Can't boss
Center gregs.
Sent your handling.
The.
Center heap help
center hickey.
Sent you my astes
sentiment catching
centre mckenna nowhere center
morris
Center tissie pena
trapped
center period.
senator sanchez
center smithies.
Center city a lot best.
The.
Center share.
senator tomman here senator
worth
center steinborn.
all senators please report to
the chamber we are need in a
quarrel.
rebecca himpiel the political
care chaplan national pisco will
church usa please remain sanding
for the pledge of legislative
today by senator harold
I.
On this day the eleventh day of
this year's thirty day session
And experience our own heart
disputy being seen and heard.
May we boldly ask for
inspiration to light our way
forward.
May we be illumined with super
natural clarity of truth hope
and purpose to bring about the
best and highest good for new
mexico.
May we
and all whom we care for receive
an experience blessing and be
I played a legend.
Once again i'd like to walk from
everyone to the new mexico
senate and to start things out
today i'll yield to the majority
florida senator peter worth
objection on that order business
announces misleading thank you
mr president and thank you
chaplain him pill for being here
and for your words
again it's thirty days and we're
all it feels like we've been
here a lot more than eleven days
but I think it's appropriate to
put that marker out there for
all of us and certainly
of important announcements from
our chief clerk for the members
please do not remove the
charging courts that are at your
the staff's responsible for
making sure they're updated and
ready to use and if they're not
here obviously that doesn't
happen so a please leave those
library legislative day at the
legislature some other important
bill reminders the deadline for
having bills drafted is sunday
bills and for filing financial
disclosure reports with the
secretary of state.
Today is new mexico state
university day and new mexico
library legislative day at the
very much appreciate them uh
providing lunch in terms of
events the new mexico state
university foundation alumni
legislative reception
rail yard from five thirty to
seven thirty pm by invocation
only and then there are some
advance
introduce the events for
saturday and sunday so i'll hold
in monday so i'll hold off on
those events mister president
before I yield to other members
high school where he is a junior
of our city baseball player
I think our lieutenant governor
will take note of that
voice country fifty seven of
santa fe and is the son of mike
jones who for many years has
worked here in the building so
it's all given loop jones a
welcome from the state set.
members to announce their guess.
Save up by the thank you very
much mister president unions
consent to allow cameras on the
senate floor and in the senate
hambling and gonzalez until they
return to the chamber here in a
objection center period
as present I question the
presence of a corum.
There's been a
We'll have a clear call.
Center birth.
Centre compos
center survantes.
Santra do hick
Senator him pill
center hickey.
Sandra be sort of.
Santa mentation
santa mechanic.
Senator morris
Central tissy peanut
santa pedea
senator pit pentel
center period.
center sanchez
center smitties.
Sit center share.
Center steinborn
center stewart
senator thomin.
Center worth.
Center woods.
To enter the chamber for a
corner.
senator dc penalty followed by
center soles and center brently
center days if you know thank
you very much mister president
and i'd like to ask you now it
that are lunched it is being
provided by the new mexico
society of professional
engineers and
today's engineers day at the
organizations the first one is
uh
megan mcdonald who represents
both the society professional
engineers and the uh society of
resources division in their mind
department and their mining
division also up on the day as
with this is the second
representative of two
organizations and that's gonna
utility authority and they they
both are here representing both
organizations that I wanted to
say a little bit about those
organizations first the society
of professional engineers
including technical presentation
and in engineering ethics
classes they have over a hundred
and sixty members but they serve
over ten thousand license
professional engineers in the
technology the central new
mexico professional section of
that society serves the greater
albuquerque and santa fe areas
and dedicated to their mission
five and down scholarships for
students in new mexico
this is very important work that
the engineers in our state do
and I wonder if the members of
They center dispina we have
senator soles
thank you mister president uh I
was raised in hatch new mexico
and since middle school daniel
worked alongside his father and
agricultural fields as a
seasonal worker in twenty twenty
one graduate high school at the
state university stating civil
engineering daniel was recruited
to mse through the college
assistance the migrant program
the camp program a federal and
you can't call zero a pyramid to
freshman camp students he also
serves as a student ambassador
for both camp and the college of
be the camp student speaker for
the twenty twenty three annual
directors meeting held in
washington DC as a civil
engineer the annual as a member
countries but also here in new
mexico as a member of the
eighties without limits he is
currently a local project
manager for the student group's
first local project in donate
county's village of law known
it means to give back to his
community from his up bringing
in hatch new mexico.
Uh just a personal thing I put
my junior money last year
towards the eighties without
incredibly honored to have
daniel as my shadow today if
you'll help me recognizing this
incredible young man daniel
gomes.
thank you lieutenant governor as
many of you guys know the
greatest asset tour senate
republican caucus over here is
our chief of staff vince torres
he is disciplined and
santa fe center fa christian
school here in santa fe
brooklyn's favorite subject is
history now unfortunately it
does say she wants to be a
lawyer when she won't grows up
in addition
it is also in a mess you day
here in the state senate and so
i'd like to ask all of the new
mexico state university
asus ambassador who is majoring
ag extension codi noverla who is
an ambassador of majoring and
fish and wild life ecology
alexis maneos majoring an animal
Thank you is never badly senator
could a handful followed by
senator had a meal thank you
mister president in honor of
an am as you assistant director
of government government a fairs
gear it mosely animals you
student regent and and why
distinguished guests this
morning
thank you center couldn't him
center how to meal mister
sure he lets me know every time
the eggies have a victory i'm
just wondering if he brought his
cowbell with him and that
joining you up in the diasels uh
new mexico she's a twenty twenty
two graduate of the ultimate
vista early college high school
as a team monique worked
seasonally and pecon orchards as
retains and graduates eligible
US citizens and permanent
resident farmworkers from across
the new mexico monique is a
sophomore may majoring in
anthony youth farm.
Where she teaches supports and
in powers local youth be anthony
youth farm creates social
economic and leadership
she is a rising star in her home
town spiriting events such as
the a y f community day and
farming classes that are open to
the public and mister president
by the new mexico academic
librarians today is library
legislative day at the capital
and
there are a number of librarians
libraries because they've moved
beyond their traditional rules
libraries so much more than just
a place to get books they still
do that of course and they have
twenty first century technology
they are essential for
participation in civic life and
in the economy and especially in
rural areas they become the
activities business access to
businesses conducting their
businesses and access to
technical assistance educational
employment services all of that
or phone through the local
libraries passing the bind
issues in the city of alva
kirkin bernley and send a ball
countries by substantial margins
distributions and it will be
almost I think it's going to be
about fourteen or fifteen
thousand dollars to each of the
libraries that participate in
that.
That doesn't sound like a lot
dollars it's still generating
significant support that small
amount fourteen fifteen thousand
dollars it will be given out
this year will enable many of
utilities may be fixed the roof
may be added computer lab to
what they already offer or maybe
pay some of the volunteers for a
little bit of the time they put
of the thing I was supposed to
yesterday afternoon mention that
last night on channel five k u n
uhm the film that's been made
shown again on k the the end m u
version of pds they will be
showing it in the next year
what's in it what's the name
rural libraries how essential
they are to the cultural and
social life of those communities
so
then i'd like to introduce the
guests that are with this today
here she she wasn't able to make
it ok then we have to decide the
dimming high school librarian.
We have victoria the hill from
join and welcoming not only them
but the liberians in the gallery
who we would ask to stand up and
be recognized.
sender would
center hamlin
thank you mister president
center body I have this
wonderful honor of recognizing
how we have so many people from
last crucials here in the
friends from the city of us
crucials are protem showed up
today and we've also got the
coalition to end homelessness
who are having a a press
conference upstairs right now
but I was able to pull off the
for four years and some of the
things that I learned about in
serving on that board was that
we all have really good ideas
about what communities need when
those are those folks that are
in need but what we don't do is
presidency of alley community of
hope
and so today with me friends I
have my day executive director
of the message of all the
community of hope mister
I also have to confess that she
is one of my closest friends is
my next door neighbor and also
is one of two mothers to uh
please welcome the call martinez
to the floor of the senate
chambers.
happy to thank you mister
president and thank you certain
majority leader would you tell
me how many
members you have in your caucus
senator as soon as worth i'm
Mister president you have
fifteen members in your caucus.
So much president you have
almost twice as many members in
your caucus as we do short by
one.
but you have twice as many
members as us
and you expect us to make a corn
for a bill that we don't like.
perfectly appropriate for
either side to use the rules and
i'm not suggesting for a minute
that's not making a quarter of
suggesting that
I do think that again we had an
important bill we had a whole
room for the people yesterday
testimony from those folks and
move that process for word but
again I think the issue of a
quarrel is strategic and i'm not
shouldn't be an expectation that
we're going to just.
Delay something for five days
especially in a thirty day
side not particularly liking a
bill I think in fact there have
been times when we we on this
side there's not been a corner
with our members we saw it this
morning on the floor
gonna require the public and
we're just going to stop meeting
I just don't think it's a
realistic expectation and so
we've got to find the right
time to do it so I i'm not in
any way questioning the right of
either party to challenge a
core.
Send the red thank you mister
president thank you mister
disappointment that we had used
the rules
the minority only has the rules
in the minority will use the
rules
and if we have two will use the
And we know there's not going to
be a coreman there when you have
twice as many members of us.
It's your responsibility make
had seen and and rejected as out
entire body
five times
we've seen that by every state
that's done it
we chose not to make a core
because we're trying to protect
the businesses in the state of
use every frican one of them.
Thank you mister president we
are in that order of business
announces mislenious will go to
authority and that kind of thing
but we also talked today about
the rural libraries and i've got
a a library card from the clovis
why I bring this up mister
president is the fact that on
this morning coming in I was
listening to a book call the
shared
that experience a loss of a
child.
In the spiritual in counters
that he has
with god.
of how this world works in the
savior that's there for the
asking and I know this is a
different authority that we've
been talking about but I wanted
ah going on this morning in
mister president thank you so
much for the opportunity to
speak and the personal privilege
guest that we have on the dias I
see an old friend of former
colleague and current
constituent on their dias there
morning six o'clock in the
morning I know you don't know I
know this word gets around here
fast so mister president mister
recognition anything
self-serving it just shows his
integrity because ultra is and
neighbor and we will all be so
proud to welcome you into the
chamber this morning please
colleagues welcome mister avalos
growth program and according to
my staff I don't see him here in
the chamber but centered guy
goes your called up to the
principles office since you're
not there there are some issues
to verify where you're putting
the money and make sure
put that in the bill that is
correct so send your staff by
just to double check everything
one final time before we wrap
and I know that you're on the
phone right now and i'm just
kind of killing time here on the
volume and that's but electric
cars is not going to be purple
spinners sir said i'm asked my
request wasn't purple it was
request a request at white
because good guys right and
height so if that doesn't happen
then i'll take the purple with
we don't we don't care what the
dozen as long as you and if your
kids happen to have to drop more
fit school for sports as long as
you and your family are safe
mister president depends if they
go to four or five day school.
Yeah and that'll be subject to
the legislature will have a good
discussion about the next
menu days we have here in
session
See no further announcements
senator worth thank you mister
president and now being eleven
fifty nine am I moved we
adjourned until twelve or one
pm.
objection it is ordered mister
president I ask you to consent
that the rules be suspended at
the record show that the
journals been read and fall and
approved subject to revision and
approval of the judiciary
one pm the senate will come to
order
mister president and see names
consent that the rules be
suspend that the journal show
all those president in this
morning session are present in
approved subject to revision and
approval of the judiciary
committee.
There's no objection it is
ordered senator peter or thank
you mister president so what
committee reports and then we'll
go ahead and yield the senator
harmeal on the confirmation so
we can get our folks who are up
on the days of moving forward so
with that unanimous incentive we
consideration senate executive
letter number eight day october
thirteenth twenty twenty three
in which the governor makes the
following appointment kathleen
confirm this appointment
respectfully submitted katie do
high chair
senator mr president asking the
animals consent of the senate
the reader to read the reports
amended senate executive letter
number fourteen dated january
eleventh twenty twenty three in
which the government makes the
october twenty ninth twenty
twenty seven committee
recommends the senate confirm
this reappointment
senate executive letter number
nineteen dated november
twentieth twenty twenty one and
expiry delight eighth twenty
twenty seven committee
recommends at the senate confirm
this appointment
member of the museum board of
regions for a term commencing on
september twentieth twenty
twenty one and expire in july
eighth twenty twenty seven
which the government makes the
fault an appointment tether
carol read my cleaner hand as a
member of the meet museum board
of regents for a term convention
senate executive letter number
twenty one dated november
sixteenth twenty twenty three
which the government makes the
following appointment seriously
yamada matthews as a member of
committee recommends that the
senate confirm disappointment
senate executive letter number
twenty six dated january second
twenty twenty four in which the
government makes the following
twenty three and expiring july
eighth twenty twenty eight year
committee recommends the senate
confirm this reappointment
respectfully submitted senator
senders all those in favor
significantly saying I
those opposed need
good jobs that are more you
almost had it but the eyes have
it the community force have been
adopted
business confirmations and I
yield to senator honor meal
around that order business
confirmations senator had a
mister president I asked that
the credentials of william
president pursuant to send
executive number number letter
number nine day to march twenty
four twenty twenty two I move
that senate here to buy a point
william edwardly to the
terrorism commission.
he was born and raised on green
chile
is interesting character
throughout new mexico and he may
be full of more hot air than
this building
states of chamber of commerce
institute for organization and
management he has served on the
border region since curlingly a
faculty men member primarily
teaching their ship and
the fourth element leadership he
served on the mechanic county
commission from twenty sixteen
to twenty twenty
he has been recognized as a
regional champion by north less
was in actually confirmed
the ability keep business first
he bill was he nestled confirmed
that the commission in twenty
fourteen through twenty eighteen
addition to his leadership
skills both all bill surrounds a
small business I did touch based
on that but you know we have a
bloom rally in galve new mexico
and he's one of the founding
think about her keys great you
should watch those balloons in
the red rocks in
and floating along the red rocks
especially with their snow it's
it's one of the most beautiful
scenes you'll see.
mister president with that
i'll allow for comment.
Thank you said him when you are
sent as we are debating
the confirmation of william
See no debate send him in also
close on the confirmation thank
you mister president I asked me
I could say that recould show
the roles being called in all
those president voted in the
firmname of except for those
voting negative by show hand all
So i'll center to your seats
please.
I wouldn't waiting for center
words we bribe everybody in this
room with a blue free balloon
right in gallop
So.
Well he's not going to free
balloon right
first twenty twenty eight has
been confirmed by the new
mexican senate center when you
ask mister president will the
body please welcome mister bill
rein he risen he's done a great
job for a history.
quickly I think by the power
investment mean by the senate
finance committee I I want to
point lancing adams new tourists
cabinet secretary is allowable
will that I think my message is
getting received
thank you said anything else
we are in that order business
confirmations and I yield to
santa had a meal mister
senator stewart stewart
thank you mister president
pursuit to send it executive
letter number twenty one dated
november sixteen twenty twenty
corporation here are no
objections center students
you'll explain
thank you mister president type
I met became friends with say
during our work on the energy
and I want to share a little bit
of that so sir is a second
generation entrepreneur and
first generation daughter of
japanese immigrants she grew up
work alongside her father in his
international software company
permission and focus on
Invented software that predicts
microscale whether patterns cyri
worked along side her father for
fifteen years as the business
and organizations together to
make meaningful progress I can't
think of anyone who is more
qualified to have a seed on the
small business investment
corporation I stand for
matthews senator survived as
followed by senator how to meal
than sooner more sinister montes
thank you mister president i'm
pleased to be first up to join
in the chorus of i'm sure what
and and what I don't imagine
anybody in this room probably
knows but miss yamada and I know
and I see mr had a meal up in
spend hours and hours going
through that bill amending that
bill outside of the committee
process outside of the presence
of of others not to keep anyone
out but because as that are sort
what it was a fair bill and
ultimately took a couple of
years to do ah but got there and
in that that's a story that very
people few people know sorry but
it's time that people do know
with mixed feelings the end of
the merger negotiations between
pn and having great at the end
of this last year
hope the folks at p and m and
otherwise hear that that we've
got to have the right people
with knowledge and commitment in
forty two like years when trying
to do these complex things like
uh I have really great deal of
confidence that that's true
I think the other thing that's
really important in this
nomination on the small business
investment corporation is to add
your father but very frankly the
struggles that you ran into in
the obstacles that you ran into
that we're created by government
and I think it's important that
generation immigrant trying to
take wonderful technology try to
make something big out of it and
and the the four to two that it
took to overcome obstacles of
government that's that's a
look forward to what you can do
to further new mexico as you
have in the past they serve
surrounders we do have others on
the list who elected debates and
you know mister president I
stand in full support of this
And official and I just wanted
to stand up and say that I fully
support this confirmation mister
president.
Thanks and had a massive or more
conversation ahead with series
about this issues aware of this
conversation we had this
conversation in rules the
executive department has
nominated a number of lobbyists
positions and I just something I
feel but always had a great work
in relationship with some
hearing I violated as senator
ivy sodo my convictions on this
last week
pressured by the leadership at
that time to do a vote is that
i'd unfeel comfortable with and
I did that vote afterwards I
knew is the wrong vote in a
promise myself I would never go
number things as I matured but
i've never taken another vote
since then that I regretted
almost came to that point last
week when I voted for a lobbyist
are take monetary compensation
to influence government policies
should then be put into policy
making positions to me that
doesn't pass ethical mustard so
i've had a great work in
relationship with her spry won't
return my calls ever again
that's fine but I doubt that
because she is a class act.
And I know she will do a good
job in this board so it's not in
her it's voting against the
concept of lobbyists and these
positions thank you mister
nomination
the first time I meant saudi was
actually my first ever
session where I was appointed
the day before the session
started and the eta was the
biggest thing the biggest vote I
had to take and I could hardly
I did vote for that bill and it
was a struggle I I will admit
but I think it wears the right
decision and i'm really
personally than than that and
would I know about her is she
moved from being our pm to
pursuing her passions and I
passions and she's going to make
a huge difference on this board
and i'm really happy to stand in
support of this nominee.
Thank you center city love is we
do have others who would like to
in in in life if you don't have
it strong woman around your
right in a strong leader rank in
so is is a strong woman that
leads people my wife for just on
meant her coming up here in her
side kick and a and i've learned
that she's a very strong woman
passionate cares about what she
direction or want to take us in
the right direction as a member
of this board I
her name in nava hope today uh
what japanese was in naval and
in she'll tell us that maybe
when the introducer you can give
president I I read support so
should do the right thing thank
you.
Thank you center minutes center
by the thank you very much
mister president I I do want to
conversation earlier about
lobbying this lobbying that I
just want to let the body know
that you know there's some hall
of the story to the lobbying
that this particular country
does it's not just about some of
the major corporate
way so I just want to call that
as a very you know public a
statement and my eye supporter
and I like to see a balance I
feel like i'm a balanced
individual to kind of work that
I do and I know that she is to
but the thing is president I too
rice in support of this
conference I think everything
has been said about her she's
been a one of four individual
person and in always trust her
word and and what to work she's
done and I really appreciate I
didn't I wasn't familiar with
her background with her father
see no further debate
center stewart to close
thank you mister president I
want to think my colleagues for
seats please we are voting.
If you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
We have sent a more voting now.
Live over thirty three and the
terminative one the negative the
appointment to say area model
senate center centers to it
thank you mister president and
if the body will stand up to
congratulates higher your mom
your money
center had a meal mister
president I asked that the
credentials of heather carol
read mclanahan be presented to
the full senate for
nineteen dated november nineteen
twenty twenty november fourteen
twenty twenty three I moved that
the senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of heather carol
read mclean and to the museum
board of regions.
thank you mister president miss
mcclean ahead has a long history
in museum coordination running
different things she was a state
historical society over so
mentioned of museums around she
has certainly is highly
qualified for this position on
the museum board of regions and
I think we are very fortunate to
See no debate center source to
close on the confirmation thank
you mister president I asking
them is consent of the that the
you wish to go now please raise
your hand.
Yeah.
informative the negative the
appointment of heather kill read
but plan a hand as a member of
the museum border regions for a
term commencing on october
thirteen twenty twenty three and
expiring july eighth twenty
please stand up so we can
recognize you and and your new
role on the museum board where
you can continue your great
work.
to the fourth and effort
consideration to the museum
board of regions I know yield to
senator cut him fill senator
could a hand hill thank you
mister president pursuing two
monow thread but as a.
To the museum board of regions
here in the objections senator
feel explained thank you mr
mister barrasa received a bas
and fine arts from western
mexico university where he
currently works as in our junked
nature and landscape drawing
he's been a director of the
rural book mobiles in the
southwest and he's also served
committee for the museum of
international folk ark he has
had been in many many councils
and boards over the decades and
with that mister president
I I it's just a privilege to
stand here in strong support if
mister barrassa for this
appointment and a stand for
debating the appointment to
manual fed but as anyone wishing
to debate.
The.
Seen then center could I have
and then negative by a show of
hands then it is to receive air
voting if you wish to vote
please raise your hand.
twenty twenty one and expiry in
july eight twenty twenty seven
has been confirmed by the new
mexico senate center could I him
feel
thank you mr president I asked
Thank you mr president thank you
senator center how to mail
mister president I asked that
the credentials of mary and
zine executive letter number
twenty six stated january second
twenty twenty four I moved that
the senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of marion cortesy to
you haven't recognized him so
maybe if we could get him on the
list to speak but
this morning we had the pleasure
of having this gortee before the
committee and learn quite a bit
world there's only a hundred I
believe is what she had said and
we have one right in fort summer
so if you have a chance in your
driving through then you'd like
to check it out it's it's quite
an interesting experience
four days i'm in then her her
extensive work with museums I
think she's a great edition on
her reappointment she's worked
for a different governor's
different directors and seems to
mary ann
as a member of the museum border
regions or beginning of words
thank you mister president
Certainly stand in favour she is
a a lot from a long term
ranching family and debacle
county
and all the family very well
time we'll talk about bill of
the kied though the trailer
tears the whole deal but it's in
was privileged to hear the
presentation this morning in
rules and got to meet this
criticism and she invited me to
impressed and I intend to do so
but it's great to have these
types of people from all over
yet what else surprised me is
how many regions we've gone
through the process to a point
but i'm particularly pleased
that uh someone from my district
compos thank you very much
mister president
as we go back mirand critessie
has an extended resume going
years ago as we work on the
bosco project she was very
instrumental in terms of helping
to ensure that that was going to
become a reality so she is in
in rajettic and intelligent she
continues to work with every
single individual who has a
strong concern not only to
improve their communities but
marianne cortezzi for this great
position thank you make a senate
anyone's been looking for that
lost phone it's been found in
return thank you mister
president coming up that motion
is except for the purposes of a
call.
State your objection center pro
mispresident I believe it was
unanimous consent so if that's
what the motion wants to be then
I object to unanimous consent.
See no more debate
center per close
thank you to spreads asking
interest consent that the record
show the role has been called in
that although senators present
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
twenty ninth twenty twenty three
and expiring july eighth twenty
twenty eight has been doing the
confirmed by the senate center
period
president if the body will stand
and help me congratulate the
Thank you senator perl center
how do you mister president I as
that the credentials of trees
are and possual be presented to
the full senate for
consideration to the museum
pursuant to the senate exactly
letter number nineteen dated
november fourteen twenty twenty
three I move that senate do here
but I confirm the appointment of
treasa and possible to the new
Mister president trees and
posscoise a member of the
accommodable she graduated in
twenty fourteen the university
of new mexico the bouchers and
science to be program and along
Thank you center cities
send it as we are debating.
The confirmation of three set
and first while and we'll begin
with center time one
as as a human being so lucky on
us but I also mister president
want to request myself from
voting because she's also on the
border directors of the group
okay I will announce it and then
i'm being suggested by our
former parliament turn I should
leave the fort okay i'll do that
good luck then you send a
squall for the appointment I
know that
comes from acama and on her
family for a very long time in
the work that she's done and
acting as one of some of the
tourist the acamise one of those
places where many people from
rwanda world coming visit the
sky city itself as well as well
as a museum and I know her work
confirmation thank you thank you
center schedule any further
debates I would.
The.
See no further debate in their
sand just to close
mister president I asked you
Center wars mr president good I
don't think there was a proper
motion can we hear that again
senator more zero cricks and
their
mister president I asked
in the negative by a show of
hands senator
except for the tenth voted in
the firm self can we get that
motion one more time sender
centers you missed one d and
show that the role has been
called and that all those
president in the affirmative set
those voted in the negative by a
show of hands then it is we are
voting
Five thirty five minutes ago the
negative the appointment of the
by the new mexico senate sender
sanchez mister president I asked
that the body rise and helped me
uh
confirm treasor and personal to
the new mexican border regions.
Thank you center centuries
center have a meal mister
president I asked that the
credentials of korena good ds be
presented to the fourth senate
for consideration to the new
pursuant to send it executive
letter ten dated october
thirteenth twenty twenty three I
move that the senate do here by
confirm the appointment of
googers has an incredible resume
she her professional experience
includes from april two thousand
and fourteen to the present
being on the state of new mexico
mexico school for the death has
been an outreach a s l teacher
a service coordinator for the
state of new mexico commission
for death and heart of hearing
work for the death community is
incredible and this appointment
to the commission is so
appropriate for someone with
this background and someone with
vigorous president I think many
of them in the chamber know how
important the school for the
death has been for my family I
would not be here and where I am
was young about three two three
years old and became death and
she went to the school for the
death
succeeded excellent at the
school for the death went on to
southwest instead for technology
for the death with my uncle
patrick are
dog work i'm sorry patrick as my
cousin and then my mother
followed in those foot steps
they earn became a speech
death education so I was raised
on campus is as my in the
university minnesota ended up a
gallery university myself as a
child and i'm honored that we
account at for a spanic new
mexico children our students to
be able to go in advance every
search and education and so we
should start at the doctor
personally funded that this year
and so that all all that all
started because of the school
for the death unfortunately that
illness and the fever of that my
aunt had as a child really has
many many years my entire life
is matter of fact and so is my
mother so i'm big fan of the
score has plays a critical role
in new mexico in mexico history
It and I have to apologize to
koreana i'm supposed to be
helping the new mexico school of
the deaths cheerleaders get
ready for state competition we
haven't been able to get our
mexicans and how she came to
satifade to the school for the
death and how she learned to
sign and now her being an
advocate not just for families
we do have further the debate we
have center with rigorous thank
you mister chairman mr president
I too are standing strong
support of korena i've known
koreana from many years went to
school to the school for the
a great job in helping other
death people so I truly
appreciate so much that she
wants to continue to serve on
the board of regions at the
rodriguez any further debate
centers.
See no further debate senator
offers to close is to mr
president I ask unanimous
consent that the records show
that the role has been called
and that all those present voted
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
But I voted thirty in the firm
and is there on the negative the
appointment of a cream a good
yet is as a member of the new
mexican school for the board
death border regions for a chair
commencing on march twenty eight
welcoming and and congratulating
this inspiring nominee careener
could yet as well is that i'm
the dias.
trust one board of trustees I
know yield to senator pope
center for
thank you mr president pursuit
to amend it senator's activity
objection center pop of your
explain.
Mr william j night is was raised
in towels new mexico and
into the military and was
honorably discharged in nineteen
seventy two
he worked in the life insurance
industry for about twenty years
organizations committed to our
youth these up board emergency
emorators of the towers
community foundation and is the
past chairman of the rocky
consensus and as we are debating
senator paraford's purpose thank
you miss president it's been
over an hour since I did there
so it's appropriate to question
the core of.
The crack to call the role
center to barca.
Center brand.
Center brantley.
Senator birth.
Send your guyos.
Send a gonzalez.
The.
centre him hell
center hickey
center i've been sort of.
Center meal
Center morris.
Sent him in yours.
Centre never.
Sent our tissie penal
centre but dear
center pinto
center period.
Centre sanchez
center smitties
center city a lot best
now we present it in here.
center step by next
center stewart
center steinborn.
Centre tarm in here.
seniority spinner mister
president just point of
information doesn't the person
who calls for the corone vote
have to be in the room to make
debating the reappointment of
william j night with anyone wish
to debate.
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by shelvan all senators
to your seats
we are voting mister president
the city morris was provided the
votes already been started
sending more as I had not called
for the vote yet I object
is necessary to have made as a
except for the purpose of the
call
Are you now consent mister
president to excuse center
tonight until the return to the
chamber.
Senator share voting now.
Center share brought in yes yes
yes.
children's trust fund border
chesties return comments in on
october thirtieth twenty twenty
three and expire in october
twenty ninth twenty twenty seven
has been confirmed by the new
could all rise and give mister
night or around the place.
Center how to meal
mister president I asked that
eight dated october thirteen
twenty twenty three I moved at
the senate dear here by confirm
with the appointment of kathleen
keith to the new mexico finance
community partnerships where she
works at the team to build
relationships between the
laboratory across the education
and work for sector as well as
the best in the business
presidential appointment to the
US department of energy and the
director of economic development
division for the new mexico
economic development department
she has worked across the nation
elected member of the governing
board of the sanity community
college she holds a bachelor's
degree and journalism and
political science from texas
tech university and a master's
mexico.
Thank you to me i'll send it as
we are debating the appointment
of caping keith anyone wishing
debate we have senators thank
you mister president why me
maybe one of the few people on
legislative director and I can
just say that a test that county
is the ultimate professional
extremely smart extremely
capable and just a great long
see now for the debate center
had a meal to close and the
confirmation mister president I
ask unanimous consent that the
record showed that the wrong has
been called and that all those
we are voting if you wish to
bono please raise your hand
turkey
and thirty one.
Yeah.
My vote of twenty nine minutes
on the negative of the
appointment of kathleen keith as
a member of the medical finance
by the new mexico senate center
how to mail
mister president
just enough cafe keep was a
heart in rural new mexico so
thank you mister president thank
you senate had a meal
mister president I asked that
the credentials of paul castery
be presented to the full set up
the senate pursuant to executive
a senate executive letter number
twelve dated october the
thirteenth twenty twenty three I
moved that the senate do here by
confirm the appointment of
members of the senate out of
deep admiration again for mr
cassidy who is a long time
friend uh I present that the
credentials to you and they're
exclusively and public finance
in your mexico mister casted he
was appointed at the state board
of finance and twenty nineteen
the new mexico military based
in more accounting his home
county as well as the curtailing
participant partnership
committee supporting the mission
of the national no clear
his wife joy who live in
louisville colorado carnian paul
live in albuque and cleveland
your mexico and uh mister
president members of the senate
they'd be able to finance great
public projects he has a level
demeanor he has the high level
of integrity in most importantly
he is a devoted individual not
nominee we stand open for there
thank you thank you
we do have debates center by
the.
to nobody mister president you
know it's consent to excuse
senators do higgins tofanics
until they return to the chamber
object to second time there is
an objection center as we are
See no debate in their
accomplished to close thank you
mister president I ask unanimous
consent that the records show
that the role has been called in
all those
have you wished about now please
raise your hand.
expiry march seventeenth twenty
twenty five has been confirmed
by the new mexico senate center
companies thank god mister
president members of the senate
at this time I would like to go
a dedicated person to the state
of new mexico mr policies
please.
of business thank you mister
president you know we go that
are business messages from the
governor around that order
business messages from the
governor of the reader to read
president pro temporary store
and members of the senate
pursuing to article for section
five b two of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
threat to a fourth degree felony
creating the crime of swatting
and prescribing penalties
respectful yours michelle them
on grisham governor journal show
pursuing to article four section
five b two other thing mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislatures.
pursuant two article four
section five b two of the
mexican constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
eutels unit unitization of
for formations for subsurface
equestrian of carbon dioxide
limiting liability of owners of
sick question facilities
governor has been received
senate executive message number
forty seven the honorable name
historic president protemporary
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of senate
bill to sixteen a bill amending
the new mexico finance authority
act to provide financing for
michelle luhangrishm governor
the journal show the message the
governor has been received.
Senate executive message number
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of senate
bills one sixty nine a bill
incorporated municipality
population cap amending eligible
recipients of funds requiring
prioritization of funding
requests of indian nations
the journal show the message and
the government has been received
senate executive message number
forty nine the honourable name
is stewart president protempory
consideration during the fifty
six legislature's second session
submission of senate bill one
forty six a bill and acting a
new section of the hospital
funding act to require county
payment plans under certain
circumstances respectful yours
michelle to hundreds of governor
the journal will show the
message from the governor has
been received.
of business thank you mister
president you name is consent we
go out of business introduction
of legislation we're on that
order business introduction to
legislation
the reader to read.
senator pavia representatives
guy goes and harper.
An act relating to health care
creating the health care
delivery in access medicaid
directed payment program
providing that revenue from the
assessment be used as additional
reimbursement to certain
the care delivery and access act
providing a delayed repeal
providing a contingent effective
date making an appropriation
senate bill seventeen.
senate committees committee
events senate health and public
affairs committee then senate
finance committee.
That senate bill seventeen.
to make the locks nasal spray
available in high schools senate
bill to nineteen senate bill to
nineteen haven't been read twice
by title's order printed
pinto and act relating to public
public school finance limiting
the growth of administrative
expenditures by school districts
and charter schools senate bill
senate finance committee senate
bill two twenty
senate bill to twenty one
introduced by senators pinto
lopez and pope and act relating
liaisons within state agencies
creating the work first
diversity and inclusion council
providing duties requiring state
agencies to develop an implement
such policies requiring an
annual report making an
appropriation senate bill to
twenty one
center bill to twenty one have
share over here center chair for
his purpose to rise mister
president I just was who is the
sponsor that building asked a
senator that I believe that the
introduced by senator monos and
act related to economic
development providing
applications to the economic
development department for funny
pursuant to the local economic
the senate committees committee
then send a tax and business
committee then center finance
and senate bill two twenty two
senate bill to twenty three
distributions of certain oil and
gas emergency school tax revenue
and federal mineral leasing act
revenue from the early childhood
education and care fund to the
is ordered printed referred to
the senate committees committee
then send it health and public
affairs committee then sent a
finance at senate bill to twenty
three senate bill to twenty four
senate bill to twenty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the senate committees committee
then sent a health public
affairs committee then senate
department to write salaries for
two pilots for the state
airplane fleet senate bill to
twenty five
senate bill to twenty five
having been read twice by title
introduced by senator souls and
act making an appropriation to
department of transportation to
construct a high speed passenger
railroad from the new mexico
committees committee then sent a
tax business transportation
committee then senate finance
committee senate bill two twenty
six
senate bill to twenty seven and
mexico college to develop and
start enter near and development
programs to foster in nurture
that center finance community
senate bill two twenty seven
senate bill to twenty eight
introduced by senators pavian
stewart and act relating to the
operational expenses changing
the basis of certain fees from a
dollar amount to reasonable
costs providing that money in
certain funds administered by
the department may be used for
Senate bill
to twenty eight haven't been
read twice by title's order
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
conservation committee then send
election code revising the
manner of picking up ballots
from ballot collection boxes
making an appropriation senate
bill to twenty nine
send it finance committee center
bill two twenty nine
senate bill to thirty introduced
by senator neighbor and act
related to health care amending
a section of the children's
confidential information senate
bill to thirty senate bill two
thirty having been read twice by
title is order printed referred
to the senate committees
committee and then send the
schools amending the public
school code to require health
education for grades six through
twelve to include age
appropriate instruction
addressing youth substance use
an instruction to address drug
poisoning awareness methods of
administration and opinion
antagonist and student access to
substance abuse and prevention
committee.
Senate bill two thirty one
senate bill two thirty two
introduced by senators worth and
had a meal and act relating to
projects requiring the provision
of payment in lou of taxes
payments to school districts if
I mean it's a pallet your county
acquires and energy storage
energy storage facility adding
sunset dates senate bill two
thirty two senate bill two
thirty two having been read
twice by title is order printed
referred to the senate
two thirty three introduced by
senator pope and act relating to
higher education amending the
graduate scholarship act
is order printed and referred to
the senate committee's committee
then send an education committee
then send the finance committee
senator two thirty three senate
bill to thirty four introduced
Senate bill two thirty four.
Have you been read twice by
by senator haramie a memorial
request in the public education
department to declare the week
of october fourteenth through
october eighteenth twenty twenty
providing age appropriate
educational activities and
information addressing the risks
associated with the use of and
then send an education committee
that senate moral seven
senate joint resolution fifteen
introduced by senator sch
meetings.
permanent fund required its
investment by the state
investment officer and provide
for certain distributions of
investment income of the fund
then senate finance committee
senate joint resolution fifteen
senate joint resolution sixteen
amendment to article ten section
one of the constitution of new
mexico to provide that the
salaries of county officers
shall be established by the
into the treasury of the county
senate joint resolution sixteen
and a joint resolution sixteen
have you been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate rules
announcements and miscellaneous
were on that order of business
announces misleading a senator
worth thank you mister president
so just before we
kind of rap sings up there's a
originally planned on coming in
tomorrow on the floor at one
o'clock
after visiting with senator back
we've agreed that we're not
senator schendel will announce
that and just a bit but there
were two more confirmations that
I think we should get done and
that will catch us up with all
the confirmations from the
business confirmations and yield
to senator leo
where on that order business
seem to objection where that
order of business center have a
meal
Senator couples thank you very
much mister president pursuant
to send it executive letter
number thirteen dated april the
twenty fifth twenty twenty two I
coppers to explain thank you
mister president members of the
senate
mr adoles of which has thirty
eight years experience in law
enforcement where the local
los ranches they will carry he's
been police chief of the
edgewood police department um he
has so much experience and with
this uh mister president members
ratisfich
anyone wishing to debate
seen sender accomplished a close
in the negative by show of hands
senators to your seats please if
you wish to vote no
please raise your hand.
By voda thirty one the
affirmative on the negative the
appointment to fred carl reverse
companies they could president
mr which is not able to be here
with us today but please members
of the senate a nice round of
applies for this qualified
individual and thanks again.
credentials of michael sanchez
be presented to the fourth and
for consideration to the state
board of finance I know yield to
senator worth sender worth thank
reappointment of the honorable
michael essentials to the state
border finance no objection send
a worthwhile explain thank you
mister president michael sanchez
university in mexico and the
university of mexico school of
law he's been a practicing
attorney in los angeles for
forty five years and for twenty
four years served as a new
mexico board of finance for the
past four years
it is an honor to carry his
reconfirmation and we very much
appreciate his willingness to
bait voting now for with them
can't think of a more partisan
leader that we've had it's a
better chamber in here without
him with a new leadership and
rather debate we have similar
lotters.
Several of us apologize.
Thank you mister president I
rise in strong support of this
leader he was a leader in the
community of valencia county and
he was a leader in the senate
and a lot of the work that he
did was.
I don't know how he treated the
minority party I see that the
majority party is not being very
respectful to him today but I
in his legal practice he's
served the community of valencia
county
with integrity and just done a
good job for so many people I am
honored to stand in strong
support of this nominee.
the poorer stories that that
occurred under his rain but I
will say it's it's sad that as a
legislature this is the the pick
that we have a spot on the board
that fact that I think we could
do better to pick somebody that
represents us as a whole um as
opposed to just one portion of
the body thank you mister
president center survivors.
members that are house members
former house members probably
remember
passing a bill in the house and
then coming over here to the
senate and i'm looking at the
protempt smiling and i'm looking
of the majority leader and
trying to have a bill heard in
the senate maybe not unlike what
my my colleagues on the
republican party are are
describing in some level we
the senator sanchez did it i'm
not too not to make those of us
in the house fuel inferior to
the senate but simply because I
think I think that he was trying
to really evaluate the merits of
bill didn't feel that everybody
needed up on a ward or trolley
fee for participation he asked
hard questions about whether the
law was really needed really
remains unique to me today
because he would vote alone by
himself on the senate judiciary
committee when he felt as a
matter of principle that he
didn't believe in a particular
knew him to be on a man of
principle and I respected that a
great do I learned a lot from
that.
I saw center since earlier this
week at the funeral of mary jane
am and that shows a little bit
about who he is too a busy
lawyer who could have spent six
hours or eight hours billing
cases and clients and and that's
not how we spend his day spent
another example might michael
used to speak and what michael
and I clashed plenty don't let
me they will let me
ignore the experience that some
is we had were always at a
certain level the differences
that michael and I would have
always had would have always
been the same which is he didn't
worry about what the headline
was going to be didn't worry
about who is going to get the
When michael would speak from
time to time on political events
he would always invoke the same
hero and I think it's important
to note that michael zero he
brother killed and still ran for
president and still near the
risks and that's I think partly
why michael is not here with us
today is because he was willing
to accept the risks of being
to what he describes as his hero
and and I can still call michael
very much an example of what I
think a senator can and should
be and again I appreciate that
have further debate we have
centered office
and thank you very much mister
president I stand in strong
support of this nomination for
myself former senator michael
someone who stands on principle
and if I remember mister
president
we all sees have different
as a senator survanted to share
when I think as for anybody who
serves in a chair person's role
or even out of that chair of the
That power how to be distributed
throughout the caucus he
understood and was always
someone who would stand for the
people and with the people
that we're in.
But what I will say mister
president as I think the
governor has done right by a
pointing senator sanchez to this
mexico and I just want to think
the governor for this
reappointment and dumb senator
sanchez you did well I know you
will continue to do well thank
on the floor show which side
michael sanchez preferred
obviously but young as has been
the money minority
have the majority leader we have
today
and that we don't have michael
anymore because he was a tyrant
on this floor at least two the
about him all I want sent a
brand just to reminder all
members they would keep it
respectful that we do not have
any names attacking any member
The.
Michael is no longer remember of
this chamber.
Michael was a tyrant when he
around this floor
Often former majority leader
did not respect the minority he
did not run this chamber fairly.
current majority later tries to
work across the isle and choice
to treat all this with respect
the same way we all did and have
tried to do.
Former senator sanchez.
The.
The.
Thank you mister president we do
have further debate we have sent
out these if you know.
member of the of the legislature
wasn't that only a democrat
gotten out no matter senator lie
awesome was nominated at the
same time there was balance in
but there was balance in those
nominations it wasn't that we
picked one and not the other and
I think that's really a crucial
point to make thank you mister
president thank you
center sanchez and centered ingo
work together i've been here for
sixteen years I imagine ten of
that.
They were there how member that
it's republican democrat let's
pick on a few nominees for the
republicans today
nobody saying about them you
look at the board of finance and
you want to talk about new
willing to do that the rosson
was good I talked to lee ross
and quite a bit but he was on
the sac
this is the board of finance
work together center sheer knows
that people that were here
before know that there's always
disagreement but in days like
this is this really the way we
talk about christian beliefs in
religion in how we should stop
the fight in in israel and
palestinian rate
teacher grading right pushed by
the republicans pushed by the
democrats a failure to the
teaching system
spending too much money
that take their own personal
time and take their own personal
hits
I mean center census was
targeted by a republican
gets nominated for board because
there has to be a balance and
there is a democrat has to be a
balance we're going to pull a
****.
monitor to that I did gamble
down center when you you know
we're not elected to do this.
We're not elected to talk about
passed and what happened in the
Show the man some respect.
We will do the same when you
have a republican nominee but
show the man some respect.
conversation about was he
partisan how did he treat us.
We won't be having that
conversation.
Mister president sometimes in
That's a wrong thing to be
headed about there's plenty of
things in the world to be heated
about.
So remember that opening prayer
Say no further debate.
Senator word to close mister
president everybody you know
it's consent to excuse entered
due hig until she returned to
I do have an objection send it
away to close
thank you mister president and I
just want to publicly thank
to be a mentor to me in many
ways and and one thing I just
will echo
that is so important that makes
this floor run well is
when we transitioned when
senator sanchez was not here
that sended her angle and I were
able to continue something that
I think senator sanchez and he
senator barcar and I have you
know worked hard to be able to
communicate and we certainly
don't agree on all issues but
it's that kind of communication
being willing to step up again
so without asking her mister
santon records show the roles
been called all those present
voting informative except those
voting and negative by show fans
are senators to receipts please
i'm a kitchen body now senator
schmedie's voting now
senator share body now consider
more as forty now
senator part of alright now and
The.
The.
By vote of twenty six of the
foremone the negative the
reappointment of michael
assaunches as a member of the
state board of finance return
commencing on march eighteen
could not be here but i'd ask
that we all rise and give him a
well deserved round of a plus.
run that order business
announcement swissling is
senator worth
so much president we had a
couple of
we had a committee report that
needs to be corrected in center
on wednesday we read out in the
committee report senate bill
sixty one which was amended in
the committee and we neglected
to attach the amendment so i'm
asking the union it was consent
saying mister president senator
share can I get the name of that
bill yet yes that senator
gangus's bill on the uhm.
public entity is going to let a
contract
we currently have a certain
limit to take the the above
which they have to go to our
people of which they don't they
committee with the sponsors but
then who he submitted the report
that that
amendment was left off so we
need to expand it then it will
reintroduce it now with the
Center citizen.
The.
Can we can we go ahead to
introduce the committee report
that was the corrected community
or do we have to go to committee
reports of the floor leader to
corrected seen amazon we go that
are business committee reports
we're on that order business
hearing no objection
senators the reader to read
recommendation that I do pass as
amended and dense referred to
the judiciary committee
respectfully submitted senator
gerald or these epino chair
the eyes have at the community
part has been adopted the reader
to read
mister president your education
committee to whom has been
referred senator bill seventy
and a bill seventy four do pass
and then referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
the senator william p souls
chair
the objection the reader to read
set a bill one oh three
recommendation that I do pass
and then refer to the finance
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the finance
committee.
Senate joint resolution nine
Center souls I move adapter the
committee report we have a
motion to document report all
those in favor signified by
saying I
there was a post a the eyes have
your committees committee to
whom has been referred senator
bill fifteen has had it under
consideration and finds seem to
be german pursuant to senate
Senator worth.
Move it after the
mister jarass that all the
The senate bill sixteen fine
seemed to be german and then
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
senate bill one thirty eight
fine seemed to be demand and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee
senator bill one thirty nine
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
senator bill one fifty nine fine
seemed to be german and then
referred to the education
committee
sent about two oh nine fine
seemed to be german and that's
referred to the education
committee
senate bill to ten find seemed
to be german and then's referred
senate bill to thirteen finds
aim to be demanded that's
referred to the conservation
committee
senate bill to sixteen fine
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
respectfully submitted mimi
stewart chair.
thought was opposed need
the committee reports the eyes
have a security reports have
been adopted and the general
reflect they were acted upon
individually sender peter was.
Senator peter weren't thank you
mister president
so just to reiterate we will not
be
and once we get to the end
I want to make a special thank
you to all of our staff and will
go through the list to show our
appreciation for another hard
thank you mister president you
know sometimes I just get a
little disconvoluted by things
here and
sometimes yeah I just wanted to
night i'm a start nineteen sixty
four not you know back in
eighteen hundred nineteen sixty
four a group of farmington
businessmen actually winter
chicago to talk to the
nowhere near the main highways
or anything but they want they
got it they actually got it done
and they got it moved so that
nineteen sixty five carnival
game was played in farmington
oil and gas people with their
own money and no taxpayer money
that they they built the field
the field itself was as good as
any major league field anywhere
in the country
thing the other thing that city
of farming to did because they
knew they were out of the way is
they created the foster family
program and what the foster
family program is is when the
players come in
their uniforms they take them
and show around places the
foster family is a huge part of
the continent world series
because people can come from all
And they help with whatever the
team needs whatever the team
needs that's what they do so
they go out there and just take
care of all of that and I get to
they're thinking about where to
do things I mean that kind of
across series is amazing it's
amazing what they do and in fact
all of the baseballs since
nineteen sixty five to today
housing cost there's no feeding
cost there's no baseball cost
it's great it's great but you
know one of the things it's
really important here is there's
and three hundred and thirty six
of them
have moved to the major leagues
a third of all of the contiment
junior I mean these are folks
that played in farmington that
state in somebody's house
somebody that fed them and close
them in the house them in
washington forms it's amazing
no air service and yet we still
managed to pull this out of
great it's amazing thing and the
community has come together
putting in our own blood sweat
Zero zero four percent of the
whole budget
to see if we can't help a little
bit with tourism in the state in
the mexico cause carnivac is
more people more exposure from
new mexico it would be beautiful
especially considering that we
just heard today about how they
were secret negotiations to
destroy the economy of the
has dumped billions something
like eight billion dollars this
year into the the coffers of the
state in new mexico fifty three
families it's actually to help
with tourism it's amazing
so I I you know I must forgot
mister president because
somebody's gonna ask well who
It was the steinfield pickle
company
from portland or again
I think that's pretty cool but
who won this year the dallas
tigers in a male biter came down
bollow tie when he was parked of
the american american baseball
congress in nineteen sixty seven
have others send them yours.
You know mister president listen
to center share brought back
some old memories for me
actually no king griffi person
is dated in him wanted to come
actually went to address martins
and induction in the hall of
them I got a balloon have been
fishing with that guarantees
boat in florida right uh I i'm
in baseball is a great game in
and you got to understand it but
center share i'm i'm on board to
help get you some advertising
money I mean we may be we could
so I do know some of those
baseball players that play there
king griffin and I actually they
play the mariners played I
forget who they pay the astros
griffery governor and he says
yeah right you like you know
king graffiti right so we went
to dinner we went to dinner with
king griffin the governor who
right up to grown in the major
league players
baseball a great world in
greater read to be in
there so many I can I can mean a
I don't know if weight bogs did
but i've been hunting with the
wage bugs beautiful.
I know that
um i'll think of a few more but
mister president you know
advertising and get more tourism
in new mexico outdoor wreck
contiment world series and areas
in last crucials could be coming
in in those things interest me
and and they bring a lot of
tourist dollars to mexico so
mister president is is we talk
about the budget
to have to do a lot of a little
work as we move them but budget
comes over and wrap up some
detail
mate with exact and see where
their headed
shoulder requiring you to do a
right then in there because we
got too busy with other stuff
but make sure you get your
capital then the grow I think
clinic a little early today in
in will try to clear the deck on
some of these but there's a big
push by some agencies that have
a lot of money left department
secretary can perform
don't go crying for money and
then when the legislature funds
you.
Build that road from
you want money we may just fled
you with money and then tell you
to perform it
so we we're going to figure that
out as we move forward
tomorrow sentence finance will
meet tomorrow in the morning at
nine am
they can send anyone else we do
have further announcements with
about twenty minutes following
the end of the floor session we
are going to have a hard stop at
six pm tonight so we're gonna
dipping the the amended bill and
then we've got we'll go as far
as we can on the others one bill
has been the sponsor as
requested that one bill on the
agenda that we have uh
so members if you can get there
as close to two thirty is
possible I figured by the time
we finish all these
announcements it'll be probably
twenty or thirty minutes after
two very short things first to
quell any rumors I am planning
on playing in the baskball game
my old bow is healing well.
senate education meets monday
morning room three eleven at
eight thirty we'll have a
presentation from representative
from the education commission of
the states and that as zoom
like to come in here some of
those and then somewhere around
nine to nine fifteen we will
start in we only have a couple
of bills in education at this
point scheduled for monday so
time is short but just it's
amazing how some of our friends
who buy their ink by the barrel
don't know economics one oh one
the tourism department spends
over ten million dollars in t v
little world series which is in
july and it's in portmouth port
smith portmouth it's in
pennsylvania's little town in
pennsylvania and
league guys make the major
leagues but connie mac has a
hundred majority players that
can add to that advertising
component so we get like three
for one one is we get good old
commend the chairman of finance
for looking into it because with
a little bit a lot we can grow
our economy we can highlight new
mexicans and we can show the
love to our friends and in
farming ten through the
committee will be tomorrow
eleven am
three twenty one thank you
center schedule senator servant
thank you mister president
evening and a machine is holding
and then alumni events I hope
legislators who are aggies or
want to be a user have children
who might be ideas
and and for law school so and I
never graduated made an issue so
I i'm trying to be part of this
by partisan spirit peace making
of you to enjoy last cruises
days weekend we're very
fortunate to have an invitation
from the governor to come to her
house sunday evening she's
continuing a tradition that's
been around for as long as i've
have the uh the university and
issue again has a lot to be
proud of this year the ball game
you all have heard about the the
women's athletics and and most
can be impressed by so I wanted
to rise because we're talking
having all this talked at about
baseball in a we all put me in
the in the frame of mind that
that we celebrate last christmas
days and this weekend
and I avoid and I vade them a
lawyer forgot six
on top of all of that we do have
a senate judiciary committee
meeting today we'll do that
we'll start a little bit late at
we'll start at three pm then you
very all be horrible shouldn't
uh further discussion of marty
wanna to join us it'll be a very
deep dive into where we're at as
please pay take note of those
rules and procedures where we're
really trying to minimise the
time that we commit to hearing
and allocate their time so that
we can run the committee and
efficient way so we're we're
we're not having people on zoom
just kind of pop in we're not
president thank you senator
montasa to answer the question
aware next on the list of sender
every subtle very much as
president mister president would
a center brentley please yield.
already the committees are on
dealing with marijuana issues
listening to misrelation again
around the site on senate
finance and so as far as the
hearing tonight of the the
enemies to get together mister
president mr president the
information that was sent to me
as at five thirty to seven
the
also uh miss president I I do
appreciate very much the work of
the majority for leader and the
and the minority floor leader
on what the uh wording of the
motion was and so
I would just simply like to ask
unanimous concept for the rest
of the session if I should not
be here that I would be excused
I I didn't hear an objection III
heard I heard a pinna gallery
I heard an objection saturday
fair enough.
senator had a meal mister
president the rules committee
will be meeting monday in room
three twenty one at eight thirty
am thank you.
Amaze attacked israel and took
over two hundred hostages
there was over hundred hostages
left and I just want you to
they're at in fact reports
coming out of gaza say that some
of them hamas doesn't even know
where they're at.
And so think about that think
but with senator savantosh yield
send up some answers deal
now you
can my fellow last cruise and
thank you mister president if
state college of our cultural in
the mechanical arch on the last
crucist went to a football ball
game this year correct
mister president center that's
correct I was there and enjoyed
ball the new mexico ball and I I
know you might not have answered
this but center my assistant
knows the answer to this that's
why I sold all hearies here when
miss president would senate my
assets yield anyway
as deal
president center more is yes and
mispresident senator weiss are
called into mexico mister
president center more so it's
actually a creation of state
government under the richer
sentimentation as you know
the most awesome non new years
day bowls in the entire country
and it's and it's the new mexico
ball because the state of mexico
is the prime sponsor of the ball
game.
just continuing that process in
my school has been the late
title sponsor of the ball game
is letter has stepped up in
actually sponsored and for the
a lot of those actually the best
experience they were happening
college football so it's bring
back great members in the man
i'm hugging there's a guy named
brad solid and from all password
Love that guy.
myself strict and even though
we're here to promote our
districts and you make our at
best we can for our disuccess
where we're here for some very
proud of that but it also
promoting entire seat and I love
you read.
Thank you center morning's
senator perton
thank you mister president I
think an hour as parcel
I will not be calling for a
forum but thankfully because of
that I will be able to go home
and I will have to explain to my
come up with compromise thank
you sender partl centers to it.
Must present mine is just a
boring announcement I I wish
that greatly good looking
so the committees committees
were me monday morning at ten
thirty in room three twenty six
that photograph up there a great
deal there there's one thing
that some of you all may notice
a little bit about that
photograph which is the jersey
soiled and and looks like
somebody who actually got in the
game and if anybody was put up a
Center peter warting sort of
business thank you mister
president just just well we're
so saturday is chamber of
commerce legislative reception
are at land at five o'clock by
invitation sunday is a
legislative breakfast site
thirty to six by invitation only
and then on monday from seven to
nine is the greater los cruises
chamber of commerce last
cruise's day legislative
end in spave lorado and doctor
news will be back in the senate
lounge monday from nine thirty
twelve thirty giving napropathy
treatments and we very much
appreciate that
staff and I just want to go
through the list of all those
who are working extraordinarily
hard behind the seems to and it
out in front to make this ship
security are great chief clerk
and her office and staff that
work in the front office the
rostrum the calendar copyroom
enet journal maintenance payroll
operators telephone operators
all of our secretaries.
Ah big shout out to our majority
and minority and protemp office
torres they've been working
collaboratively on committees
committee and we really
appreciate what they do
thanks to my staff leewit mark
staff let's give them all a huge
of our constituents and this
states and with that mister
president unanimous constantly
standing recess until eleven
o'clock on monday morning you're
