Sent her handling
Center meal
center low best.
Sent her my assess here center
mccartin.
Center niber.
Central now.
Sent our teasy penal
Center pub.
Sent a router I guess.
Center sanchez.
center sales
center shandow
center stephanics.
Center words
you do not have a corrow mr
president
alex what do you do in here and
I guess I think I I beamed into
the wrong place
everyone has to go in hello hi
It's just the best day it's an
amazing thing that you're doing
here in new mexico center of
the families i've learned so
much it's amazing how much you
can learn about tiny little
commands and how they grow the
the rotanda year and the new
mexico senate chamber
that does make more sense
doesn't it I mean that to paint
with two broader brush but the
early intervention precare
they're making such a huge
impact the new mexico to all the
tiny little humans and family so
childhood investments
before I go can I ask a favor
sure can I help you with the you
know the thing the hammered that
would left you can I ask you to
consent to the members if that
would be appropriate to that
appropriate
it sounds appropriate if i'll
just have your hand right here
alex are intergolectic early
childhood champion
mrperiod president you do have a
court we do have a core on my
the implication to be led today
by governor almost what is
former selling sunday found some
people governor and traditional
leader I would ask that you
please remain standing for the
senator tallman.
The.
I help to walk away but what do
you want yet more and my normal
they hear in the area to call
down the addy way he I mean he
it they hear me when a diary can
I mean the middle age and I know
you will be pulling the north a
manorate to carb namicaster
going on and will be sent out
more in behalf to repair career
to in the mobile door or be
many on the way I am not me had
in no having arguing popularity
suitable perhaps now
you hear so with that i'd just
coin parliament from send out
their father prevalent hire
traditional name is giving what
the water cuts through
I just wanted to bring our
traditional table blesses to
each and every one of you the
men and the women for being part
of this again uh started another
do you.
and with the blessings from our
dollar said i've gone before as
the spirits that are at that we
rely on with all the six
directions that I just pointed
days in the next month that you
will be here
and the challenges that you go
through to give you that wisdom
to protect you guide you as well
to not just hear but when you
year here so thank you very
much.
But I bet the lay at that.
begin things off by yielding to
senator peter worth thank you
mister president good morning
everyone
as I always do I appreciate very
just pause in really understand
what we're doing here and why
it's so important and so you
grace us with your presence
thank you for being here
upfront kind of announcements in
the certificates we're going to
try and do those in the next
twenty minutes so that at
quarter and twelve we can start
we've got a lot of work on the
table we need to get done in
a certificate for seven national
boards certified teachers
sponsored by senator had a meal
will do those up front a number
of members have guess and what
afternoon so I would yield to
other member introduced gas
go through our
process thank you since it was
sent here for the thank you very
much mister president what an
Thank you center
for the and also mister
president you know it's consent
to allow cameras in the senate
chamber and in the senate
into order any number of other
things going on the building uh
to my colleagues here in the
senate is buzzing with young
people today this building
belongs to them it's theirs
whenever they come over to my
you you have every right to be
in this building any hour of the
day whenever you need to get in
here and do your work so I just
want to say thank you to all of
the early educators that are
here in the building today and
governor is going to come and
speak secretary grogansky with
the early education departments
going to read a proclamation we
have a number of other things
happening today which is really
exciting for early education in
joined a city thank you center
for the
app
senator compass thank you very
much mister president members of
the senate it's really great to
go in have the guests that we
have here with us today not only
county and they're here today
not only to go ahead and show
their appreciation because over
the last several years as you
all know we continue to deal
with the hermes peak caf can
and every one of you many of
them decided let's go to the new
mexico state capital and make
sure that the members of the
house in the senate not only
and every one of us mister
president members of the senate
there are individuals that are
sitting here behind me are some
of the community leaders and
again like I say they brought
mister jonature here who is the
vice chair the more conic
commission
and also here is mr george johio
who is chair of the more a
uh megital martinez who is the
more independent school cfo and
we also have mister general mays
who is the more a soil water
conservation member as well
they just don't couple mister
president thanks to the
companies and welcome to the
chamber
center more
their judge and honest what a
waterable surprise they are
fancy asking mister president so
thank you I hope we find out I
guess we're starting to yearly
gain in thirty pounds early this
year
it's gonna be a two thirty room
three eleven and mister
president it will always as
always be shorter than the
democrat caucus meeting
the think thing is anymore
you thank you so an announced
that the senate tax business
transportation committee will be
after fifty minutes after the
afternoon floor session.
thank you center cindel any
further announcement centers
as senator do hig
thank you mister president
mister president I is this a
problem with have to do it
today by three I start fivers of
asylum detention we have lily on
a stability who is that asylum
seeker from mexico she was
who are survived detention uh at
torrents are and
not seem like that sierra
survivor of torture in iran and
was detained upon entry into the
US and he is actively pursuing
asylum with the help of unm law
score and mister president I i'm
any further announcement
senators
see no further announcements
senator peter worth thank you
mister president of what we're
going to do is have a senator
the rotunda and they're outside
and I think senator padia we're
going to sneak their man before
we get to the work of the
senate's ideal to senator.
Senator had a meal mister
certification and when I
announced your name if you can
stand james melton college and
career high school albert keep
schools kevin dutcher mandela
international magnet school
sanify public schools christina
size santa rosa elementary
n sugar adoles and treatment
center
now mister president achieving
national board certification is
a rigorous process which can
take three to five years to
complete at the end of end of
a written test of content and
pedalogically knowledge studies
have shown that teachers who
complete this process are more
likely to remain in the
classroom even after twenty
years of teaching and their
of our teachers across all
public school districts the
bureau of indian education
schools and charter schools have
attained the certification on
behalf of all of our schools
for their dedication to the
education of our young
generations in addition to them
I think the senate to also help
me in welcoming tamora getty.
round of applies.
They are going to be performing
one song for us here on the
senate floor you know we have
groups all over the state that
it all done for us so she's
bringing out our folks come on
onto the floor here thank you
right in the middle here right
in the center
and thank you mister president
while they're coming on I just
want to say that mariachi is
is just beautiful today the
group consists of members
ranging in ages from thirteen to
eighteen from schools around all
of santa fe in los alamos the
santa fe youth symphony
actually have been participants
of mighty actually spectacular
they'll catch it the large
largest mighty actually
conference in concert event in
the US and i'm gonna ask them to
perform one song mister
The.
Lost
there go man email
me
and bunch of.
Yeah
And the lowest pressure that
email
me
and not there.
Senator but here I think you
very much mister president what
a beautiful way to start today
here in the new mexico state
senate I do want to recognize
the performers today they're
just doing a great job again
martinez leon leon garcia better
cruise career goes carlos net
though
fees good man I hope I got that
right a risk of man excuse me
manager and the program services
person at the athletes could
companies can we give them a
hand please
around all over new mexico and
one of the projects mr president
you might remember that i've
been working on very diligently
and very closely with this group
is a mighty achieval of fame
that we will be bringing to new
randy sanchez and liz the as mr
president can we give them ahead
as well
to the opera as well yes sir
we'll take care of that thank
you mister president thanks to
thank you for the members of the
body for letting us do this
thank you thank you set up a
thank you to our money achieves
I will just give a moment for
how much is to exit.
Yeah.
Seller worth thank you mister
president so just for the
members
report read in for house bill
one which we will then hear just
for the public we're reading in
this morning uh will roll the
clock and hear that this
afternoon in the afternoon
session
republicans are going to caucus
at two thirty some I guess it's
probably three o'clock we'll
hold senator morris to his
primus to keep it shorter than
where in that order business
committee reports center many
i'm sorry to the reader to read
mister president your finance
committee to whom has been
referred house bill one has had
we have a motion to adopt the
community report all those in
favor simplify my saying I
was supposed need the eyes have
messages from the governor of
the reader to read
january seventeenth twenty
twenty four senate executive
message number nineteen the
honourable mimi stewart
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session.
Submission of a bill bearing
ledge dave council service
drafting number point do do six
construction that state agencies
and local public bodies may
enter into and for purchase
orders under those contracts
respectful yours michelle do
honorable mimi store president
pre- protemporary president
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
preserve pursuing to article for
section by be of the new mexico
do six four three zero a bill
creating the DWI act in amending
repealing and acting and
recompiling sections of the
the general show that the
message from the governor has
been received
senate executive message number
twenty one the honorable nearly
steward president temporary.
the fifty six legislature
section second session
submission of a bell bearing
legislative council service
drafting numbers senate bill
twelve a bill renaming the
orders of protection and
amending and repealing related
sections of the enemies say
nineteen seventy eight respect
president protemporary
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuing to article for section
five b two of the mexical
two two six eight five four a
bill amending the local share
adjustment waver requirements
for school districts
respectfully yours michelle lu
hungry governor
president protemporary president
pro temporary stewart and
members of the senate pursuant
to article for section five b
two of the new mexico
acting the meat inspection act
authorizing that maximum
lifestock board to conduct meat
inspections to ensure safety and
quality and meet for human
consumption.
excuse me and providing
exemptions for ritual slaughter
respectful yours mission the
hungry governor.
The journal show the message
store president protemperate
press president pro temporary
stewart and members of the
senate pursuing to article for
section five b two of the
drafting number point do do six
nine three eight a bill and
acting the age appropriate
design code act and providing
civil penalties respectfully
senate executive messages number
twenty five the honorable
meaning stewart president pro
temporary president pro
temporary stewart and members of
the senate percent to article
drafting number point two two
seven one five seven a bill
changing the date of the back to
school cell gross receipts tax
The journals show the message
from the governor has been
researched.
Instead of a peter words to take
us to that next order of
introduction of legislation
where in that order business.
Send a worth well the
legislation there to introduce
is coming in do we want to go to
another order business.
The.
to come in nor mister chair I
think they're up there all the
prefile bills have already been
reviewed and they should be
already up front.
So they're there so there's two
Some as president just for the
there's some after
one ten I believe that the new
ones that they were going to
look at so but we can uh
misresort we can stand in place
and visit with the senate a
minority leadership about those
referrals before they come in
and we kind of work a lot of
issues out and so we don't have
wonderful practice that helps us
work together in the chamber
cell we don't mind it all
waiting in place.
Senator pinot worth
thank you mister president in
amazon said we got a business
introduction of legislation or
in that order business
introduction legislation the
reader to read
in safety devices for the
surrender of invents under
certain conditions without
criminal prosecution for
abandonment or abuse of a child
allowing the installation
providing limited immunity for
operators of those devices
require the children youth and
family's department to issue
rules to implement the
ninety one haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate communist committee
events senate judiciary
committee then sent it finance
committee senate bill ninety one
university for a windmill tech
mission certification workshop
senate bill ninety two senate
bill ninety two haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
introduced by senator bradley
and act making an appropriation
to the board of regions of the
mexico state university for
research and development of
chile harvesting solutions and
committees committee then send
education committee vents senate
finance senate bill ninety three
senator bill ninety four
introduced by senator brentley
another jist and all the just
sent a bill ninety four senate
bill ninety four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
the reader read the title of
that bill again please.
Set as senator I disorder i'll
university foreign any allergist
could you could you spell that
please
thank you very much thank you
center is other
things
the reader to read
senate bill ninety five
the department of finance and
administration to plan the
design construct replace an
improved water lines into the
consequences in sieter county
affairs committee then senate
finance committee that senate
bill ninety five
the senate bill ninety six
introduced by senator my estas
and act related to criminal
murder to eighteen years senate
bill ninety six
senate bill ninety six haven't
been read twice by title's order
printed referred to the senate
committees committee vents
senate bill ninety seven
introduced by senator myesters
and act relating to crime.
Providing the shooting at a
motor vehicle and shooting from
ordered printed and referred to
the senate committees committee
then senate health public
affairs committee then send a
judiciary committee thence
counseling compact senate bill
ninety eight center bell ninety
eight having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
act related to taxation removing
incremental increases to the
canabas excise tax senate bill
ninety nine senate bill ninety
sent a finance committee that
senate bill ninety nine.
Senate bill one o two introduced
by senator brand and actually
they need a crime amending the
senate bill one o two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the senate committees committee
then senate health public
introduced by senator civil
opens and act relating to water
authorizing the office of the
state engineered to inspect
permit and license holder
account for inflation senate
bill one oh one.
Senate bill one o three
introduced by senator lopez and
act making appropriations to the
board of regions of the
university of new mexico to fund
one o three senate bill one or
three haven't been read twice by
title is order printed referred
to the senate committees
committee then send it education
committee then send it financed
department of transportation for
infrastructure projects on a
certain portion of united states
highway three eighty sena bill
committee senate bill one o four
senate bill one o five
introduced by senators share
and actually dating to taxation
amending the tax brackets
compensating tax leased vehicles
gross receipts tax and gaming
tax and manufacturer licenses on
the transfer of gaming devices
and increasing the rate of the
redevelopment project removing
authorization for a tax
instrument development district
to dedicate and increment of the
state gross the seat stacks
Alternative fuel tax act county
and municipal gasoline tax act
and insurance premium tax act
development tax credit act
highwage jobs tax credit
affordable housing tax credit
act alternative energy product
manufacturers tax credit active
receipts and compensating tax
act providing sunset dates for
certain credits deductions and
exemptions pursuant to the
of the film production tax
credit act reducing the capital
gains deduction pursuant to the
income tax act and acting a
gross to see to tax exemption
electric vehicles repealing
certain gross receipts tax
distributions to minister
palodis repealing certain
session lot certain session laws
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
tax businesses transportation
ready then senate finance
semi quint and senior commission
to plan promote and implement
celebrations.
Commemorating the two hundred
fiftieth anniversary of the
declaration of an independence
one or six having been read
twice by title has ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
indian and real affairs
act relating to taxation
increasing the amount of rural
job tax credit making the credit
refundable and removing
committee then senate finance
committee that senate bill one
or seven
senate bill one away and
introduced by senators munios
and rodriguez and act relating
dollars senate bill one await
set a bill one away having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee that senate
rules committee then senate
finance committee that senate
bill one await
and act relating to the public
finance in acting the
catastrophic business relief act
creating the catastrophic
business relief loan fund
loans requirement repayment
established in reporting
requirements making
appropriations senate bill one
or nine senate bill one oh nine
Senate bill one ten introduced
by senator steinboard and act
related to public finance and
providing duties permitting
certain investments prohibiting
complex of interest creating the
state banking fund requiring the
state treasure to the positive
appropriations set a bill one
ten senate bill one ten have you
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate judiciary committee then
appropriation to the department
of the environment to provide
additional resources to protect
water in the state senate bill
one eleven
senate bill one eleven haven't
introduced by senator gagos and
act related to motor vehicles
allowing pregnant women in their
third trimester to be in to be
issued temporary significant
mobility limitation parking
placards sent a bill one twelve
senate bill one twelve have you
towers senate bill one thirteen
senate bill one fifteen haven't
been read twice by title is
ordered printed excuse me that
senate bill one thirteen sent
about one thirteen having been
committee that senate bill one
thirteen
the senate bill one fourteen
introduced by center thomas and
act relating to taxation
providing an exemption for
tax senate bill one fourteen
senate bill one fourteen haven't
been read twice by title is
order printed referred to the
senate committees committee then
send a tax business and
transportation committee then
section fifteen dash seven dash
three and a message nineteen
seventy eight being laws
nineteen seventy eight chapter
one sixty six sectionate as
finance and administration for
settlements of claims over
specified amounts.
Providing for notification to
the legislative finance
committee of approvals senate
finance committee that senate
bill one fifteen senate bill one
sixteen introduced by senator
hickey for the legislative
finance committee and act
relating to a state reserves
ms in nineteen seventy eight
being laws nineteen ninety nine
chapter two oh seven section one
as amended senate bill one
bill one sixteen
senate bill one seventeen
introduced by senator gagos and
act relating to taxation
credit senate bill one
seventeen.
Senator one seventeen haven't
been read twice my title is
ordered pretty and referred to
the senate committees committee
then senate tax visitors and
transportation committee then
senate finance that senate bill
taxation providing a gross
receipts tax deduction for died
diesel used for agricultural
purposes senate bill one
eighteen
committee dense senate finance
that senate bill one eighteen
the senate bill one nineteen
introduced by senator worth and
actually lady to taxation
committee then senate tax
business and transportation
committee then senate finance
that senate bill one nineteen
senate bill one twenty
fund making an appropriation
senate bill one twenty seven
bill when twenty haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
and act related to taxation
amending ownership elderly
requirements for the new solar
market development income tax
title is ordered.
Printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate tax business and transfer
committee then sent it finance
preteral release establishing
when a rebutter presumption
arises that are defended as
likely deposit threat to the
safety of others if released
pending trial and that no
trial trials and hearings
declaring an emergency senate
bill one twenty two senate bill
one twenty two haven't been read
then senate finance that senate
bill one twenty two
senate bill one twenty three
introduced by senator brant and
conditions senate bill one
twenty three senate bill one
twenty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
health and public affairs
moores and act relating to
public employees retirement
amending the public employee
employees retirement act to
allow members who were employed
To purchase up the five years of
service credit senate bill one
twenty four senate bill one
twenty four having been read
twice by title is order printed
twenty four senate bill one
twenty five introduced by
senator bert and act related to
taxation removing the sunset
date for an income tax exemption
send a bill one twenty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the senate committees committee
senate bill one twenty five.
Set a majority thirty to peter
water to take that next order
business thank you mister
president in amazon that we go
that our business announcements
are misleading us that order
consent that the rules be
suspended that the journals show
all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there is
no objection to the sword mister
president as he needs consent
thank you mister president
appreciate all the members this
morning working through the
business up front and the
announcements plan again is to
side they're having a caucus
from two thirty to three
I was given an insurance it was
going to be nice and short so
three o'clock this afternoon I
and and I do know there's going
committee's committee from to to
two thirty this afternoon uh
respectful of the **** two
thirty two o'clock through three
seen objection to senator
