Senator gregs center hamlet
center him hell
senator hickey
center I thought the.
mechanic mechanic nowhere center
morris.
Santra minus
senator novel
senator pantel.
Center peril.
Senator pope
senator roddery guess.
Center share
center shandow.
Center souls santers departments
center steinborn.
corrupt mr president thank you
it asked that we all please
stand
for the pledge of the excuse me
for the implication to be led
today by reverend to leave the
senator souls and the solution
in mexico flag to believe today
by senator mases
thank you very much as I begin
this time I invite us to take
breath in those gifts to let us
breathe in deeply the gift of
guards piece.
And let us breathe in the
blessing of guards love.
But will not let us go and will
not let us down and overcome all
division.
Let us pray.
created creating still.
A whatever name we know you.
Here are prayers this day.
And we pray that those
interested with leadership and
we ourselves might have the
courage and vision needed to
make decisions for the good of
all.
In this land of endless guy
teachers the boundlessness of
your beauty and love.
In this land of little rain
teachers to share in the bless
what you have given us.
The.
And in this my end of many
cultures and colors give us your
infinite imagination.
And teachers to respect and
value all your children.
Up as to pray and work not only
for ourselves but for all your
people and indeed for this great
and blessed land.
justice love mercy and while
completely with you now and
always.
I'm at
I played allegiance.
The.
Romento their third alabamata
those.
I solute the flag of this.
things started
thank you mister president good
morning and good warning to all
our guess we've full house today
we are glad to have you here
unanimous consent we go that our
arnold lead us off
I very much appreciate your
words and it kind of is a
perfect follow up to an
extraordinary prayer breakfast
lots of brothers we talk about
that and we are here to do good
for all and so again we are
graced by your presence thank
financial disclosure reports
which are do in the secretary of
state's office by five o'clock
it is american diabetes
legislature and lunch is being
provided today by towers county
it's in the senate lounge from
mucho one of our sale which
shops here and we very much
and will do that first also
after senator gonzalez senator
rodriguez has certificated for
the new mexico alliance for boys
and girls clubs that will be
read and guests introduced.
placement day and he has some
guests to introduce then there
are two other certificates that
are not going to be read but
we'll be discussed senator
this morning but there are
guests to introduce I know
members have a lot of gas I also
have a shadow that all
introducing just a minute in
terms of events the republican
association new mexico are is
having its legislative reception
at the market steer steakhouse
four o'clock to six thirty by
invitation the new mexico
heritage area breakfast room
three twenty one from seven to
eight thirty am and the new
mexico hospital association
continue of care breakfast in
my shout or slash in turn who is
here for the day mason gruber
sack the groups name is well
known in this chamber his dad
before moving to albuque when he
was in first grade not only as
is down the former senator his
grandfather albert was a santa
fe city counselor and is great
school class meet of mine and
senator servant
and she was the deputy cheapest
staff for the house judiciary
committee mason is majoring a
political science with a double
minor in philosophy and
plans to work on some elections
for the democratic party in this
year's elections and then plans
to work in both real estate and
the canabas industry before
let's give me sent a big welcome
to the state senate
and mispress a year the senator
padia first for some
announcements and then other
members to introduce guests
before we get to the
certificates there might be
there thank you mister president
senate chamber and in the
gallery
senator brent
mister president I ask you names
consent to excuse senator
martmore is accept for the
have the distinct honor
to to introduce my shadow today.
He happens to be one of my
i'll tell you something about
car car would.
He was raged in broad view which
very few people are raised in
broad view
parents are quitting and diana
would this is diana who lives on
the original homestead and have
high school where he enjoys ffa
four h showing livestock welding
in playing football here's a
with her state for each
portfolio he will be attending
national for each congress in
the fall he also received the
he believes in agriculture and
the importance that it has after
high school he plans to become a
license welder and started his
own fabrication shop with while
grandfather mister president may
I present my
thank you mister president
visiting us today we have a
students from belind middle
school.
The volunteer high school
message program coming all the
way from the beautiful middle
real grand valley valencia
help me welcome my guess
introduce a senate to my shadow
today brand new roar because
with the today she is with the
executive board of the u n
she's excuse me as president
she's she's with the executive
board of the u n college
democrats organization she's
is from ventura california and
she's excited to be here today
and so we please welcome his
intern and I have failed who's
already gotten the opportunity
to create a a bill analysis I
have a shadow who is a college
dim that's mister james
legislature and he's really
excited to learn more about this
body and the dream is to to get
an impa and pursue policy work
he describes an interesting
encouraged him to think about
policy work in elected office
and pino maybe
so I please join me in and
the members of the boys and
girls club of generation on all
in power bent out of especially
who are on the gallery today and
on behalf of senator pinto who
stuck in traffic she asked if I
which she did send a go coulders
thank you mister president.
cruces high can you all stand up
from us crucial's high and show
your love.
Where are you and you were here
before did they leave already I
told him to come and watch the
us can kind of get a new rave of
hope and and just amazing this
when we know that our young
people are really interested in
the process of what their
government is doing so for our
involved in that and I think i'm
honoured and I hope you all will
please just apply all of the
young people that are here today
who want to learn more about how
government works in the state of
it's my honor to introduce two
guests today as most of you know
I had a prior life to this in
which eventually evolved into
having a company that basically
went out of business and so they
have as well but these two
individuals who stand behind me
success I had is really due to
their brains in sight in ability
to deal with people my is one of
the and i'm not exaggerating
i've been all over the country
we've got some new jobs may be
coming that could use some
really good data analysis and.
So she's up here today visiting
and common meyer is a nurse
completely and across the board
and in what the rules are to be
so she may also be looking
something as well and don't but
I want to present them to you
phone
thank you mister
we in the capital we have
occupational therapists and ot
students from throughout the
on therapists work with people
while ages and we have four
colleges in the state that train
occupational there be
practitioners everyone who gets
ot's and ota's to our senate
thank you
thank you for a second time with
Send a bucker
thank you mister president I
think you majority leader worth
for indulging me for a moment I
legislative session and I am
happy in uh thank god for my
wife every day who supports me
in and helps me while I do the
of senate majority florida peter
where to take us to the next
order of business thank you
mister president we're going to
stay on our announcements but do
girls club certificate and then
senator harmio so I would yield
the santa gonzales.
Anyone sellers.
of the state with having our
constituency and will come and
be set up and work with us then
talk to us better the most
president if we could have the
reader read the certificate and
then I would have some guests on
the rostrum that I would like to
be able to entroduce enough
objection.
does hereby extend its
recognition and acknowledgment
to declaring january thirty
first two thousand twenty four
taus county day in the senate
where as tales county is located
continue to serve as leaders and
water conservation and sound
water management and whereas
water management infrastructure
investment and the protection of
are critical to the development
of lower carbon energy sources
and where as water management
and construction investment and
the protection of local water
culture now therefore be it
resolved by the legislature of
the state of new mexico that
january thirty first two
thousand and twenty four be
the minister palazi's mutual
domestic water associations a
secure and communities of tous
county and conserving and
managing critical water
roberto robbie at j guns honest
mimi stewart president protemp
and sherry de luhan chief clerk
new mexico state senate before a
Senator is thank you mister
president and member or some if
you can see on the certificate
every part of the state but we
have really given
the emphasis to really work with
innocent to really work and
had a our late senator cardill
sis nettles that served for many
years you know in this chamber
and with u and m towels we have
history and anything that has
you know to do with the
specially with so much of the
demand that we place on our
water for our state and this is
america or so county day and we
have a christian isolated with
chevron his state government
affairs
darline vehicle tough county
board of commission and jeanette
brush tales county board of
commission.
superintendent of the question
schools
jason brian question independent
schools
mark florida's president of the
taste municipal school board
and jeffrey plan tous news.
And we have in the gallery we
have many students we have a
question students and there
for being here to date thousand
county day
is mister john of the other
mayor of course
thank you mister president thank
you thank you senator comes on
as I do believe that there was
some members that may want to
on silence indicated water
definitely is one of the key
issues as we continue to build
new mexico and ensure that there
is vitality of course for each
the county of towers there are
few things that
really add my opinion would be
very very good to go ahead and
mention and and one of them is
you will the aesthetics the
beautiful mountains the great
snow that running water the wild
draft of these things that are
there if you really want to go
to a place where you can enjoy
all the kind of things that are
there it's important for all of
us to know that when you get
there to touch or that
surrounding area.
You can tie and culture your
has all of these components that
really make our lives so much uh
for there if you will with the
graces of what we all are all
about so if you go on into some
that are there so this area
continues to be if you will an
area a center piece for the
entire world as people come from
these stories when you continue
to say well I want to do
something a little bit
different.
The difference definitely
happens to be the forest seasons
thank you very much for bringing
this forward it means a lot to
us in the people that are here
definitely represent the pride
that you all continue to share
Senator pete or thank you mister
president next up ideal to
Thank you mister president I
assume ms consent to present a
certificate like the reader to
read please no objection.
The reader worried
to declaring at january thirty
first two thousand twenty four
boys and girls clubs of new
mexico day in the senate.
Whereas the boys and girls clubs
a century and whereas the boys
and girls clubs of new mexico
bridge the gap between school
and home by providing an
educational fun and safe place
for school aids to youth to
highly trained staff to it more
than twenty eight thousand five
hundred children and teens in
seventeen cities the route new
responsible and caring citizens
and whereas the boys and girls
clubs of new mexico provide
character and leadership
development education career
further encouragement and
appreciation for the arts and
provider programs in sports
fitness and recreation.
And whereas the programs
building strong character
developing leadership
encouraging community
involvement and preventing risky
behaviors and whereas the
contributions of the boys and
mexico that recognition be
extended to the leadership and
members of the boys and girls
clubs of new mexico for the
invaluable contributions and be
it further resolved that january
senator nancy radigus mimi
stewart president protempt
sherry de luhan chief clerk new
mexico state senate thank you
you mister president buyers and
girls club would what a big day
we have this is your day to the
boys and girls clubs with us
today I am pleased mister
represent the over fourteen
thousand youth served each each
year sorry during our out of
school time the boys and girls
we are so welcome the many youth
adult staff and parents who have
joined us in the gallery and we
recognize a critical work
provided by the new mexican
clubs.
skills uh we support the mission
and valuable work of the new
mexico clubs to ensure that all
young people reach their full
potential as productive caring
work with the clubs and their
families and so on in our state
allowing parents to continue to
the lives of so many youth in
our state and to the young
people who participate in their
local boys and girls clubs and
are committed to achieving a
successful future.
mister president I do I rise in
support of this certificate and
thank senator that began as I
don't know if others in the
chamber knows some of the really
notable people that were born
out of in grew up out of the
general wesley clark misty
colbland
magic urban johnson jackie
joiner cursy cuba good in junior
i'm liking it smoking robinson I
just mentioning a few of the
notables that have been members
of the boys and girls clubs and
I want to thank senator or the
biggest for doing this again
because really it's a group that
lefts people out of poverty and
again senator that is thank you
mister president thank you
center but there.
Send a brand.
No thank you mister president
college and so we we definitely
appreciate the work of the boys
and girls club it's great place
for for young people to go after
school and and to be able to
have some activities that that
we appreciate the boys and girls
club in the work that they do in
and just want to remind everyone
my wife actually used to be a
director forms thank you.
Thank you senator brent.
recognizing me as an individual
who continues to support the
boys and uh girls clubs
throughout new mexico and in
particularly one of the ones
that has recently been
established there in the last
outdoor classroom and this is an
opportunity for young people to
continue to grow into so many
areas and in a few minutes i'm
going to go and talk about one
of those individuals who has
to contribute to the boys and
girls clubs throughout new
mexico thank you very much
mister president thank you
senator coppers.
members that are here with us
today and when the rostrum we
have matthew vocal lyric arondo
recklam and pamses nettles they
are with us here in the rostroom
well come them and then in
addition to this we want to look
up to the gallery and you can
finally penia sophia culture
ella getler your radio martinez
jared catnack michael chavadia
per dear josanna k dazzening
camalia came the after ran
canbria gomes and christi gomes
please stand up and let us
thank you mister president
members of the senate thank you
very much.
Send a worth thank you mister
president next year to senator
mexico senate and I asked the
reader to read in no objection
the reader to read
fifty six legislature second
placement day in the senate
whereas though those animals
public school district has been
named the two thousand twenty
three college board advanced
placement small district of the
recognizes the los animals
public school district for being
a national leader and providing
students with advanced placement
classes and college access.
And whereas the ward reflects
the los alamos public school
district challenges its students
to achieve at the highest level
now therefore be it resolved by
the senate of the state of new
mexico that the loss animals
thousand and twenty four be
declared advanced placement day
in the senate signed and sealed
at the capital in the city of
santa fe senator leo automate
Center attempt mister president
you can't hide my hill topper
pride and I am so excited they
even named they they gave me an
unreary lettered last year and I
just want to tell you mister
school in simultaneously twenty
five percent or more of the
graduating coherent scored a
three or higher and at least one
ep exam during high school was
district serves three thousand
seven hundred students including
a hundred seventy students from
thirty three different countries
and public speaking twenty five
different languages mister
our district leadership I am
proud to represent los alamos
public schools in the senate
district and I would offer to
sing the fight sign but I think
I would shatter some glass but I
Thank you center how to mail
center hotel now mister
president joining me today our
students teachers and
administrators from los almost
public schools when I call your
principle reney don't worry los
alamos high school vice
principle ryan finn lost alamos
vice principle and my former
especially value high school
cheer team mates is an montoya
luke favorite is joining me and
area to the on this who are
students and ap and a whole slew
of hill toppers including our
mister president ladies and
gentlemen of the senate if you
can help me congratulating los
next order of business thank you
mister president so let me just
give a members and everyone here
a little roadmap of what we're
going to do
so we're going to read in the
go to that confirmation before
we do that however I do want to
remind members that capital
outlay needs to be submitted to
day it's the last day to
introduce and I understand
one of that important deadline
mister president before removed
forward it now being eleven
fifty nine am I moving adjourned
until twelve oh one pm
the senate will come and order
Here in no objection it is
ordered mister president I ask
you knows consent that the roles
be suspended that the record
show that the journals been read
in full and approved subject to
revision and approval of the
am I moved we adjourn until
twelve or one p m senate will
come and order mr president I
asking ins consent that the
rules be suspended that the
journals show all those present
in this morning session are
subject to revision and approval
of the judiciary committee here
in no objection it is sorted
senator peter worth thank you
mister president unanimous
committee reports the reader to
read.
Mr president in your rules
governor makes the following
appointment treasa and net or
tears casados as secretary of
the children youth and family's
department for a term commencing
respectfully submitted senator
at katie at do hague chair
saturday mr president I move the
community report senators we
have a motion to adopt community
reports all those in favor
president unanimous concept we
go to that order business
confirmations and I yield to
send it rules chair katie do it
senator mr president I asked
Center but there thank you very
much mister president I move
that the senate do here by
confirm the appointment of
teresa and net or these case
you very much mister president
that's my honor to stand before
you today we had a very robust
and helpful uh hearing in rules
committee today are both sides
of the isle were very generous
it it helped stand me up over
the years and I did live in
seven different counties and
seven different foster homes
also the all fates home and
albuquerque so the moment I
arrived here twelve years ago
new mexico for the employees in
that department and i'm speaking
of secretary designate to
reserve a case of those and
mister president three so i'm
just going to call to reserve
she has over twenty years of
experience and state government
she was the director of
operations and human resources
she was a deputy chief of staff
a deputy cabinet secretary a
president agreed to take on the
extreme responsibility of
leading the c wife the
department as a designate
secretary designate and
throughout that entire career mr
vast amount of experience to
this role she is more than
familiar with solving complex
problems uh bringing people
together to solve those problems
mister president to carry this
confirmation.
What would you know when i've
done confirmations in the past
i've been asked to do those I
secretary designate casadoes to
the senate floor for
confirmation one of those was a
question that I receive which is
what is going to be different
she has already begun to
an organization in the structure
and a team that modernizes how
cases are handled from and to
end and she's more than willing
to accept help as a matter of
fact she's asking for help
mister president she's asking
she's asking for that help and I
just have to say that you know
if you have any amount of time
with the reserve as she's a can
do she has a can do attitude
that mister president I believe
this strategic plan is going to
look at some very valuable
feedback from members of this
body on what a strategic plan
should look like she's focused
on short medium and long range
strategic planning mister
all of the human resources in
this department are they in the
right positions and the right
roles do we have all the
departments all the work groups
set up the right way it's gonna
be using the technology it's
have so that's the second theme
that I was hearing from our
members here in the in the
senate.
Another one is focus on child
while being as she's helped us
to create the early childhood
mission today in the rules
committee we got some excellent
feedback and and secretary
designing casalos agreed with
almost all of it and and it's
basically take a look at the
entire department and figure out
services for the entire family
so when a child might be having
an issue or is in trouble or
something's going on with that
child there's a whole family and
community around that child to
help lift them up and what
support services meet what what
in the morning they're just a
welcome maybe sometimes they're
shocked maybe ptsd is setting in
and that's going to stay with
those children for the rest of
their lives and so she's working
really hard to create an
that they need to move on into
the next stage of protection so
that they get on into the next
part of their lives
the next thing was focus on
employees absolutely the
and in addition to that that
they have self care
opportunities because a lot of
the work that they're doing is
very emotional it's very
sensitive
and these experiences don't just
affect the child they also
president to taking a look at
all of the ratios in the
department.
The national association of
social work has very defined
ratios that they would like to
see you know and in time in
kept hearing over and over again
and the secretary and I have
discussed this many times and
that is the management and
support of this department so
that we have managers that are
we did have a really good
discussion in debate in the the
rules committee this morning I I
want to acknowledge the other
side of the isle for the
excellent questions that they
asked I want to say that this
department it should always
always be about the well being
of a child I thought senator
neighborhood had an excellent
point in the meeting this
morning he mentioned a couple of
times the well being of the
child and what are the things we
centers we're debating.
of action plan mister president
uh set fourth guidelines with
with time tables where things
needed to be done and should
have been done by the agency my
vote today certainly won't be uh
a vote personally against a
miscassadols although I wish I
could support this nominee I do
believe the CYFD needs to go
undergo a much more substitute
change then work what we've seen
in in the in the past few months
improve cyfid I believe that
this topic cyfd
interchangeably with crime in
the state should be the two
referred to committee or or I
get a message or anything like
that where we can get behind
this desperate and in crisis
and if we are not here for that
in this body to reconstitute
that family unit then why are we
here at all mr.
your this is one of those
departments that honestly I i've
had struggles with for years not
just under this administration
upon you but my concern for this
department is great
I am greatly concerned as later
bike I said that we are not that
we're ignoring this this year
from the center for the study of
social policy uhm that.
for the most part they've been
little to no progress in
addressing them
so that that is very concerning
to me it's very concerning to me
The training insufficient
training lack of.
Supervisory support low moral
poor communications and lack of
community resources.
But the fact that that were not
seeing.
Progress concerns me.
I was really excited.
supported her and said if anyone
can fix your life dates you.
Well
so much for that.
Because it didn't get fixed.
the the equivalent department as
a children's social worker.
In northern california.
Yeah sometime you were going to
have to make radical changes.
To this department to fix
things.
home that we take them out and
we put them in a place that safe
that they can feel safe.
But they can be safe.
That they can know they're not
Or we'd see i'm not taking out
the home at all when there's
been a reports numerous reports.
On the family.
And yet I don't see the radical
changes that we need to make.
I will see the support for a
faster parents that need to be
The secretary as soon as it came
in.
Put a hiring freeze on.
The one I see the opposite of
But.
When you already have massive
caseloads I don't think it's
smart to not hire anyone else.
It is extremely difficult for
social workers like my sister to
make sure that they can get to
every home.
Investigate every family.
And so a concerns me that we
stopped hiring people at the
very time we should have been
hiring people.
And so I I really hope that that
From the last secretary.
Do I honestly did believe if
anyone could fix this department
without us as a legislature
making radical changes it would
have been.
Your nomination at this time
because I just I think some of
the things that you've done just
don't make sense to me.
But I wish you all the luck in
And then i'm not gonna hold my
breath but I will hope and pray
that that is the case thank you.
then I was at the hearing this
morning and so i'd like to share
a couple of things that I heard
going on this morning that I
think speak to
case others made a couple of
statements that I think really
are important to share with the
body one is that she is
committed to.
code that have for too long been
used by the department to cover
up things rather than to deal
with protecting children and I
the other thing she said is that
she would be glad and this was
an in response to a question of
mine but to other senators that
should be glad to work closely
hold hearings this summer and
and in those hearings we will
hear from the secretary about
progress she's made I do think
it's it's unrealistic for us to
the secretary long before this
administration.
Like senator buddy I have a long
history with this department I
variety of positions in that
department.
But there was a time when it was
a well functioning organization
and that was in in the early two
highly trained than professional
staff most of the staff had
professional licenses.
There were license social
workers.
really knowledgeable in that
field and that's going to be one
of the things that it takes a
little while to turn around you
don't do that in nine months you
commitment to making the
organization work.
Deserve a chance and deserve the
opportunity to turn things
around but it is not going to
expect that to happen by you
know some kind of magical
process it only takes the the
process of hiring people who
know what they're doing who are
prepared for that job and then
secretary and follow through and
the process that she's begun
realizing as we do that that is
not going to happen magically or
overnight but that are
in center with center period and
thank you mister president and
now this morning's meeting and
rules I think was was very
that we have identified that
there is a problem
so that we can at least start to
talk about solutions.
We were also given
especially in the last couple
weeks
is what is the department going
to do what are the goals what
are the time lines for these
goals and what are you going to
accomplish.
going to accomplish and a month
to ensure that we're going in a
good direction
because mister president there's
one thing i've learned in twelve
years here is that whether it's
education or well being.
So it gives me hold that maybe
we can come up with solutions.
But unfortunately
there's bills that have been
have these conversations as a
legislature and move something
forward and hopefully we can.
Next session I think it's too
far away
joint resolution was perfect
the answer over and over or the
the debate over and over was
what we're doing is not working
and at some point you have to
enough crisis that although none
of us wants to talk about
special sessions that's one of
those things especially when
your insertion maybe give us a
week after after we've seen a
And this is something where
there's children being harmed
they're dying.
They're being abused
secretary I I hope that you have
all the success because every
child in the state is depending
on you and depending on this
department to do it and do it
support of this nomination i'm
on legislative health and human
services and i've had the
opportunity over the last nine
months to see her hit the ground
running
important and really big and she
saw that problem and fixed it
immediately I forgot who brought
it to her attention but it it
came up in legislative health
and human services and she
makes sense to me has good
areas of focus for the
department.
She also has created a a
transparency dra- dashboard and
so many evils particularly in
the child in the in the area of
children like they say family
secrets uhm cause
everybody's attention I do
understand that has to be
balanced with children's privacy
I understand that but I think
it's also important that we are
aware of just generally what is
and I believe that she
understands it and understand
switch what needs to happen
these things
this department has really
casados is that her knowledge
extensive knowledge of state
government is really going to
they don't understand spo they
don't understand you know how
they can adjust salaries they
don't understand there's so many
things that are not understood
especially if they bring in a
whole new team of people who
problems solved with both her
restructuring and with the the
problems with in salary.
Uhm
and morale problems with the
these these things in just the
last few months
i'm looking forward to see what
she can do in the future thank
you mister president.
Senator worth
what I think is probably the
most important and most
difficult job that exists in
state government and I also
think it's important that we
we're in this together and I
just wanted to make that
statement I do think there are
multiple tracks here and I
appreciate center city of opens
bringing up the cabinets
settlement
judiciary committee which all of
us very much appreciated you
were there not just a listen but
to participate and obviously for
those of us with a legal
training and the lawyer had you
reiterate it we should be
working on this together and I
just think you I want or just
let you know that
I certainly will do whatever I
right person to take this on and
I just am extraordinarily
appreciative that you would be
willing to do it thank you
mister president.
Thank you center worth sender to
secretary of CYFD and mister
president I just want to really
think secretary casa those for
being available in responsive we
training to avery single c y fd
employee and including faster
families and recognizing that
those employees who are
thing they need just to be
recognized that those are
difficult situations for the
child for the family and
certainly for the employees who
are responding and allowed to
walk or exercise and do those
things and also doing a campaign
to recognize important work that
foster families are doing so
getting the resources they need
and so I look forward secretary
for salaries to working with you
and moving forward to make sure
that we're adequately providing
just supporting those most
vulnerable inner states so i'm
really great fall for your
willingness to stop up and lead
the agency.
Thank you mister president.
Thank you senator brandon.
think this is our fourth cyft
cabinet secretary under this
administration I think that
speaks to the lack of connewity
within our agencies.
I remember our confirmation for
the last ped secretary kurt
steinhouse I was optimistic
student great support had a lot
of hope.
I know this he's not gonna fix a
darn thing
he's not going to make a bit of
difference.
Because the system is broken
The.
The.
This secretary before you came
with no solutions to the
legislator
legislative request at all just
the same request that they have
all had we need more money
in the legislator response.
We give you more money
conversations in the interam
there seemed to be a want from
both sides the chambers in both
sides of the aisle that this is
disappointed to see that you too
after nine months arrived with
no ask.
Just money
are actually argued leaving
posed by the agencies how we
were formed leadership something
as simple as the career act
which passed this chamber
child abuse will meaningful
change won't go anywhere
some legislation that makes it
still a little better and like
we did something may.
but in the nine minutes I might
say you haven't even started to
look for the garden house
just during session just during
there was a co neutral's report
there was issued by a national
child welfare experts that
reporting the reported that the
hiring freeze that you
concern of fraud and abuse just
in the last two and a half weeks
I heard a great quote yesterday
and my committee that said in
order to be successful you have
this is a failing agency that
won't admit failure
we can't change and we can't
succeed if we can't recognize
that we're failing I am very
that I think you the first
stability being able to turn
this shop around.
I don't have a lot of hope today
I certainly don't have the hope
that I had three weeks ago when
The.
Regardless of push back from a
corrupt agency
nurses
Our teachers.
And our media
the new mexico media has done a
what's going on because the
media new mexicans say enough is
enough and refuse to ignore the
crisis.
I have hope that she will
implement plans in programs that
have immediate action and it
actually outlast your term here
I do hope that
I feel that at this point all I
can do is pray and so I do I
pray for the vulnerable children
of new mexico here are not
being.
Who are not being responded to.
Today I will cast a vote of no
confidence not not in this
secretary at all.
But I will cast a vote of no
But I also pray secretary that
you proved me wrong.
Thank you mister president.
Would you have several members
who would like to be in the list
I just want to announce those
mail senator words and certain
and when yours certain panics
thank you mister president I
will be brief
I stand and support the agency
successes in problems the
secretary designate did not
create these problems but will
need to address most of them in
a timely fashion
field in area of services
including the ekc foundation
pass colleagues and state
government consider her as a
phishing and skilled she has
responsibilities and services of
the department she has already
identified that a new division
for family services will support
families before there are
Thank you mister president and
secretary
casadashcongratulations
big job big job for you
i'm not running again i'm
you start to reflect on.
Your time serving up here
and there are few moments of
just a few that are the really
Just those few moments that
still hearts me
was an amendment that I ran on
to insert some language into the
family representation and
advocacy act.
That language is just a clause
interest of children then quote.
You see where this story is
going
that amendment
did not pass this for
immediately to my left.
The chair of a health and public
affairs who is an experienced
The man sending to my left broke
with his party.
And voted
for the best interest of the
children
and go against
that progressive grain
edges.
Just do it.
Of course.
But my question is or are
actions going to match our words
a closing thought from first
As politicians we say a lot of
stuff but if you put us down to
a vote that's where it really
Once again congratulations I
wish you the best you do have
some wonderful people no doubt
that will share and have shared
wisdom with you and I urge you
the very best thank you mister
secretary designate because
southerly soon I think you are
you bring in a full plate of
energy and tm and ideas to hit
the ground running in a just
want to say
in these jobs all of us in this
room are really about people and
we're about carrying about
people
leading lives of quite
desperation we're talking about
a child who may be in the worst
situation when they'll voice
whatsoever and really I think
your job in the job of this
department is to find the.
I hope that you have a system
set up to where you're
constantly asking
what about this kid what about
that oversight that redundancy
um
and so that we we can catch that
next tragedy before it happens
and that's my that's my hope for
you and are.
we need to get into the weeds
and we need to be asking about
these kids and make insurer that
none slip through the crack so
maybe that's an over
simplification i'm sure it is
but I think that's really the
what i've heard and i'm really
proud to support your your
nomination and appointment
itself i'll just leave it at
that thick miser president thank
you sector doesn't.
The center in office.
since the beginning when she was
there as just before she was
fully appointed to the position
I remember her coming to the to
the meetings during the interim
and just passionate and
compassion both both trades that
we we really are intrinsically
passion for your job in the type
of work you do every day she was
consistent in her presentations
I never never heard anything
very honest she is a woman of
integrity and a hard working
leader and I will ask the senate
to confirm her to this
possession in one of the biggest
needed and I believe that by
confirming the secretary here
that can continue nowing that we
supported her and that were in
the system trying everything we
This morning is hearing in the
senate rules was very zero
mad of secretary I appreciate
your right four hours
mentioned in committee to there
have been many secretaries that
have come in front of senate
rules over the years my ten year
here in the new mexico senate
and every secretary that comes
in there's always hope.
and I think you bring at another
level of hope as the department
moves forward
mr president it's not to say
And as I mentioned mister
president this morning we don't
need to criminalize poverty we
to make sure that we're helping
our families because when you
separation from a child and the
family member
doesn't say mr president that we
don't recognize that there are
some serious issues and some
serious
on what the other prior
secretary had done.
And everyone mister president mr
Funding is an issue looking as
to what we do with the money's
who are we working within the
community.
We don't know everything about
what happens in this in our
But as I mentioned in the
committee this morning mr
president it's a systems issue
yes does not just cyfd but it's
also law enforcement
line enforcement needs to make
and removes the child if need be
it's also working mr president
with the courts.
It's also working mister
president with the guardian
together and that is coordinated
mister president.
I also believe
mr president that our community
needs to own up step up and
realize what wrong we have as a
have a standard that is middle
class that we look at each
family that we come into you
holidays seem to contact with
that we see in our communities
we should be able to help as a
community
and do some outreach
mister president what I have
seen over the years what's
Your birth through seventeen
eighteen but also those who are
in the juvenile justice system
if they ever been a due dicated
and they're still there what are
is cyfd still following what the
initial
mission that was proposed back
in the day under governor
Either other programs with the
department mister president that
maybe could be shared with
another department
maybe just focusing on chuck
community needs to be involved
in this conversation including
us mister president in the
legislature
because we have the
responsibility for providing
what responsibility should I say
mr president does the community
have those who are the providers
all of us need to sit at the
i'm out of secretary to be I
wish you the best as I have
wished every secretary for
several years that have certain
that see
committee course corrections and
justice but also some of the
other commissions that do exist
that also
are willing to listen to you to
can I just get him but mister
president
i'm here to work with you into
help as I know many of us on
this floor are and in the other
chamber
make sure that we stay on
stand in rise in support of this
confirmation you know we are
speaking to terrorist at this
morning she talked about
building from the inside out and
so sometimes we go into
means we turn our back on the
children who need you and so you
said he would lead with heart
and I appreciate that and I know
that you will and as somebody
who definitely seized the work
like I said this morning in
committee mister president we
all need to be part of the
solution we all need to come
together to help CYFD and help
those who need us the most which
that her employees feel as part
of the team and know that
there's training and support for
them there's management training
and development which will help
employees the pipeline to see
will lead with heart her family
was here today and I know that
she's going to take on this
department as if it is her
family because she's committed
to them thank you mister
president.
Senator woods.
it seemed like I see the the
good secretary in front of me at
least once a week I think.
don't want to be too critical of
you.
But many times.
In my simple mind.
I know that that money done fix
every problem.
We have a you know in your
department you have a vacancy
problem you have a retention
problem.
And
can be done to help retain
people they've got a very hard
job there's no doubt about it
synector or two superior
explains that many things many
Done more money sometimes is not
going to fix the problem you've
heard you know tremendous budget
increases over
and not all while you were there
And we know that that you know
you you then get spent.
Your budget last year.
And.
But we can't buy a way out of it
it's it's it's the people on the
ground it's it's getting the the
connection one or one.
So
i'm gonna vote for you I to
straight up.
But.
haven't touched it yet maybe you
have started and I hope you have
and I hope you have great
success.
But when you keep coming in
front of me and ask for more and
you know how you.
Apologize to you for it but
labor we have coming into this
countries across that border
down there.
Word on had to figure out how to
give the unemployment numbers so
But it's like many a my
producers back home
they get fined if they harm.
We've got a figure that problem
here because that's one big
challenge we have an estate that
were not addressing.
Is the labor problem.
Every place we turn their asking
president ahead and what i'm
trying to say yes.
The labor problem is not only in
this department it's across
shame we can't get people hard
to work.
Mister president again I want to
thank you for the opportunity
I wish the secretary and I do
call you secretary.
if there's some way I can help
you a big glad to do it thank
you mister president.
Send someone up.
Thank you mister president you
know first of all to her mom dad
you should be proud of your
daughter
taking on something that's going
to be.
This played a call in this heart
in this tough as parents and
sitting there you should be
proud but i'm going to send this
message to the media
give the secretary of chance
sometimes gonna do what they're
going to do and once be known to
the secretary and they find out
later and then she's got to deal
with it in the press and as slow
as change comes
and so how quickly can we use
each minute to make that change
into the ifd
I mean how quick how many
If you do not follow this
secretary and let her leadership
rule and let her make the
If we're gonna truly go on a
different direction not turning
the ship riding the boat
arranging the deck chairs right
there is a big change that has
that staff has really gotta hold
you up may not like change
agencies don't like change
government doesn't like change
but it has to happen.
now in six months but in this
year if you really wanted to
save children and change
people's lives.
Changing the direction
maybe this is the third
secretary been through in the
last two years
in soul
more tired as a legislature were
That's not a responsibility.
Altogether it's a responsibility
but individually we can't make
change.
So is this happens.
i'm willing to let them have
their benefits right a little
bit longer to we can make that
change because they work long
hours they work over time they
i'm there but I want to see that
change in that five hundred and
twenty five thousand six hundred
minutes on behalf of that this
is called two hundred and fifty
minutes but two hundred fifty
to hear what changes more l
and so many secretary and want
to change that for you.
We me have to run a few bills to
would say you know sometimes
these things get political and
in
you didn't ask to be political
you took a job you knew is gonna
be political rate
governor over has been political
but i'm a big boy no longer kid
that doesn't have a parent or
has a parent on drugs or has to
tell you one thing that
the good governor richardson
pride tell you get to work.
discuss
I think one part that are
you know what there's been a
many year thoughts as many
statements that have been
that's just going to pull us
through and in working with is
the other party is so she is so
very approachable and willing to
know there's no not not about it
and so we wish you the best but
I stand in full strong support
for you thank you.
Senator gages.
i'll try not to personalize my
fillings to you uh I i've been
in the legislature I was in the
house for eight years i've been
here in the senate for three
years and i've been finding was
Let go to her parents because
they were
undocumented immigrants and she
was brought back blind for life
to be able to have a number on
budget I want and window in your
department not a door I don't
need to disherb your field
first kids and state we hear all
the negatives
and that's what i've got to go
by i've seen it in harbs can I
feel for the kids.
wish you well i'm actually prain
for you because our kids deserve
better.
But it's one of those things
that when we have foster parents
that leave and they become for
for their own security plus or
blowers against the department.
problem child that you'd know my
name and you would have graced
me with the meeting now sector v
hill was in my office off
I don't want to do it just to be
negative it's not what it is but
I think your structure
the house they set up a task
force meeting in albert I troll
three hundred and twenty five
miles to be turned away
I would **** that you look from
the top down there again I have
a lot of respect for the field
even by myself not my choice but
I have to stand for the harm
this happening to my
constituents and their children
organization but truthfully you
are in my prayers because this
state needs to change
a year mister president.
add a few things from on my
experience over the last year
are very first interim committee
meeting this year for the courts
corrections in justice
committing which I had the
privilege to charge this year
times we don't see cabinet
secretaries in administration
willingly come to our are
hearings and it was going to be
a difficult area she knows going
to be difficult hearing
emotional distressent and still
keep her call and deal with the
the business at hand of being in
mescalerol.
My colleague center every so
does not hear today but so i'd
are in the custody of the state
are receiving where we're
receiving benefits benefits from
that we're doing them
from the government or for their
parents or for the death of
So every sort of brought this to
this to the missus casado's
attention in she readily
acknowledged that she was
reported that within a week of
that hearing he heard from his
casadoes and that policy had
been completely reversed and
changed that the benefits in
rightfully full of praise for
you miscassadus for being able
to do that in a week to get back
to him in the follow through
intercorrect something that the
clearly was a wrong that you
know.
but I see as here always
creating task forces and
commissions and committees
anytime there's a difficult
challenge or difficult issue we
create a task for so we create a
memorial recreate a study or we
didn't need a report and didn't
need to come tell us years staff
was looking into it you got to
take her.
Where were around a government
to replace the minimum in the
plaza of santa fe
where we're three or four years
into that and you took care of
something in a week and so i'm
i'm giving you the story and i'm
demonstrated capacity to get
things done I know you can do it
now
and and I hope you never lose
that and I hope you don't give
up on that.
What cyfd needs is not new laws
without new regulations not new
policies not new studies or task
force what it needs is the
leader who can change things a
outcome a government I I think
you have that capacity
and so I hope a year from now I
can tell you I was right about
that don't don't lose the fire
show me again.
Thank you mister president
colleagues.
Senator office.
Thank you very much mister
have happened to take care of
our children are going to take
care of our families how we're
going to take care of the future
of new mexico because that all
towes together and you
are because I have observed you
over the years the decades of
the commitment that you've made
to the people of new mexico and
you've done it in such a way
where through
carrying for all these children
those children who are very
vulnerable in their homes and so
your work into establish a
system.
public the observation that I
continue to make of the things
that you continue to do in the
person that you continue to be
in that is you're always seeking
everything that you do in that
tase in that's the triangulation
today that I see in a person who
has let us in many ways.
in modern she was back here in
the office but with the
community meetings that we had
the devastation that we dealt
day the rest that would ensure
that she was there that
resources were brought forward
and that these issues continue
to be addressed.
someone who is tireless it takes
someone who is committed it
takes a devoted team it takes
those individuals who often
be recognized and supported for
their efforts.
The legislature as we move
forward with the resources that
that gets that and she is going
to continue to do everything
possible when it moves forward
so those are some of the
indicators she's qualified we
government many years back in
fact around nineteen eighty they
served on the children's called
task force and within that what
the commitment to make things
better know that it doesn't
always work out for us in the
way we anticipate but in that
daily and annual basis but
within that you need someone who
is resilient someone who has the
institutional knowledge someone
who is step forward in this case
has all those tools are the
resources to insure that this
department is going to be common
more successful.
term hope if we don't have the
aspirations for our children if
we don't continue to seek
solutions to those things that
because maybe people do lose
faith in them so the message
coming from us today hopefully
will be to each one of these
young people
But if we break that down and as
you all know within a family if
the family split often times the
inefficiencies the
We want to insure in moving
forward.
That we give the secretary
designate an opportunity to
say cash how is that gonna be
when each one of us offer is
everything that we have.
To report when we see something
neighborhoods those kind of
things that will bring about the
inspiration that'll help those
young people that'll be lifted
up
they'll set something in place
senator by the continues to talk
about it's going to involve each
and every one of us.
So in closing I just have a
couple of things.
The first is the assert.
move forward as one state.
And then secondly and more
important.
Take care of your health.
And we're going to be there for
you but take care of your health
thank you very much mister
president.
Senator every sort of.
Saturday doesn't it cassette
gather in the position.
Was that hearing
etc sarbantas was refreshed
recently down in at the end of
I raised an issue of something
that I had heard about when
talking to families of faster
kids
Ah while there is in foster care
the department stood in local
parental was actually in the
into the into the general fund
of the department.
A practice which apparently
several of the states do a
practice which was legal
so responses saying first of all
so she was new I don't know
about this i'll look into it
appropriate response but also
saying that doesn't seem right
to me
but you know having been
having been in this chamber now
for twelve years
I can't tell you the number of
times we ask a cabinet secretary
doesn't matter the
and months go by monscobate
sometimes they get back to us
sometimes they'd take care of
the issue and they don't bother
to tell us because they took a
list of they checked it off
and so in a lot of times nothing
ever happens.
of the same week
i'm taking into account the fact
that try to drive back from
muscle error
that there are other things you
have to do so really like you
don't have a whole lot of time
it this way other states do it
it's lawful to do it we've
always done it this way which is
the biggest six years for not
making any change and you
decided we don't have to do it
this way.
Yeah i'm say well the later next
year may we will run a bill.
Alice to the study and commit a
task force you institute a
policy that same week.
To say.
them they should get that
benefit.
And I know you are facing
challenges.
one issue tells me where your
commitment is where your heart
is.
And that you will act on things.
When you came.
But the moment you figure out
that you can do something for
the children I saw and I know
that you will act on it.
And I want to thank you for
that.
I don't want to be the last
person hopefully to afford you a
secretary designate.
a position that sometimes feels
like siberia
but doing what needs to be done
for the most vulnerable among us
thank you.
The.
They have an objection center
staff mister president I moved
that ah senator shannon pinto be
excused.
we we will agree to a announced
consent if it's for except for
the purpose of a call otherwise
we will challenge senators to
thanks mr president I moved that
Send a pathetia to close
thank you very much mister
president thank you members of
this very hard working state
lot of terrific information and
as we all know feedback is a
gift and no matter what
direction to the ten and I think
she's going to certainly benefit
by all of our comments we
one of them is of course the
best interest of the child I
think almost every comment here
today no matter how it may have
sounded is absolutely in the
direction of the best interest
heard this from our secretary
design multiple times as we were
going through this exercise to
get to where we are today so I
do invite and I know she invites
don't bring complaints don't
don't bring grapes don't bring
this for that bring a solution
and let's all of us roll up our
sleeves and work on this
together so without mister
president um I will ask you now
I'll send it as to your seats
please where voting
i'll send it is to your seats.
Center brant boat snow center
brantley center brantley votes
no centre birth center birth
boats yes center compos.
Send a guy cause vote snow
center gonzalez yes sender
gonzalez votes yes intergregs.
center hiki boats yes center ivy
saw them.
Yes ma'am sender I resolved
about cs center hermes since
armio votes yes center locus.
Centre might hutch in boats no
central mechanic yes then to
make cannot vote cs center
morris center morris votes know
centre many us.
Send your own lbs yes central
tissie pino center tease pino
boats yes centre pidea center
roddery guess center rodriguez
volts yes center sanchez.
Centers smitties.
The.
Center share boats yes center
shandow
center shandow bodcs center
stewart center stewart boat see
as center tom in yes center tom
and both cs center worth.
Center worth boats yes center
They have ordered thirty two in
the affirmative and the negative
the appointment of terresa
confirmed by the new mexico
senate senator shared explain
his vote and i'll go to senator
but the center share thank you
mister president I found this
whole debate quite
Center by the end
so thank you very much so mister
president thank you members of
to call you that and I do want
to introduce her family today I
have to tell you that the rock
started the families sitting
about three and there she's my
new dance partner so with a
peter worth to take us to the
next sort of business thank you
mister president unamazing that
we're going that our business
announcements and mislanes.
know if anyone's waiting for
bills to come down and we need
to get those in um we're working
on the final capital outlay
requests but this is the final
A single of checks more on that
order of business messages from
the governor.
The.
and members of the new mexico
state senate president for
temporary stewart and members of
the senate pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
forty eight a bill and acting
the unsafe use of public
roadways and spaces act defining
terms and prescribing penalties
respectfully yours michelle
and members of the new mexico
state senate present per
temporary stewart and members of
the senate pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
seven four two four a bill
requiring the court to hold a
of release respectfully yours
michelle luhon grassom governor.
The journalists show the
ordered business committee
reports the reader to read
madame president your
to be german in accordance with
constitutional provisions and
then referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee respectfully submitted
Seeing no objection the reader
will read all the committee
reports
senate bill one forty two german
senate bill two forty one german
and then's referred to the
health and public affairs
committee
senator bill two forty nine
business and transportation
committee
senate bill two fifty three
german and then srefer to the
senate bill two fifty five
german and then truffer to the
judiciary committee
sent a bill two sixty german and
then this referred to the indian
the tax business and
transportation committee
senate bill to sixty three
german and then the referred to
the education committee.
things referred to the education
committee respectfully submitted
mimi stewart chair center worth
adopting the community reports
run adoption of committee
savers sick of far by saying I
already that's much better those
opposed name
but
I think the committee report has
been adopted
do I have marked limit cost.
The.
Madame president your education
pass and then referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator william peace
souls chair center souls thank
A single objection the reader to
read all the committee reports
senate bill two twenty seven do
senate bill one thirty seven do
pass.
Do pat do pass respectfully
I moved option to the committee
reports as amended
we are on the order of business
adoption of committee reports
many report is adopted
madam president your tax
business and transportation
committee to whom has been
referred at senate bill at two
oh one.
senator benny sendo I chair
center ham one
madame prison and I ask
unanimous consent of the senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
in a bill ninety nine do pass
and then referred to the finance
committee
committee substitute for it
senate bill eighty eight do pass
and things referred to judiciary
committee respectfully submitted
senator benny sendo chair
favor of significant saying I
was supposed need the is haven't
committee report is adopted
sitter worth I think you made a
president you know is consent we
of legislation the reader will
read.
Yeah.
The.
appropriation to carry out the
purposes of the sake yeah and
community ditch fund act senate
bill two sixty six seller bell
senate bill two sixty six
thinnet bill two sixty seven
introduced by senator campus
bill two sixty seven so the bill
two sixty seven had been read
twice by tile disorder printed a
referred to the senate
committee's committee then to
conservation that's to finance
and act relating to health care
creating the health facility
viability fund providing for
financial assistance grants to
health facilities making an
affairs then to send a bonus in
the bill to sixty eight
senate bill to sixty nine
introduced by at senator
fund establishing funding
criteria and grant management
and oversight requirements
enumerating duties of the
department of finance and
administration making an
appropriation.
affairs things to set up finance
senate bill two sixty nine
senate bill two seventy
introduced by senator compos and
science center senate bill two
seventy so that build two
seventy had been read twice by
title asserted printed and
referred to the senate
committees committee that senate
and act relating to criminal
procedure requiring the call
court to hold a person with
outbond for a violation of
conditions of release until here
seventy one have been read twice
by title in sort of printed
referred to the senate
committees committee then to
senate health and public affairs
and sense to senate judiciary
executive departments in public
bodies to collect demographic
data pertaining to sexual
orientation and gender identity
it judiciary so built two
seventy two
senate bill two seventy three
interduced by its senator souls.
the common school current funds
shall not sir plan to general
phone support for public schools
senate bill two seventy three
to senate bonus and it built two
seventy three
senate bill two seventy four
introduced by senator duhig and
act relating to canada's
enforcement creating the
including embargo seizure and
destruction of illegal adult
rated or dangerously or
dangerously at fraudulent
misbranded candidates making an
senate committees committee then
to senate judiciary thanks to
senate bonus central two seventy
four
senate bill two seventy five
and balances eliminating certain
incumbents requirements
requiring certifications to the
department of finance and
administration and providing a
reversion date extensions for
reversion of unexpected balances
making appropriations declaring
an emergency senate bill to.
referred to finance senate bill
two seventy five.
Senate bill two seventy six
interduced by senator maestas
and senator o neil
defendant to be placed on
probation for a longer period
than the maximum allowable
incarceration time senate bill
two seventy six ten bill two
thanks to senate judiciary
senate bill two seventy six
senate bill two seventy seven
commission senate bill two
seventy seven seller bill two
seventy seven have been read
twice by tires or a printed
referred to the senate
committees committee tends to
senate bill two seventy eight
introduced by senator him pill
and act making an appropriation
to the local government division
of the department of finance and
income that is or is at or below
two hundred percent of the
federal poverty line and are in
need of assistance to support
their quality of life and safety
Tends to send it bonus and it
built two seventy eight
senate bill to seventy nine
welfare senate bill two seventy
nine
so that build two seventy nine
have been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
introduced by senator stewart
and act relating to the public
piece health safety and welfare
senate bill to eighty seven bill
introduced by senator stewart
and act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
senate bill two eighty two
introduced by senator work and
act relating it to the public
peace health safety and welfare
committee senate bill two eighty
two
finite bill two eighty three
introduced by senator worth and
act relating to the public peace
two eighty three.
Senate bill to eighty four
introduced by senator worth and
act relating to the public peace
senate conservation committee
senate bill two eighty four
senate bill two eighty five
introduced by senator pidea and
printed and referred to the
senate tax business and
transportation committee senate
build two eighty five
senate bill two eighty six
bill two eighty six have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed referred to the
senate education committee
senate built two eighty six
bill two eighty seven so the
bill two eighty seven have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
senate finance committee senate
bill two eighty seven
senate bill to eighty eight
seller bill two eighty eight
have been read twice by title
instead of not printed and
referred to the senate rules
committee senate belt two eighty
eight
An act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
cinnabill two eighty nine so
senate bill to ninety introduced
by senator baca and act relating
to the public peace health
safety and welfare senate bill
two ninety seven at the two
senate bill two at ninety one
introduced by senator brand and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare senate
built two ninety one
finner bill to ninety two
introduced by senator brant
and act relating to the public
referred to the senate indian a
rural and cultural affairs
committee senate bill to ninety
two
senate bill to ninety three
red twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
senate health and public affairs
committee senate bill to ninety
three
Senate bill two ninety four so
that bill two ninety four have
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
senate conservation committee
senate built two ninety four.
senate bill two ninety five so
the bill two ninety five hundred
twice by title instead not
printed and referred to the
senate conservation committee
Senate bill two ninety six
introduced by senator stephonics
and act relating to the public
not printed and referred to the
senate conservation committee
senate belt two ninety six.
Yeah.
introduced by senator souls.
Senate bill two ninety seven so
the bill two ninety seven have a
red price by title instead not
printed referred to education
health safety and welfare cynic
bill two ninety eight so that
bill two ninety eight him and
read twice by title is ordered
not printed referred to the
senate education committee
introduced by senator souls
and act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
education committee senate belt
two ninety nine
senate bill three hundred
introduced by it sended her moon
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
senate finance committee senate
belt three hundred.
peace health safety and welfare
set bell three o one
seven three o one have been read
twice by title is ordered not
Senate bill three o two
introduced by senator munios
and act relating to the public
finance committee senate bill
three o two.
Yeah.
and act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
senate bill three o three seven
senate bill three o four seven a
bill three four hundred read
twice by title is ordered not
printed a referred to the senate
health and public affairs
Senate bill three o five
introduced by senator or teasing
pino
and act relating to the public
and public affairs committee
senate bill three or five.
and act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
senate bill three o six seven
finite bill three o seven
introduced by senator pinto and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare senate
affairs committee senate bill
three oh seven.
The.
Senate bill three oh eight
three away at have been read
twice by title and sort of not
printed and referred to the
senate indian rural and cultural
Senate bill three oh nine
senate bill three hundred and
nine so that bill three o nine
have been read twice by title
instead not printed referred to
the senate judiciary committee
Senate bill three ten introduced
by senator savantes
and act relating to the public
judiciary committee senate belt
three ten.
Senate bill three eleven
introduced by senator savantes
and act relating to the public
not printed and referred to the
senate judiciary committee
senate bill three eleven.
Senate bill three twelve
introduced by senator do him
an act relating it to the public
printed referred to the senate
rules committee senate belt
three twelve.
Senate bill three thirteen
introduced by senator duhin
and act relating to the public
piece health safety and welfare
peace health safety and welfare
senate bill three fourteen.
So the bill three fourteen
Senate bill three fifteen.
public peace health safety and
welfare senate bill three
fifteen so that bell three
fifteen m and read twice by
title disorder not printed
introduced by center senator
sender
and act relating to the public
piece health safety and welfare
senate bill three sixty.
the three sixteen
finite bill three seventeen
introduced by senator sendor
not printed referred to the
senate tax business and
transportation committee center
bill three seventeen.
too soon one more.
Senate memorial ten introduced
to convene state wide meetings
to create legislation for the
correction of property
assessment disparities between
residential and non residential
read twice by title
is referred to the rules
committee then to senate tax
business and transportation
senate memorial ten.
sing no objection where on that
order of business committee
reports the reader to read
madame president your finance
pass respectfully submitted
senator at george munios chair
when you forgot the key but move
adoption of the community
report.
committee reporters adopted.
As they're worth thank you
madame president unanimous
consent we go that are business
president so that is all the
work up on the table uh will be
in tomorrow morning at eleven
o'clock so now is the time for
committee chairs to make their
thirty in room three eleven we
have a revised agenda it's not
the same when this printed on
the blue sheets here we had to
make some shifts because of
we've substituted bills by
senator hickey and senator of
tomorrow but it it's still
lengthy agenda they're still ten
items so we want to get started
Thank you madame president I
wasn't expecting that so fast
you know madame president I I
still have some disconvolution
here so yesterday I tried to
talk about how much money oil
and gas is bringing in I got the
five million nine hundred and
thirteen thousand dollars an
hour and and I just want to
point out that oil and gas is
william net positive not it's
not just a net positive to the
revenue the state but it's in
certainly a thousand years ago
the length of life we've gone
from like forty six seventy
eight incredible modern medicine
going down when you're there you
don't want your
whatever it is you're hooked up
to the stop working because you
don't have reliable energy so
that's huge but also
with all that sterile because of
oil and ground and made much
most of our modern medicine and
modern procedures
require
gas because all of the stuff the
solar panels in the winter bins
at all all of that requires
synthetic things in that means
The backup tower when the wind
doesn't blow and the son doesn't
shine natural gas kicks in and
keeps the lights on and keeps
the medical equipment at
oil and gas in mexico new mexico
has got the best way to do it we
can we need to do it the
cleanest way we can and
Thank you senator share other
messages announcements a center
hamble thank you madame
president destine let you know
your senate tax business and
transportation committee will be
changes from senator stewart
plate corporate income tax
corporate income tax liability
and more again tax business and
transportation tomorrow one
thirty or thirty minutes after
the four session and room three
twenty one.
committee members and staff at
nine we will start the committee
meeting center stewart has the
first two bills then we will
madame president madame
president we're a little late
starting the afternoon so we're
going to try and get to
judiciary quickly so judiciary
can be members would you please
be in the committee room at
three forty five that's thirty
minutes after the floor which is
would like to instruct the clerk
to enter into the journal
capital outlay requests number
off
thinking man president I know
the literal governor was up
there yesterday but I want to
make sure that everybody knows
do not charge your electric
vehicle the land office
yesterday or today they were
dollars to charge that vehicle
that a lot in fuel that's what
the computer read out is sending
to them in text messaging on how
much they've spent at the
that high cost at that electric
charger is there so be cautious
to be charged the land office
make sure you check and make
sure that the rates don't change
on you quickly man president
other center brand situation on
this and I think one more but
there were center souls
so we'll get through those
rather quickly the house is
hearing house bill to it's
they spent a lot of money in one
thing that's disappointing to me
is that the tobacco settlement
money the four hundred million
that should go to the back of
settlement has now been spent
Thank you any other
announcements
seeing nonsense thank you madame
president I just before we wrap
up want to thank our chief
always thank all of you so let's
give them all a quick ground of
applause just for the work done
today
