senator burke
senator compos
center survived as.
Center do hick
Center hickey
santa I reserve the
center armio
senator low best
Sent him in yours
santa neva
center neighbor.
senator pertal
senator pope
santa rother guess.
Senator sanchez.
center shandow.
Center cells.
Center step arnex
center stewart
You do have a core mr president
thank you i'd ask everyone to
please rise for the implication
to be never delivered today by
ruling all their con red roche
senator brandly federal agencies
spanish to let today by senator
and the solution mexico flag to
be led today by senator michael
by the.
for the seed you nurture through
him in the life of your jewish
jewish and muslim children.
And which company to live you
show through the decipals of
jesus christ.
creation keep us ever mindful
that we were created not to
dominate each other and creation
traditions and cultures now we
pre that your spirit will
descend upon us and abide with
this body we ask you this day
and interact in the new mexico
house of representatives in the
office of the governor of new
mexico that they may do their
work in a spirit of wisdom
respect.
promote the general welfare in a
way that honors are into
connection with all of creation
within and even beyond the
bounds of this beautiful state
state will be respected and
whose lives will be made better
by the decisions made by this
body we praise it and so doing
our senators the esteemed
just a small part in which went
in the heart in harmony we can
jointly sustain or create
creation for I pray this in the
name of the lord and save your
Once again you may be seated
once again we'd like to welcome
all of the search who all of you
are joining us today here that
you might still send it to start
things off or yield to senate
happy monday on the ten day
countdown for father record we
are definitely counting
in amazon said we go that our
invocation this morning and you
know your blessings for us but
also for all those who support
us our family is I mean this
together those are certainly
what we're going to need as we
go down this final stretch so
thank you for being here mister
president before I go through
the the run of show here are
senate center
thank you mister president
leader worth
it's really great great honour
many years ago when I started my
career in education this is
where I started in cornal
elementary school and to me that
this is a spanish language
emerge magnet school in o.
Great through theft the students
will be singing the social
the gallery and with that on
mister president I will ill to
our director mister o t rece
thank you senator dollars.
The.
president and member so what a
way to start a monday morning
and let's give a this young
younger
a plus for being here with us
today
thank you
thank you and thank you to our
student performance and I want
to apologize to the body and as
senator morris isn't here he'll
to get unanimous consent thank
you mister president in as
concerned to allow cameras on
the senate florida and the
way to start on monday
today is new mexico tech earth
science day and there are
lunches for the members in the
lounge coming at noon a clock
certificate that will get red
and guess to introduce I know a
number of members have guess
we'll do that just a minute
in terms of events the
Some folks who have gone through
the hearing process up in rules
and there's confirmations once
we get those committee reports
down from rules as soon as I was
shadow today jackson when stand
up jackson blows it was born and
raised in santa fe a ten santa
fe walled he attended santa fe
fe water should association
cleaning up the river and
working with fifth graders in
the my water my water said
program he plays the violent
loves the outdoors enjoys hiking
And without a deal to any other
members to introduce guess thank
trip fill trip going on here
this is our new mexico history
class who has come up to the new
mexico legislator to witness
works i'd like to welcome them
here if you could just raise
your hand aid in michael you're
your zaden matt you elizabeth
abigail kiley miley gracin
costander chris dominic sakaila
and they are a company to either
teachers miss bolch and miss
thompson over here
also joining him behind my seat
mckenna alex felina and andrew
if you guys would all just waive
your hands and let everybody
know please welcome our treater
consequences middle schools
here.
president i'd like to uh
introduce my intern for the week
of she is from UNM as she is the
chief justice of the supreme
bills but also watching what
happens in the senate and some
other projects plan for so if
you'll help me of welcoming
machelette of terror who is my
internet for the week.
guests with me a few up in the
gallery that i'd like to
introduce for all the way from
silver city geoffrey castio dog
And mr president I also have an
intern with me today I have bree
hocken sierra and she's an
intern from unm she's a double
in the pre law society and
interested in environmental law
and patient law or pattern line
Thank thank you center credit
hamphill senator had a meal
mister president joining me
today is my intern brian a true
hill who is a freshman at lost
alamos she has the passion for
student leadership and giving
back to community through civic
projects and is also a member of
the lost alamos high school
track and filled him and mister
president she has a dream of one
deliver some of her very own
fresh baked peace coaching those
to her fellow gross got a lump
governor michelle hang grisham
on gross county really claims
that the governor told her they
and welcome brian and to the new
mexico senate.
Center pitter
mind is the victims right to act
that was put through that is
very monumental for our people
so i'd like to introduce our
vice president of the nab nation
rachel montoya and part members
of the body please welcome my
guess.
See no further announcements
set a majority florida peter
words to take us
There are some mispresent what
A roadmap
of third reading I think the
plan today is to do items one
in our objection we are in that
order business committee reports
the reader will read mr
president your rules committee
has had under consideration
affairs department for a term
commencing on december fifteenth
twenty twenty three to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
your committee recommends that
the senate confirmed this
with one motion in that the
journal reflect they were acted
upon individually here no
objection the reader will read
the new mexico legislative
council makes the following
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
appointment alan sanchez as a
member of the state investment
council for a term commencing
Senator mister president I moved
to parts senator centers there's
a motion to adopt community
reports all those in favor of
the journal reflect their acted
upon individually.
San majority learning to peter
word second set next order
through them mister president I
answered the credentials of
calling o'donnell be presented
to the full senate for
consideration to the state
letter number one dated january
sixteen twenty twenty four I
moved that the senate do hereby
confirmed the appointment of
kelly o'donnell to the state
investment council
committee kelly o'donnell is
uniquely qualified to serve on
our state investment council she
has been a research assistant
professor at the school of
she's been a senior research
fellow at the center for health
policy at u and she's a founder
of odonna economics and strategy
both AP a a masters and a phd
and economics from unam she
spent a senior fiscal economist
from the department of tax and
understand uh the economy the
economic
the economy around uh doing the
right thing in our social
policies in our regular physical
of caliodonnal anyone wishing
the debate.
Senator peter worth followed by
senator hicky thank you mister
president thank you senator
stewart for bringing this
legislature of had a chance to
work with her with many
different hats including when
she was working as an analyst on
the senate tax committee and I
and it's top shelf so this is a
tremendous appointment and I
think you bring a really
important background to the
state investment council so
happy to stand up and support
your nomination.
I haven't had the benefit of
miss or daniel in my public
career but in my private career
i've been here but it's because
of the great work she does the
incredible knowledge she has of
the state and how the real
economy works here and I
thank you very much center hiki.
Center city
no thank you mister president I
few years back then
extraordinary job
I I don't have how fashion
creates uh matrixes and explains
everything so do you tell that
confirmation thank you
seen offer the debate.
Senate stewart to close
uh thank you mister president
voting in the negative by a
short town senators your seats
please we are voting all
senators tear seats.
Vivoda thirty four the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment of kelly
o'donnells a member of the state
of best council for a term
commencing on confirmation
expiry and march thirty first
kellyo donald into the state of
those counts
Senator coppers oh thank you
very much mister president
members of the senate
pursuant to legislate of council
See no objection senator real
explain thank you very much
mister president members of the
senate this individual at least
the private sector continuing if
you will to take care of and
manage investments for one of
the big organizations here in
that c private trust of a
nonprofit health care provider
in the nation along with that
land has a bachelor's degree of
master's degree continues to
children of new mexico he was
very much involved when it came
time if it will to work on the
issues over the constitutional
justice so this individual
continues to be very passionate
when it comes to how are we
going to deal with our children
how do we have the resources
is how is he going to go ahead
and serve in the position uh if
he was to be confirmed today so
there were the state investment
council again he will continue
senate.
Uh were available if you will
for further discussion thank you
thank you center companies
centers we're debating the
confirmation car as a restaurant
lobbyists talk about that four
times I think so far the session
dot appropriate what even makes
us more in appropriate is that
appointed by the legislative
finance or legislative counsel
upstairs and is a registered
lobbyist so he is paid and takes
clients that has clients to come
pass at all mustard and I will
be voting now and I encourage
those of you who don't want to
be represented on the border
commission by a paid lobbyist to
also vote now thank you mister
president
twenty years probably umm might
only be eighteen might be twenty
two don't know but if not even
for a long time and I I respect
because he's attacked
legislators
and in his supposed to represent
us in in it in its troubling to
me I i've i've missed president
but I also know that there has
been lobbying efforts.
Against members of this body
because he didn't view thus view
us them who ever they as
supporting children.
And yet I think most of that was
because of financial decisions
one of the things that that I
heard from somewhere is that
there are no solutions there's
only trade offs in sold the
were trade offs that that we
agreed to
because of what we thought was
the greater good of the state
then those trade office always
there's never enough time and so
we made those trade offset and
again while I agree with him on
so many things
it's it's it's torn me a part on
this so in general I understand
senator morris position of
lobbyists
I did in fact vote for lobbyist.
and I he's never attacked me.
And I don't want to attack him
but I do know that things have
happened and I think it was just
center masters than seven or dc
being a center thank you mister
president I stand in strong
support of this nomination
there are lobbies and then they
new mexico and they haven't been
about money or about
especial interests of special
monetary thing they've really
been the kind of law being that
latter he's just really done
some things to make our state
better and I appreciate that
also serving an ipaq I know the
sense of ethics and I believe
that about him he has been
every time i've observed him
i've never observed anything
sleazy or dissembling it's just
with uh the work on the state
investment council thank you
mister president we have senator
my estimates followed center
disappearance then so no no
putting this name forward just a
couple things one is that
all of the state of missing
council members don't represent
particular bodies of particular
persons they represent their
president it would mister
sanchez fulfill that directive
to the best of his ability and
easy is he one of the best
people in the state to fulfil
that duty and and the answer is
along with just a country who
was here today as the the
advocate the what are they
called the expert witnesses
mister president of the of the
fame constitutional amendment
we learned that the relationship
between the federal government
and new mexico is unique that
it's paternalistic that that it
was there was a condition on our
government has done and as you
recall the eleven years ago we
also change the constitution
which made hundreds of million
dollars maybe a billion dollar
what we may not know mister
president mr allen is a
financial uh his financial
credentials are impeccable he
actually belongs to an
a distribution each year so he's
actually been familiar with his
own trust fund that experience
is invaluable being on sic and
so I just want to stand in
years but will allow us to make
smart decisions with the with
the current distribution and
beneficiaries of those funds are
to benefit future generations
but i'll be raising two hands to
the sky for this conferee thank
you mister president center
masters senator or disappear
senate rules debate this morning
on this matter one was that he's
been a paid lobbyist and the
when we took positions that a
group that he was part of
was advocating for a position
i'd like to deal with both of
those first he's agreed and he
Up I think he made very clear
that
his focus would be in making
sure that the.
not some kind of agenda that he
would bring to this position.
I also would remain the members
of the body that other members
Lobbying as volunteers on behalf
of certain positions just
because you're on the state
investment council doesn't mean
you don't make phone calls or
whether he would be paid or not
campaign that put up bill boards
that somehow were offensive
I would remind the members of
the body that we are accountable
for our votes and part of being
held accountable is that if the
citizens of the state were in a
group of citizens of the state
don't agree with the vote we
the group that he was part of
and did not lead necessarily did
not pave himself for those bill
boards as organization didn't
was a part of a bigger coalition
finally went through last
couple of sessions ago
in which is helped to find early
childhood programs in the state
fund is thirty billion dollars
now
so.
I don't think that either of
those things is a reason to not
confirm all in sanchez who
urge the members to look past
some offense that the day may
feel had has happened in the
test and to vote to confirm him
today thank you mister president
that's all I know because we've
we've fought on certain issues
and we've agreed on certain
issues and he is very eloquent
and very smart and has a
side that's all I know so so I
stand again and strong support
of allen centers thank you
senator.
since thirteen we did a lot we
got a long well but I also
side was senator share were
through a portion in time that
uh I have real problem with that
it's one of those things where I
would hope that the state
investment council he be able to
keep us focused and I appreciate
don't I personally don't think
he will be able to keep that
focusing our soil standard
opposition to this thank
today as we move forward allen
of course as a person of good
conscience and a course very
highly qualified so with it
mister president I asked
center mister president is
consent to excuse senate
rodriguez except for purposes of
the call
and senator do hake except for
please raise your hand.
We have senator and available
now
center more than you know.
Senator brantley voting now
sender birth voting now center
sunships voting now.
send the gregs voting now.
Their neighborhood moaning.
In the negative appointment of
alan sanchez as a member and the
state of bets for council for
return comments in upon
please help me to welcome into
congratulate mr allen centers
thank you.
ask that the credentials of
joe's that deep bone be
presented to the fourth senate
as consideration of cabinet
secretary of indian affairs I
now yield to senator schedule.
pursuant is an executive letter
number twenty five data january
second twenty twenty four I
moved that the senate do here by
thank you mister president and
very honored to present to the
four senate sector joseph for
university of north north dakota
in a having
and she started her career as a
high school teacher
her dream after having her three
kids decided to to move to
albuquerque and attend american
in the law program and pursue
her all degree at you on m where
she graduated in the twenty
fifteen
the indigenous communities and
in folks and then also I worked
at a law firm
she served as a deputy secretary
for indian affairs since march
obstacles and I am just have the
pleasure of a presenting her to
the full senate for a
confirmation
in the mexico because I I think
that's also important for us to
understand because the state of
the mexico is home to not only
our twenty three sovereign
so at this time uh mister
president i'll have the
committee's william.
Thank you send the center we do
have senators who would like to
debate we have sender pinto.
in some sense you're not being a
new mexican
but to.
Be neutral in that center you
think that's one of the things
to in the this particular
collaboration that is in statute
and with that there are
expectations
from my family that.
Those expectations are there
regardless of the release said
or put there
also celebrating those
accomplishments that are tribes
nations and published bring
forward we just got done with
indian day and thank you to our
so I very much looking forward
to the progress that can be made
this year especially with the
momentum that was already kind
enlightened us about the issues
that they're facing
and really also to work with all
the other secretaries especially
when we talk to the volatility
with a cyfi
our issues within our
communities and some of the
funding in bills that come
through I hope you're.
president thank you center
pentagon senator mckenna
thank you mister president and I
too do not need.
and how impressed I was with
miss monets interview with me
I really got to know her a
little bit to when she served
deputy.
that it has which is incredible
I really look forward to working
with her in this role mister
president and in my
official role with the
congresswoman.
president.
Thank you center weekend we do
have senator how to mail
followed by centers to it mister
president I rise in full support
but as a friend and so I
reminded her that the root never
forgets the flower so that the
work that her answer sisters
have put in there watching her
bloom and i'm excited to see
the he could hear nation as well
and so not only will you be
having a great secretary whose
from outer state bringing some
outside perspectives in but
somebody who's going from the
work with you thank you mister
president
senator stewart.
Thank you mister president out
of stand and strong confirmation
president of the naval nation
she has strong support and are
native american country that is
what we need for a secretary so
she is going to do a great job
leaving any time soon so can't
wait to have her beer full
secretary thank you mister
president thank you center
stewart center more
famous president
mexico and quite frankly the
answer is a lot lot I was
incredibly practically if you
get a chance to know a little
bit about her personal
background it's an amazing story
children her experiences and I
guarantee you will probably
would have floored a lot of us
in here she is and the success
she's had it is it is an honor
to know you proud of you even
although I know you for two
See no further debate excuse me
senator monias.
Thank you mister president in
your libraries and support too
concerns in her struggle through
life we're going to lead her
through that agency to know it's
happening
I think she's going to be well
thought of
compassion and carrying your
heart in how you're going to
leave that agency i'd achieve
what everybody needs an in every
community from zonito nuclear to
important I think she may be one
of the greatest indian affair
leaders in the end that we see
so thank you match the president
chosen to mexico and I think
that's probably the most
important part of her nomination
is that she has a passion for
new mexico and has chosen it
where most of us were born here
and we love new mexico because
with it and then spin her entire
life trying to get back here so
I think that's for me all I
needed to hear and i'm going to
be standing in strong support
and voting in the affirmative
mister president I assume that
it was concerned that the record
shown that the role husband
called
in that there are those
president motor in the
affirmative accept those voting
negative by shop hands senators
Yeah.
The.
By voter thirty in the formative
be served at the pleasure the
governor has been confirmed by
the new mexico senate center
schender thank you mister
president at this time I would
look at police rise to be
recognized
San major to florida to peter
worth to take a set next order
business thank you mister
president in amazon said we go
that our business announcements
are misleading us here in no
objection where in that order
then we're gonna
do the other committee reports
in the work upon the table
before we got a third reading
items one through five so you
now miss concept we go that are
senate executive letter number
seventeen dated november
fourteenth twenty twenty three
in which the government makes
the following appointment has
received a dollar as much settle
as a member of the space board
the senate confirmed this
appointment respectfully
submitted senator katy duhic
chair senator
mister president asking animals
a meditermended senate executive
letter number twenty three date
at february fifth twenty twenty
three in which the governor
makes the following appointment
first twenty twenty twenty six
your committee recommends the
senate confirm this appointment
respectfully submitted senator
katy do hig chair saturday miss
president and move the committee
part has been adopted and the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually.
Santa majority florida leader
peter words tickets and
extraordinary business thank you
credentials of treason and
costume tonight is be presented
to the full senate for
consideration to the new mexico
finance authority I know you'll
to set it or more center more
senate here by confirm the
appointment of treasure and
content nightis to the new
mexico finance authority.
Seen no objection
lobos before coming here to be a
lobo she was at the university
of california san francisco and
before that she was a vice
institutions roughly proud of
her we know she's going to do a
good job here and most poorly
should grew up and be born and
befested maryland were all the
brightest most charming people
come from and I really
See no debate
sir more thank miss president
appreciate ashing and it's
consent that the record show
if you wish to vote please raise
your hand.
The.
Yeah.
The.
constant tonight as as a member
of the um finance authority for
return commencing on november
twenty twenty twenty three and
expiry in january first twenty
twenty six has been duly
Thank you center morning
consideration to the space for
authority I know yield to
senator birth senator
thank you mister president
pursuant to send it executive
Here in objection center burner
view explain
thank you mister president I
know under lorse for quite some
time
she has been involved with but I
will tell you that
she's AAA banking school
administrator from the
university was constant
graduating banking operations uh
management she's worked for us
bank chapol taylor academy board
member greater loss cuses
chamber of commerce last
cruise's hispanic chamber of
commerce latinos in leadership
also citizen of the year for
last crucials
in two thousand and seven
the war suspend.
Really not life involved in the
living much of them in las
crucials in there's a strong
connection with both of them and
they know that she has been
following that as much as she
possibly can have been
associated with it through her
position as well and I believe
we are protect along with that
as well the lady knows her
business she is very much
Thank you president nice
standing support of this
conferee
divorce and I have known each
she is always been someone who
has worked diligently
stayed after it on all sorts of
levels and should I am proud to
exp.
See no further debate center
birth to close
thing was the prison I I ask you
now was considered the record
show that the role has been
are voting if you wish to know
please raise your hand.
The.
The negative the appointment of
his receipt that the lotus m
settle as a member of the space
for authority for term
thank you mister president
ladies and gentlemen of the
senate I wish that you will join
me and welcoming that the
newspaper the space port
authority has a seat that the
largest loose settle thank you
ma'am.
Thank you thank you center birth
san and majority thirty to peter
water to take us to the next
order thank you mister president
in amazon we got out of business
we go to third reading and again
it's items one through five in
that order so much present you
know missions that we go that
our business messages from the
house see no objection we are in
that order business messages
committee substitute four house
bill five as amended by the
house and request the
concurrence of the senate
respectfully submittedly similar
to my cutting chieftain.
committee substitute for a house
bill forty one and requests
their concurrence of the senate
respectfully submitted lisa and
martie's miccutchen chief clerk.
three as amended by the house
and request the concurrence of
the senate respect submitted
lisa martin's mccutching chief
clerk.
fifty one and request the
concurrence of the senate
respectfully submit submitted
lisa m or tease my cutting chief
clerk journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Seen objection we are in that
order business announcement
smissline is senator worth thank
you mister president so we do
have a certificate that needs to
my estus for also at the
legislature and the certificate
will be read thank you so as we
are in that order business still
announcement smislenia then how
to meal thank you mister
president and I asked the reader
new mesco state senate does here
backs then it's recognition and
acknowledgment to declaring
february fifth twenty twenty
four als awareness day in the
is a fatal neural degenerative
disease that is characterized by
the death of both the upper and
the lower motor motor new runs
in the brain brainstein brain
two to five years from the time
of diagnoses and whereas does
not affect the patient's mental
capacity therefore the patient
remains alert and aware of the
venturally causes muscles to
actually fee in the patient
becomes a functional quite
replied and whereas research
indicates that military veterans
are living with als at any given
time and whereas in twenty ten
soon after his twenty eighth
birthday former university of
new mexico lowball in
albuquerque high school soccer
fighting this terrible disease
as hard as he could patrick
passed away from als on april
tenth twenty twelve which led to
several patrick range alice
eight people living with also
their loved ones annually and
whereas l s new mexico helps
those with l s by navigation
and whereas also mexico combined
fundraising events have welcomed
over four hundred golfers eight
hundred walkers and countless
are affected by ls in whereas a
l s a weren't as day will
increase public awinners of als
patients circumstances
acknowledge the terrible impact
that disease has not only on the
als in the research being done
to eradicate this horrible
disease now therefore be
resolved by the senate of the
state of new mexico that
february fifth twenty twenty
funding for research in order to
eventually find a cure for aless
and be it further resolved that
a cup copy of this certificate
city of santa fe senator leo had
a meal senator antonio my estus
mimi stewart president protem
sherry dilohan chief clerk new
treatments and ultimately a cure
for also well it's estimated
that more than thirty thousand
people are living with also the
united states each year the
disease is not unique to the
disease will forever be felt by
their loved ones senator masters
and I have that you join us in
the fight for spreading the word
about also he will take all of
you center automatical I just
want to think the body thank you
mister president for allowing us
to time to honor elizabeth
families and they also community
had the honor of serving on the
nonprofit organization a private
local non profit there's a
national organization that
raises money for research
hopefully finding a cure the
local organization
maybe one or two recent
diagnosies from that month and
maybe one or two folks who are
no longer part of the also
because they they passed away
miss tami belin and her husband
joe billing who are
there were other members who
would like to speak that we can
come back to introduce thank you
mister president thank you thank
hospital to thank you mister
president I will circle back to
you but we have center hiking
thank you mister president I
want to speak out for
variant of a l s super nuclear
policy very related and
having lived through that for
seven years it's just it's just
find a care one day we will find
it here and hopefully this will
help with that as well but I
commend my colleagues for
bringing this forward
some advances thank you thank
you center hickory.
Center masters
thank you mister president and
second that i'm gonna go from
our right to left the ceo and
everyone and the leadership of a
great big round of a plus.
Thank you center how to meal
send a major deferrator peter
worth thank you mister president
in amazon we go that are
business messages from the
governor.
Here no objection we are on that
maybe stewart president
president pro temporary dear
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate in
accordance with article for
section forty two of the mexican
submit to the senate rules
committee the following
nomination for appointment
jamieson a error for appointment
as cabinet secretary of veteran
The general show the message
from the governor has been
received.
Send a majority of started pay
to work to take us that next
mr president you're education
committee to whom has been
referred senate bill two thirty
nine has had it under
consideration and reports the
same with recommendation that it
Thank you mister president I
moved that the reader be allowed
to read all the committee
reports we vote on with when
motion and that we act upon them
individually seen no objection
Senate bill two sixty three do
pass and then referred to the
finance committee.
Husband one seventy one as
amended
due pass respectably submitted
senator william peaceholes chair
and move adoption of the
adopted a journal reflect they
were acted upon individually
reader to read.
Mr president your health and
public affairs committee to whom
fifteen do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
committee respectfully submitted
senator gerald or disepino
chair.
vote on them with one motion but
that the journal reflected they
were acted upon individually.
Here in no objection
the reader sent a bill sixteen
bill sixteen do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
committee
and that's referred to the
finance committee
senate bill to forty do pass as
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
The.
Senate bill two forty four
recommendation that a due pass
have emotion to that's committed
reported all those in favor
signified by saying
senators if you know you right
there
the eyes have its committee for
has been adopted in the journal
reflect their acted upon
individually.
that are business introduction
of legislation
here in no objection where that
order business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
memorial requesting the higher
education department to conduct
a study to identify and
recommend strategies for
providing free tuition the
recommend strategies for
expanding two year behavioral
health education programs at
branch and community colleges
senate memorial eleven
committee center memorial eleven
house bill five introduced by
representative of joy garrett
and act relating to work force
development creating the
and training fund and annual
appropriations to the work for
solutions department for the
purposes of the apprenticeship
licensing act before receiving
funds pursuant to the
apprenticeship act assistance
act in the public works
apprentice and training act
appropriations house bill five
house bill five have you been
read twice by title is referred
tests and act relating to the
environment authorizing the
environmental improvement board
to adopt rules to establish an
to the senate conservation
committee then senate finance
committee hospital forty one
senator brent for which purpose
to your eyes there might miss
president
little gorola and rare a metal
and gale chasey and act related
to state and private educational
institutions requiring state
funded post secondary
violence and harassment or
stocking house bill one fifty
one
house bill one fifty one haven't
been read twice by title is
ordered is referred to the
introduced by representative
that like cruise and dixon and
act relating to the law
enforcement retention fund
of service providing a new
retention differential
dispersement for full time
certified law enforcement
officers with twenty or more
dispersements making an
appropriation hospital hospital
one ninety three hour spell one
ninety three having been read
twice by title is referred
committee that hospital one
ninety three.
Send a majority of learning your
peter worth to take us to that
next order business thank you
mister president in amazon
saying we go that our business
announcements are miscellaneous
see no objection we are in that
compos item four senators
safanics and stewart and item
five senator do hig with that
mister president
you know.
I yield to senator stewart.
remind everyone that new mexico
tech earth science day is today
and that we all have lunches for
us in the lounge we had a
year and yeah
and mister president there is a
new aps superintendent that's
just been announced that
and if we can all congratulate
her governance blakely as the
new aps superintendent
thank you
met with emergency class seen no
objection where in that order
business third real legislation
center could have been to
present thinking mr president I
ask unanimous consent of the
See no objections that are could
I handful to explain mr
president senate bill one fifty
two is a technical fixed
requested by the fbi to allow e
children for ececd center bill
fifty two places the department
volunteers and employees and the
for cyft senate bill when fifty
two provides definitions for a
cyfi to conduct background
clearances on foster or adoptive
that is primary custody of
children for twenty hours or
more per week juvenile detention
or correction facilities and
treatment facilities and the
requirements because the
definitions were too vague and
see where was granted a grease
period through september twenty
twenty four to amend the state
twenty four for ececd employees
because the category of
individuals to be cleared wasn't
in the proper section and the
spell also contains an emergency
we're debating senate bill on
fifty two as amended with
emergency class yields a senator
perhaps.
File by center neighborhood
center period thank you mister
president of the sponsor please
you'll center could I have
senator could I have help mr
president unanimous consent to
have my expert witness shelly
strong chief general council
from eccd with me as many
into the chamber and provide a
chair for our expert witness.
Senator burden
and in these background checks
are they
does is change the the category
and and so that actual
background checks will continue
to be the same as before but it
Center product thank you mister
president what would the scope
be specifically.
pertal it's the same that the
the background check clears now
so nothing's changing as far as
the fbi clearance what they do
on their end.
what what are they looking for
now I know it's not changing but
I I am curious as to what we're
looking for now.
So mr president and senator
to do a background check have to
undergo to
ensure the safety of specially
children who are vulnerable.
Senator prettel thank you mister
president so this is similar to
And in mister president center I
appreciate that I I know the the
turnaround there's is actually
pretty quick it's it's online um
And mr president and senator
pertal it could be as soon as
one to three days.
thank you mister president will
the sponsor.
Senator could I handle reyield
yes mister president mister
difficulty of getting more
foster families because of a lot
of
maybe hurdles that they've had
the meat and problems maybe a
more faster families to step up
and become buster families.
Senator could have heard him
mister president and senator
nibert no there is nothing that
just to ensure the safety of
vulnerable children who are in
the foster care facility are
foster care system.
to involve may be more extensive
information they it just a more
procedural type issue.
doesn't put any undo burden on
families wishing to participate
in the foster care system.
Saturday night uh mister
president I guess I
burdens on the.
Foster family whose wanting to
now be involved in the foster
that's the point of my question
was whether or not families who
want to faster if they're going
to have to go through more
complex or more convoluted
application process.
And so miss mister president
I guess your answer is no a
mr president and senator
neighbor that's correct okay
mister president thank you.
We do have further debate we
have center gaggles followed by
On this president center I
understand i'd heard this bill
and committee but
I guess i'm trying to look
through are any of these and I
Senate could I have help mister
president and senator that that
is correct.
Okay goes
value is the definitions correct
mister president center could I
handle mr president and senator
yes it this is a technical facts
cars no additional and all the
time period given earlier mister
president center was you know up
to three hopefully some around
three days I was told it takes
senator
the fbi definitions can you go
through what definitions were
not defined and and how that
changed in this.
So mr president and senator upon
summer twenty twenty three
review the fbi determined that
grease period through september
twenty twenty four to men the
statue to come in to compliance
and so senate bill when fifty
two provides definitions for a
households operators employees
student interns volunteers of
every facility or program that
is primary custody of children
for twenty hours or more per
or correction facilities
treatment facilities d treatment
group homes intensive outpatient
programming treatment foster
school development case
management
child placement agency
comprehensive community support
services day treatment greep
unification services residential
treatment facilities shelter
care supervised visitation and
safe exchange treatment facility
and treatment foster care
the fbi looking for what what
kind of background are not who
they're checking but why they're
checking.
So the section two of the bill
programs having custody of
children for more than twenty
hours per week
including juvenile correction
facilities student interns and
children who are in the care of
these adults.
they looking for christianity
are they looking for somebody
that's too short
what are they looking for not
all of the stuff that they're I
mean specifically if I were
to insure a safe harm for
children and safe environment
for children.
Center claim so mr president and
senator share they're looking
for background criminal
Senator so mister president
at least three of us four of us
on this floor probably have
pretty high security clearances
through the department of
of investigations
you know there's some simple
things that the people look for
but aren't necessarily
disqualifying but then there's
so is this instead I ain't I
still don't understand
what would disqualify me okay
criminal okay
it's all with the deadly weapon
or
being responsible for an
automobile accident
where no one was hurt these are
why why does the fb I think our
stuff isn't enough not all of
the different things we're going
to check now that's great we
should check all that stuff
begin with something relatively
minor
and so what are they looking for
that's what i'm trying to get
out not all the stuff not just
In now we're getting rid of that
because we'll drugs our illegal
anymore so what's what changed
in the definitions of what the
cyfds then it bill when fifty
two merely provides definitions
for cyfd to conduct background
clearances on additional
merely is making clarifications
about the def- definitions and
expanding the definitions to
Center chair.
you mr president senator as I
understand it the fbi currently
conducts the background checks
is that correct center of their
hand mr president yes that's
correct
to still offer those background
checks to the state is that
correct so now could I handle.
The.
Mr president and senator
brantley if the bill doesn't
in order to make sure that our
our children are protected and
they are around people that are
qualified and and passing these
cheques we would certainly want
to make sure that the fbi is
want to think the sponsor for
ringing this for it it's pretty
pretty cut and dry to me is is
the feds have identified some
deficiencies they've come in and
made their recommendations of
mister president madame senator
this policy would only bring us
up to the federal standards and
which strength then
Can I handle mr president and
senator brantley that's correct
it's to ensure that individuals
who provide care to new mexico's
most vulnerable children are
because the fbi has come in and
provided a very quick deadline
september of twenty four times
that the essence in order for us
to take action not just to make
people possible I want to think
the senator for bringing this
forward and I will be supporting
the bill thank you.
Thank you senator roundly we do
question I could I have held
mister president yes a young.
Several terms in your
explanations you have made the
statement about someone that
every week from now on our
twenty hours or less maybe as
nineteen hours less say.
And never go through a
background check so they could
a certain number of arms they
don't have to have background
check it did I mean you're that
mister president and senator
twenty hours or more per week
for example that could include a
behaviour management school
development case management
we would be conducting the cyfi
background clearances on
missed president in senator.
hours a week every week we can't
week after week after week.
Do you have to have a background
clearance check and if not a
continues
eighteen or nineteen hours is
that correct mister president in
senator.
So mr president and senator this
is just it's the f b I
requirements and certainly if
you wanted to conduct an fbi
requirements for the f b I
clearance though that they're
there fbi is recommending be
included in the cif definitions.
if a one time person.
Worked the eighteen hours a week
but a continual
But it's your bill it's your
I dispersonal opinion which
president thank you.
Thank you center with.
Thank you mister president
center at we have a couple of
questions I didn't ask committee
the other day and
and
just kind of wondering in the
identified sinner could I him
here
mr president and senator brant
and there were technical issues
that the fbi saw so for
volunteers department volunteers
and employees in the section and
for cift that efficiency was
they needed to be more specific
went when you mean who would be
needed i'm like what positions
or I mean I always thought that
anyone that worked with children
unsupervised needed those
background chucks.
determined that see where fd
statute was no longer to
sufficient to comply with their
requirements because the
definitions were too vague and
so see where fd was granted the
period because ecect employees
needed the category of
individuals to be cleared wasn't
dictate what our last c
we usually don't do things like
that is there any other place we
can get these background checks.
Senator cray hamphill mr
provides criminal background
checks than except the fbi.
So mr president and senator we
would want to go through the f b
I to ensure safety of the
everything we can to ensure the
safety of those children who are
very vulnerable.
Thank you mister president
senator I I appreciate that that
and to see why if these care
and so
how will
making these changes make our
children say for.
people had a time who work with
new mexico's most phone
vulnerable children to
offer another level of um
vetting to make sure that those
So it's a way of vetting those
who work with vulnerable
children in new mexico mister
president and senator.
Thank you mister president
just for criminal convictions or
is it even that does it let you
know if someone was accused of
something.
for that you see ecd and cyfd.
Thank you mister president
senator does your expert know if
if they include
includes the entire criminal
history.
No thank you president center um
but maybe we know that if you've
never
is done by cafd and ed
to make sure that the person
working with our children is
someone that we want working
with our children.
merely a technical fix so that
we can
be in compliance with the f b
i's request.
Thank you mister president in
me and and I don't need an
answer to this but now this this
session.
This seems like the only bill
going to see on this floor that
does anything to deal with the
deficiencies that you ifd
and we're going to allow them to
continue to run background
is what we get thank you mister
president.
Center microphone.
Thank you very much mister
president derb I just want to
standard and that we are ahead
of september two thousand twenty
four and make sure they were in
compliance that's what I
understand this legislation to
do with regard to the why would
smart more for us as well to
ensure that our children are
safe so I do have just maybe one
question if the sponsor would
yield could they have your deal
mr president our nailed.
Thank you mister president thank
the face of the plan at the
federal rear of investigation mr
president and senator that's
correct I appreciate that mister
president and you know I just
hope that the body will fully
purposes and I I hear that you
know they're bad actors in every
industry and everything that we
do in life mr president but this
make sure that we have the the
gold standard for how we do
background checks thank you
center birth thank you mister
president of the sponsor were
yield
yes mr president thank you
center i'm just through some of
the discussion questions as soon
have to go through the same
background check.
Whether they work one hour week
they work in the office but they
have kids there or their forty
Okay is the are there any
categories in CYFD where you
don't have to take this back
round check.
And it is mister president and
senator it is the same
background check that everyone
has to take same one.
Mr president and senator that's
See no further debate senator
could I hand at a close on the
bill think you mister president
I moved that senate bill when
fifty two do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the senate
to your seats please
i'll similar to your seats.
Yeah.
Buy out of forty one they firm
it is really the negative senate
but wanted to do as amended does
pass with an emergency class
center cray happily thank you mr
informed training to all see
where employees and faster care
families so I hope that the body
after this discussion is
substitute for senate bill
seventy as amended in our yield
to sender sarantes thank you
mister president mister
president asking how much
consider the senate the rules we
suspend of the record show that
mister president mister
president previously the senate
voted thirty two to two to
improve judicial salaries to
make the competitive with the
federal courts the house voted
for its sixty four to three
i'll stand for questions.
Thank you centers we are
debating.
Senator brand
thank you mister president I
Thank you mister president
senator kit can you explain to
me why
we want to increase the salary
so much for judges.
salaries the problem that
creates is that we're not
attracting to the bench
experience practitioners and
we're not attracting people from
private practice what we're
typically getting our applicants
that are coming from a fresh
judges are now we're close to
what they would be earning in
the private sector so that's the
principle of reason i'll just
send you the best way I can
always uh illustrate this is
when there's a vacancy on the
see it were fortunate to or even
won application so we're just
not attracting the experience
practitioners the importance of
the judiciary really deserves us
Mister president well so you're
you're isolating that to the
supreme court's supreme court of
course it's just five members
tonight and I hold them in in
level but we're not just talking
about supreme court the way
there are system works is the
salary of the supreme court is
set and then the salary of all
the judges that what we call
salary so senator again we have
some exceptional judges judges
we can be very proud of but
we're just not getting uh
applicants when vacancies do
arise from civil practitioners
which is the more complex
the concern is
that
we're not getting enough
applicants but wouldn't you say
express an opinion on the
motivations of everybody who
applies for a a judicial vacancy
of course i'd like to believe
that all of my replying for
reasons of service but the
Like what most experience
A missed brisen center I don't
know the australia.
I'm doing this present would you
say it's more or less than two
hundred and thirty two thousand.
know you taught me very early on
when I came in here not to ask
question I did already know the
answer to and I I have forgotten
that lesson so i'm sorry i'll
past years of looking at this
bill that it's probably around
fifty eight to sixty thousand.
Mr president miss president
struggle with this bill is
report state
we tax or people
to death
it to judges when I don't know
if there's a judge seat this not
filled
i've heard that there is very
few applicants.
can attract more we're just
wanting to bring it up to the
national average will the fact
is in new mexico
you don't have to earn as much
square foot home in california
for what they paid me.
I moved to rearantial because I
could afford to buy a really
nice two thousand square foot
home.
and I think these judges are in
the same situation they don't
need to be paid as much here
because quite frankly the cost
up and I used I I can't go back
to my district and answer to my
voters and say yep I voted to
pay judges two hundred and
unreasonable job it's an
unreasonable increase and I just
don't think it's a good thing
for us to do I don't think that
something I can defend to my
See no further senator more as
thank you mr president with
senators abroad to shield center
survivors miss president no
silence.
I'm confused the governor didn't
give a reason for veto in this
bill or senator swantos mister
and so how do we know mister
president senator that the what
we're doing here today uh
actually will do anything to
appease the governors to
satisfaction with the bills and
assurance as to what the
governor will do with anyone of
our bills the year
but the vetoes without a message
so I didn't have not had a
conversation with the governor
some concern that doing so would
have interfered with our
discretion and prerogative in
the appropriations process
that's the best I could surmise
from her earlier concerns and I
and we don't have any feedback
that's where the problems with
these vetoed pocket vetoes is
that a governor never in its
both governors both parties they
never actually have to tell us
anything if only there was a
constitutional amendment
away their vetoing something it
would help us allow your member
there is a bipartisan effort
with the previous administration
when they fail to give us a
democrat effort to stand in
together for the power of this
legislature we force that
governor in the courts are to
provide a semester and I wish we
would do that for future
out of road vido we joined
lawsuits again against the
governor by vido and quite
frankly we need to take that
pocket veto away from the
executive and actually make them
get a message for you when you
veto our bills mister president
bank is there anymore
sensor montes you do have an
Thank you mister for his dealers
looking at my little book here
and I was trying to find set
real quick because you're all
we're supposed to know the
answer for you s the question
had infounded in time mister
president if the sponsor would
saying the vehicle serious
probably zero
at any given time there may be a
judge who is retiring maybe a
judge has been defeated in an
election that's pretty rare
district donate a county where
i'm from unless that's happened
since i've been up here with you
so we were usually able to feel
are these vacancy centers there
I hope the answers your
question.
the heart case backlog that we
have and a
so I guess in normal question
and the next question I might
Mister president center I
appreciate the question very
much and I agree that we have a
backlog in the court appeals a
supreme court and other courts
betch i'll tell you that when
in my civil practice we file
something called the summary
judgement motion i'm looking
judge who's been on the bench
for twenty or thirty years you'd
be surprised how quickly they're
able to discern get to the
bottom of those motions really
with a lot of experience rule on
those
a little grey hair matters and I
i'm confident that if we were
able to attract people with ten
twenty thirty years of
experience we're going to be
able to do a better job with
backlogs than then inexperienced
know the answer to that I don't
apologize.
Do we expect to put more judges
on the bench
to deal with these backlogs.
to get the backlogs cleaned up
is is that the use not in your
bill again mister president in
senator do you see that coming
down the road
we don't have enough judges in
the court of appeals in the
response i've received pretty
consistently from the supreme
court which is the highest court
the court that is supposed to be
the superintending court of all
do a thorough job of
administering the court appeals
to bring up some of that back
log in I think the supreme court
realizes the importance of
having cases decided quickly
insurance companies I am trying
to represent people have been
injured sometimes they'll wait
many many years to have any kind
of recovery in terms of medical
benefits or better benefits to
business disputes stay stagnant
and we and we see this
everywhere we see this in cases
before the p r c ray cases
and in all these things are are
effort to expand the number of
judges on the supreme court of
the court of appeals.
And I agree uh missed president
senator that.
Whatever the case is and I
understand how how much research
it has to be to go and all these
and and there's not something
that's black and white and the
sideline wondering you know we
just wonder if what is going to
be another five years.
Backlogs just compounding and so
Thank you since it was a
Thank you mister president and.
I don't necessarily need the
sponsor of the bill survived is
to yield I am simply wanting to.
Contribute to the slightly
discussion mister president i'm
sender i've been a long time.
Proponent of.
Report mr president and it's
been prepared by.
Prepared by the judicial
compensation commission and is
the twenty twenty three report
So the university of new mexico
athletic coach.
Is earning four hundred thousand
dollars a year.
University of new mexico chief
legal council earning three
hundred and fourteen thousand
five hundred seventy six dollars
a year.
So those are the top three on
justice is now it's one nine do
you it's a hundred ninety one
thousand six hundred and eighty
three.
The.
That position is.
Is earning less than the parent
executive director.
limited jurisdiction matters
straight judge in your mexico.
The us district judging the
mexico the US tenth circuit
judge the burning of county
mister president so I think what
we're asking to do to respect
our justices is is it's very
well.
spower a proud coal sponsor of
insure two which would eliminate
pocket vetoes that's all I have
to add mister president thank
you.
vetoed actually that was not the
case the bill was
actively vetoed
and
and I and I got thinking about
that and and so when I hadn't
mister president and colleagues
this this this of course is from
the governor
um i've decided to veto set up
bill to which is presently
related to attention to a
recruitment in the just or
of other states and private
sector positions to that end
last year I signed into law a
seventeen percent raise for
judges and justices sp two what
Acknowledge we need to raise
judicial salaries from
incompetitive
however I am not convinced sb
two is the answer to begin
also disreturning political
federals and petrol service
systems deserve substantial
investments in order to ensure
that our criminal justice system
is running effectively and
inefficiencies and article
system.
Indeed the seller just as
servantas one or seven several
bill two sponsors at a
practicing attorney putting the
to pay for his medical expenses
and care necessitated by the
defendants negligence.
We need to update our processes
and systems in order to work
more efficiently.
of the currently seated judges
and justices or for any other
funding that would allow courts
to streamline their systems.
matter and work with me to
develop a more targeted approach
to compensate for judges and
justice that reflects the needs
of our justice system because
these issues and pursuing to my
respectful years michelle hung
russian governor
mister president would the
sponsor of the bill yield
the the governor expressed some
some real concerns about tying
the uh the salaries of our
justices and and thus judges
both the pallet and trouble
no it's not an appreciate center
i've been so to remind me about
the veto message for this last
year's visa year before that
that I should have been more
clear about was the pocket
vetoed version of this bill but
market competition in state
judges is with the federal
system but the governor having
expressed some dissatisfaction
not get us caught up with the
federal system and will
discontinue get for a further
and further behind as the years
go on but this will get us at
least maybe into the ball game.
this year would it
wouldn't have an automatic
increase like last year's would
in terms of being tied to the
federal system.
those issues you you responded
to those issues that were in the
veto message and or at least try
to be responsive to those issues
that were in the in the vital
message from last year.
Mr president center yes to the
tie to the federal
judiciary salaries we've
eliminated that and hopefully
address that concern enough for
her to sign the bill.
were cognized about the message
from last year and and and and
the response of this that you
had are from that in terms of
this year's bill thank you very
much appreciated.
Any further debate.
send the message that we did
last session in the session
before that where we've now
passed this that would be the
third time to put it on the
governor's desk and the house
attorney's officers and others
throughout our government and
most important those on the
bench in the federal system so I
asked the colleagues to join me
and mispresident there therefore
Seriously office was purposed to
raise yes I need some guidance I
need to recuse myself from this
vote so I don't want to sit in
my chair should I leave what how
do I recognize myself from this
vote.
Do I leave
okay I ask unanimous consent
okay thank you centers we are
voting i'll send it just your
seats
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
exploit my boat center more
volume now.
The.
By vote of thirty four in the
primary five in the negative
president and I think everyone
knows why would against it but
it seem like that would have
been the perfect opportunity to
exercise our right to override a
vehicle.
Thank you senator brand senator
to travel in and how long it
takes to give the judgement back
in we're increasing salaries so
The.
The.
debate and discussion thank you
members thank you
someone third reading will go on
to item number three senate bill
nine is once amended hard final
passage has been taken and is
now subject to the big amendment
or substitution.
Center composed to explain the
bill thank you very much madame
See i'm sorry excuse me that's
legislative finance committee
sorry thank you very much madame
president signal objections of
education trust found in the
higher education program fund
and it provides an annual
distribution from the trust fund
to the program find making a
transfer from the tax
and scholarship programs are
subject to legislative
appropriation uh
within that matter president
members of the senate funding
comes from a transfer from the
so that we can go and get used
to to we're talking about this
the tax stabilization a reserve
fund has a balance now at three
point one billion dollars the
percent the trust phone may be
spent by the legislature if all
general fund reserves and the
tsr are depleted again by the
legislature.
educational needs by students
are the amount will be a forty
seven point ninety five million
so in essence madame president
members of the senate uh this
Thank you center complicates
there is a debate senator
neighborhood
thank you madame president well
to talk about critical needs for
uh certain professions to be
filling spart within their
it seems to me that this is one
area that we could encourage
students to go to school and ck
degree that could then be
I don't see anything in the bill
that puts any conditions on this
but I I do want to use this
opportunity is floating the idea
thought of new mexico receiving
some benefit in return from that
education and requiring maybe
more of a robust loan program
use this as an opportunity to
try to float that idea once
again because uh the citizens of
Professions that are desperately
needed by not owing our agencies
but by a number of professional
pursuits in the state and we
ought to be using these
opportunities to fill those much
Thank you others debate is their
other debate.
Center or tcipino
thank you madame president of
what the sponsor of the bill
did you say it has three billion
dollars in it now madame
president center tc penalty
three point one billion dollars
I understand as of the last
it's somewhere in the
neighborhood of about five point
two billion somewhere in that
neighborhood or six is what I
have heard but but it it also
select so when we say we have
in those reserves matter madame
president center tcp not no it
uh it's not counting that in
that amount in fact with a
reserve rate out there with our
reserves.
Well I think uh I have indie I
have
appropriation and
and the house bill to contains
zero for that apparently this
year.
We're still twenty seven million
dollars short of completing the
stabilization fund because
there's a lot of money there it
doesn't even get colluded
included in the reserves so I
will be preparing an amendment
to my bill for senate finance
would these phones in this
scholarship this almost one
billion dollar scholarship the
trust that we're setting up
would they go
example
the graduate education in
but as we move ah again what
would probably go ahead and have
would have fast forward would
have other scholarship funds
I would have other means so in
terms of this the way it would
requests as for their needs for
a student tuition so within that
there would be a lot of other
ways to go ahead and secure
resources for student
that true also senator companies
matter president center tc pena
you're correct.
Thank you very much senator
compass in my twenty this year
Thank you we have further debate
snatter brown thank you madam
president would the sponsor of
the bill yield thank you very
lead to several others but
if i'm not going to college but
i'm going to
year college where you do have
the programs and that particular
college does indicate that there
is the need then a course this
as well as the four year
universities thank you madame
president.
Thank you madame president
center so it would not go to any
of the trade schools though
senator brand they do have let's
say for example welding auto
mechanics they have electrical
they have so many others so it
to be able to use this you
couldn't go to a private one or
anywhere else madam president
again senator brand a very good
that will go ahead and work with
fast for network with the
federal if you will financially
system and then these would be
those scholarships
story short no if you're in one
of the private institutions
that would not be covered here
unless they do have fast for
where some of the other means to
Tax reserve fund
still have the right place thank
you very much madame president
court senator brand it's gonna
that it's that money is sitting
there.
So so madam matter president of
I guess my concern.
Then a president is that.
We know the statistics
And yet we continue to put more
and more of our reserves and our
tax base tax money into
colleges.
the thirty five percent that
actually go to college just a
little over half of them I was
looking at it again the other
day in state why I think it's
fifty eight percent of them
of our high school students go
on to college and get a college
degree
and yet all we ever focus on
Does anyone go to college or
maybe the case of twelve didn't
prepare them properly to go to
college.
The.
There was no way I was going to
college.
I had to go in the air force so
they could teach me out of read.
Yeah every time I turn around
we're we're putting more money
into our universities and more
money in their universities and
that's all we ever focus on
we're going to grow our job
We need electricians when you
plumbers.
If you ever try to call plumber
lately
you might as well go to home
depot by the snake yourself to
fix your own dream.
you can't get a plumber to your
house as the house is flooding
then they might show up show you
how to turn off the water by the
way if you don't know how you
probably should ask someone.
because we keep focusing and
putting more and more of our
money into college and there's
nothing wrong with college I
went.
Been there done that got the
degree.
Need it if we're going to do
something like this we need to
be doing this for the trades now
for college
we've got opportunity
independently wealthy your
college in new mexico is paid
for a hundred percent.
The.
By the way from sir
You cannot get aid from the
federal government to do
anything above your bachelor's
degree.
Then exist.
Yeah.
But we've already dumped buckets
and buckets of money into the
opportunity scholarship and into
the lottery scholarship
lottery scholarship that was
never supposed to receive
general fund dollars we just
years that we really are to be
looking at you know what career
fields do we actually need what
degrees do we actually need
just getting a degree and
underwater basket weaving and
doesn't really get your job.
Getting a degree in new mexico
in an area that we don't have a
need for you know that means we
means we're paying for someone
degrees that we need less
priorities those for the water
scholarship this prior to raise
those for the opportunity
scholarship.
And then let's start looking at
In fact our budget from left see
this year
Okay that's the error we need to
be investing in.
His career technical education
the trades those are the jobs
that we have available those of
That's where we need to be
putting the focus not cutting
that area of the budget.
eighty percent who are going to
get the real jobs that pay for
the twenty percent
to go to college to get degrees
then no one wants
there certain careers you do I I
really wouldn't want a doctor to
just go straight out of high
school and start operating right
of maybe twenty percent of the
people and then the degrees
people are getting
all call out some people in my
own family near you get a music
Should be focusing on the if
we're gonna put state tax
dollars in if we're going to
take the tax payers money if i'm
I need to put it into a program
that works for the eighty
percent not the twenty thank you
madame president.
Matter president uh sitter my
estates I do thank you madame
president center companies I may
not have a question but just
wanted to share some shame
thoughts thank you for your
mind you know we were maybe five
six years removed from the from
the bank's crashing and the in
the fiscal crisis of two
thousand nine we are kind of in
and so that was the reality we
were in the end and and the
mindset that we were in then but
I honestly will madam president
that were
could stash you know roughly
two hundred or three hundred
million dollars so that we
wouldn't have to cut future
budgets
and so it was wise at the time
raise money because the chief
executive took a no tax pledge
about a president and then we
weren't getting the revenue we
you know to function as a as a
functional government because of
what we wanted to sock away for
hard times it's three point one
billion dollars
three point one billion dollars
and we're just staring at it
with all of the with other the
A billion dollars that we're
doing nothing with is going to
with this bill we can at least
do something with roughly fifty
million dollars of it but but we
really have to think long and
hard whether we want to
particular purpose or what we
want to do but we don't need to
put three point one billion
in a trust when when we're at
doing something as opposed to
nothing but we
but we don't need a three point
one billion dollars tax
stabilization fund we as need to
Thank you we have further debate
center she meetings.
Thank you madame president
is having some major issues in
our country in fact a gallup
paul
that continues to be updated
including last year has found
that higher ad
and I have how the numbers are
there they're very very low
they're they're like in this you
know seventeen percent range or
something like that
so there's something very
everywhere enrollments down to
michigan and arizona
students students are leaving
if if you look year after year
and so you know the question is
into a broken system where
essentially just propping up a
system that needs reform and I
think we need to instead of what
we're doing you know gary
johnson said there's he said if
I don't think this day really
hasn't interest in that and I
think that gets to where sender
brand instead of nibert win
they're kind of getting more
specific with it what is the
state actually have an interest
specific jobs and so instead of
just incentivising the these
scholarships openly which I
admire the the sincerity of it
we need to put our incentives in
higher quality product that's
what the people want and that's
what the state has in interest
in the state has an interest in
unand being as good as possible
have an interest in unand
producing the very best
graduates and giving the very
best education product that they
can same thing with highlands
new mexico state anywhere
well educated ready for the work
force whatever it may be we can
put those metrics on there once
again if we if you subsidize it
you'll get more of it this
I I can only vote for funding
that is going to put that
pressure in give us a better
product give us better high red
students so if I go to
a restaurant and the food is not
that great you know i've got the
money in my pocket i'm paying
lesson less so with students
right and what's the recourse if
they go and they're kind of not
not happy or the first semester
first year we've got all this
third party money coming in
you say i'll wait a minute now
that person was tied to a
scholarship whenever no I mean
that's not how government works
they can just come they can ask
us to set it more trust funds
fundamental it's not really
just enrollments in tuition
let's in center vise the quality
of the product thank you
thank you we have further debate
can either spend that billion or
you can make that today's money
tomorrow's money you say
programs you invest it you get a
return that return offsets the
And doesn't earn this very much
money.
If you take a billion and you
invest that for higher ed you
dollars a year but we don't put
our money to work for us until
we need to start thinking about
well how we per money to work
and and where that money should
program but the problem is the
colleges have to adopt that that
certificate program is out
credited and so when you get
that accreditation for those
certificate programs then it
in locator said you know if we
want to fund higher ad and not
make it a general fund every
single year then we need to take
this money invest it take the
to find lottery lottery
scholarships set up by the
legislature twenty seven years
ago it's in a deficiency so how
thinking new mexico I said
itself up in and this is
something you're not really
going to see are here in the
news but we have set ourselves
cash economy till or not running
in debt we're not bonding we've
heard all the stories you know
we need her tailbond doing it
curtail bonding.
Well we're setting ourselves up
that now capital in three to
so new mexico has set
theirselves up with early
childhood trust five billion
dollars now to operate that
issues and all that through
funding one time funding that
now generates money for the
future.
Called her trust color anything
Before he cut important things
senior citizens we're talking
today about an issue in the
budget where there's a twenty
get twenty five dollars a month
in snap
in in me in the executive we
gotta raise that up because what
is twenty five dollars really by
you the end of the day and and
people or it's not going to
change education it will there's
four nurses that come in
twice a week into my office in
in what are the student spice
health care with her savings and
she works for me but I mean
there's there's flexibility have
if you want to talk about
new mexico III don't see what
they're doing compared to
the university of arizona or
arizona biggest online programs
in the nation a issue is now
institutions really not leading
that vision maybe a little bit
in msu but they're not leading
that vision that we want to see
change in hire ed
before we can do that so.
That may happen next year we
have another bill in the senate
that's coming that says you know
if you want to go to year around
examples of that I have a kid
and gallop that went to early
chuck doll credit charter school
went to college it in a msu
dollars a year coming out as a
freshman that's what library and
opportunity to do for kids so
thank you madame president.
Sir further debate sooner share
thank you madame president
I am sure i'm gonna cost the
change the incentives for what
we do and I agree or incentives
need to be different
instead of be having a degree in
interpretive dance it's better
it's it's how do we pay for
higher education that's the real
debate because this isn't
changing any of that stuff
if we do this what we've done is
madam president are landground
permanent fund is really called
the
common schools permanent fund
and the idea when that was set
and we would have a fund big
enough to pay for the common
schools k twelve
imperpetuity
make sure but not that but if we
do this we've taken that oil and
gas money we've said it into a
separate trust now for higher
it's the permanent funds
continued to grow.
to pay for it anyway
so this would this would
grow
we draw off the interest and
that helps us pay for that so
to do this and solve for that
reason
III understand the concerns
about encouraging one thing or
another incentive I think one
thing or another I don't think
that changes this at all
thank you senators are further
debate
same non center composed to
close and thank you very much
madame president members of the
you will be robust passion that
each one of us continues to feel
when it comes to education just
a couple of quick things so here
we have eighteen community
colleges a spread throughout new
students continue with those
programs we have about sixty
million coming up in one of the
other bills that's going to go
ahead and go to work for
solutions for a printership
programs so we're thinking about
but in different ways and so
we're going to continue to look
for resources in order to make
sure that what we talk about
education the future of our
state that there'll be the
resources in perpetuating so
that as we deal with this our
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the senate
that the record show that
they're all has been called in
all those present voters in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by short hands
you wish to vote no please raise
your hand.
Senator brown folding no
senator gay goes voting no
Senator tom voting no
center more's voting now.
Yeah.
This.
explain my vote if you'll wait
just a minute
by a vote of thirty seven in the
affirmative five and the
negative sentence the one fifty
madame president uh hate the
vote against my good friend
senator campos but I just share
university has gone up a hundred
and fifty eight percent that's
fifty six percent
after adjusting for inflation
courage costs have really gotten
You know it's common knowledge
that
universities are overloaded with
administrators that's number
three number four there's an
arms right in the college you
know a college you'll build a
by ten room shared with a a
student and now they have
switched
with bathrooms and frigerators
and it's more like a hotel room
it's not a critical need for
more money for universities they
need to cut their costs and
number six and the final number
final item is you know it's
the in the past but they still
keep asking for bricks and
mortar when more and more
students are not on campus so
they don't need to the
facilities that they have in the
Thank you we will go on to item
number four snatter stephanies
for senate health and public
first comma substate for senate
bill fourteen
adam president
senate bill fourteen on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate or
amendment or substitution
as seeing no objections to
clean up and what is being
distributed is a chapter by
chapter dilineation of what it
covers it is a two hundred page
the senate we did pass a lot a
statute that created the health
care authority department act
and we as we established that
last year so this is basically
authority we did that last year
senate bill fourteen is
statutory clean up and it takes
the health care authority
rearranges status statutes to
form a new chapter twenty four a
titled health care code
consolidating all sections
currently found and chapter
authority state benefits
division will now join the
retiree health care authority
sport in addition to joint
procurements that I back the
information data it collects
with the health care authority
the administration of the health
care affordability fund program
tuesday chapter twenty four a
so due to concerns that arose
with the first brochure
the child care of facilities was
and this bill is that the health
care authority will insure
transparency and clarity about
new mexico's health system
performance
and a proactive approach to
managing state health care funds
customer service through a no
wrong door approach to health
for questions and comments
meetings to be to debate the
as madam president I will heal
thank you madame president
I had a couple questions on the
bill first the the spanthrough
especially for any stakeholders
listening so but I i'd really to
to if you're
on the other side of the isle
from me i'd like you to put
yourself on my shoes I really
oppressive to the sick person
and so if you tell me you're
going to reorganize and make
government more efficient what I
see is a big army of oppression
just like a brain singer sport
is going to vote against a lot
of the crime bills that come
from over here because they
because they feel like the
systems inherently oppressive
and they want reform and and
that's what I want I I cannot
policy is going to shift power
from the government to the
patient from the hospital to the
patient from big farmer to my
patience or from an insurance
company to my patient or empower
my patience in any way i'm happy
this is not what uh the bills
not modifying you this language
because you heard the sponsor
this is kind of reorganizing
things into the hca umbrella
from you know pbm all these
sorts of things
they're going to file these with
the healthcare authority but
after this says unlawful
disclosure that we're not
man president because because
that's that's the problem is
that we don't know the prices
and we need to know those prices
whether it's a negotiated rate
between an insurance company in
convoluted rebate system but
anyway
I just want to point that out
because it does come up in the
in this bill
and so I I did have a question
hca
and I believe that is on page
forgive me this big bill so it's
going to take a little bit of
time page one ninety five
in so I would like to ask about
consultation with these other
folks but now it's gonna be the
hca in consultation with the
superintendent why why are we
doing that.
Madam president senator the
our state so when we are
combining the different forces
from state group benefits and
other entities medicaid and
other entries perhaps from be
president center you would like
to get into the details I could
call in it
expert witness but the office of
the superintendent of insurance
So many president and center I
just want to make sure I I
understand this
is is the eight is the c a
necessarily calling your your
expert I don't want to get
bogged down this I just I just
want to make sure I understand
this.
Madame president has centered
meetings that office of the
consolidation of health care
systems and looking at modifying
this step there be
requirements that they already
would have the responsibility
and the authority to consult and
collaborate with the health care
authority on the use of those
funds thank you madame president
center i'm good with that answer
disclosing especially I think
it's really focused on the
affordability piece I I think
you're degrees me on that but
uhm
on page thirty six it's talking
the other one is I think another
maybe government entity in and
their usual role
requesting their own identifying
information does that need to be
in their by your perspective.
Madame president centers
their medical records and in
fact when insurance companies
would decide that they were
denied some service or some
prescription there are
those for the your provider
insurance coming but it says the
files and records of the
authority and so I just does
that mean that this is these are
records kept from the government
I just want to make sure the
that the hca keeps individual
records that for example are
managed care companies actually
manage all the individual
and procedures and in terms of
the state benefits division
those entities are not usually
involved in individual records.
have received care or are
receiving from the authority
which is interesting he doesn't
say from a provider says from
because i'm sure you wouldn't
have an objection to to putting
in in individual requesting it
just I I don't know what kind of
records these was be but it but
it clearly says files and
expert because I I see one
workaround is it says number one
where permitted by rule of the
authorities for the authority
could by rules say well yeah
we're open and in the individual
say files and records of a
provider or an insurance company
it says over the authority
the other technical thing I
wanted to look at was pages
and it says new material so I
just want to make sure man a
president sender you know this
was I I believe your bill that
was was signed by the governor I
So a madam president and center
committee is the rural health
care fund from last year is in
here but this is also related to
this past week and I believe and
it will be going on to senate
tax and business but it would be
this new section is taking into
account that bill if that bill
does not pass then this section
would be moot thank you my
sixty four says the rural health
care delivery fund is created as
an honoring phone the health
street treasury I mean is that
fun not already created by the
bill that was passed last year
page sixty five talks about
defraying operating losses
including used new start up so
those funds from last year and
the new funds that were tracking
from what you did last year's
that we were saying it's madame
president center it's in
addition to last year in
addition to okay thank you
matter president center i'll
bringing different people to the
table for affordability you know
grouping people together
is that that's kind of the mean
point of this is that credit.
effectiveness and a proactive
approach customer service to a
no wrong door approach and a
unified vision so yes
not not just say no and offer
something positive to what the
hca is going to be
tasked worth I think it's a very
big job.
in committee and it was talking
about you know we're talking
about uh pooling all these of
the groups together right we're
talking about the retiree
insurance pools other insurance
usually works let's just say
how what other kind of insurance
you know at home orders
insurance i've
or or other you know life
free the cost over a large group
of people that tend to not die
young right the vast majority of
us don't and then that way the
insurance companies can afford
but
III reject the notion that
pooling people together
makes makes our leveraging power
stronger.
a in bulk you know costco or
some are going to get cheaper
price however
back to this principle on
insurance there was something
that was said in committee
that I
I don't believe that my
president
we are on
we are headed toward a cliff and
we are stepping on the gas pedal
adults with pre diabetes eighty
percent of adults are overweight
in this country fifty percent of
ninety percent of americans that
have pre diabetes don't even
know that they have it profound
the metabolic disfunction
And I want people to think about
outside the bounds of our normal
living conditions as a society
and it's showing up once again
showing up our military showing
up on our law enforcement
eligibility etc.
The majority of older people
have high cholesterol in our
country majority.
Where were sicker than we admit
that we are so I want to offer a
couple of fixes it's not pooling
power it's a different approach
and I think the hca could
participate in this think the he
could participate in different
of us are overweight most of us
have met a bolk disfunction
and so let let's let's move in
to a couple of those concepts
and I would like to ask these
vote for it if she's I i've got
four four five things and maybe
I don't know maybe if if she can
convince me the hca would would
help on these things I don't
about high red subsidies where
we put our subsidies as as a
state
it is the issue going to bring
whether it's you know shifting
tax incentives will the hca be
able to bring people to the
table to talk about about tax
credit subsidies anything like
that with healthcare.
language
that entities are brought to the
table to negotiate best
practices for the patience that
the state for both the health
care authority and for the
department of health so the
department of house has a role
in consulting with the health
benefits actually will have
employees there could be at the
table to negotiate and talk
about what would didn't be in
the best interest of the
patience and they then could
well I I just have a
you know constructive thought
here as suggestion when the DOH
you know gets to this table when
they have their their
conversations
Consume or organic foods less
highly processed foods
with we've got to do this once
again where we're thinking
Self so sick it does not going
to work insurance just is not
going to work when most people
are failing nutritionally and so
closer to the table you know how
once again how do we incentivise
our own organic farmers this is
crucial to the health of new
that you will never win and so
ID o h if you're listening and
and in the bill spots i'm sure
you're going to you know agree
with some some aspect of what
i'm saying is if we can look for
tax credits
than some you know who knows
some farm in some other country
right.
And so that that's what i'd like
to see
and I I we could talk about that
are our high red institutions
going to have a serious table of
any of this or is hired at all
affected by your bill.
department of health already is
working on work force data the
department of health and along
with their health care authority
whether it is clinics so there
is coordination between the two
departments in terms of the
needs I would as soon maybe
okay miss president center thank
you very much yeah I I would
just you know I know this this
may not be the intent your bill
but if you go down to the you
know health care affordability
into preventative medicine
looking at our once again
looking at lifestyle
interventions
I think it's really important
and so
I I you know just once again a
little a little
helpful suggestion that I I
think if we're going to talk
about addressing affordability
where so much they're finding
comes from the food industry and
what what are we going to get
back from that far-
pharmaceutical industries their
bank rolling pharmaceutical
research in our country.
empower our higher edge to say
you know what we're going to get
rid of a lot of those conflicts
of interest and we're just going
to do research on behalf of the
people and I think that'd be
you know a little bit more more
discussion on
on what we're doing with tobacco
in the affordability find
and then in the beginning of
to change in in the way that we
do behavior health prevention
after this bill passes.
Mr president in senator the
Our funds in both
saying is is not not much is
going to change in what they're
doing now uh based on the it's
not a fault i'm just trying to
understand how the bill works.
Mr president has centered me
in miss president center thank
you for letting me ask that I
saw come up in the beginning of
the bill just wanted to make
sure nothing was going to change
III hope that they're doing very
well too you know we have a a
and I quote him because this is
so important short children are
exposed to harmful content on
social media region from violent
and sexual contact to bowling
health crisis and i'm concerned
that social media is an
important driver that crisis one
that we must urgently address
and so once again if the goal is
affordability of health care for
what's happening with social
media in our country if we don't
do it in our state same thing
guarantee you if you don't fix
our food supply if we don't fix
our addiction especially with
and senator.
Is
our entitlement programs
you know medicaid food
Mr president senator the
supplemental nutrition are act
will still stay and the health
wick program and the farmers the
food define program that is
department of egg and the
department of health will all be
coordinated with the health care
authority.
you said some about ag an ag
program could you repeat that
i'm sorry as little noise in
here mr president senator right
now the food to farm
program that has several
money that goes to the food
banks goes to the health care
authority to disseminate to the
food banks around the state the
money that goes that they
of health but something you
mentioned earlier about our
farmers we are going to try to
have an initiative next year on
how you can address young people
thinking that that's very
helpful to know that about kind
of the status on on snap and you
know
once again I have some major
to sugary dranks if you look at
line items on snap purchases the
number one item that's purchased
is sugary drinks
find there to be once again
we're trying to put out a fire
but we're we're putting gasoline
on to the fire how is how is
that you know going to going to
help us.
sort of affordability of health
care if our government is paying
people billions of dollars to
consume sodas
and in my opinion that keeps
people poor you know we're
poison that now millions and
millions in tens of millions of
americans have met a box is
function because of the poison
that we're putting into our
olds can have the can consume
ten percent of their colorado
take daily without it shoulder
that's that's absurd it's absurd
mister president we're not gonna
have any affordability in health
of big farmer and insurance
companies that makes more
profits the more people are sick
the more people are sick the
more money they make
understand that the the senator
the sponsor is not saying that
this is going to fix everything
but when when one of the major
line items of this bill is
affordability and and I just
criticism that mister president
in center and I hope that the
new tables that we're creating
and the new conversations that
we're going to be having in a
more consolidated entity that
actually be more healthy or our
financial incentives
geared toward sickness because
that's the the proof is in the
putting where there's no
is our profound pre diabetic
state or medical optus function
and our poison is food supply so
please fix it at hca fear
listening look at these
back to follow by center share
than sender loves center bucker
thank you mister president I
just wanted to bring up a point
that the good doctor I think
made sold your main in his
authority we need to give it all
the opportunities it has and I
think it was just pointed out of
what what an opportunity we have
there and with that we have we
people on that is a direct
inter-direct connection with
reducing food prices and so I
just wanted to mention that I
know it's a little bit off topic
deduction we could do that put
put more a economical food on
people's plates for the in the
statement mexico thank you
mister president.
Thank you center buck and center
share
Mister president yes center
chair thank you mister president
according to the FIR mister
president this is a hundred and
ninety four million dollars
price tag and
you know we we we i've got a
bill for two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars it's going to
send it finance i'm just
wondering why a hundred ninety
that's that's coming on board
they've been stood up in so we
just added an increase to the
health care authority and that's
why it did not come to finance
anything that's more than that
that's that size article are to
go to finance but I understand
that it already exists I
understand it it's already been
to fix anything but thank you
mister chair mister president
thank you center share we do
have further debate we have
center love is followed by
center hickey center office.
we first heard this instead of
rules
one of the concerns I have a few
in amongst some of the other
comments I had made mister
he as there have recently been
some federally qualified health
care centers otherwise called
fhcs that have
had some financial instability
we had first choice community
health that also was running
into some issues financially as
well as staff
mr president I know that the
about oversight of um primary
care clinics which is what one
of these arm
and what I just wanted to ring
to the attention mr president
senator stephanics to the
our state auditor and looking at
audits financial such
finances when it comes down to
the point where a facility may
close and you have such as in my
community about
that we need to keep up a closer
I on it
I know that the department of
house
last year before this transfer
happened was looking to see what
so it's just a concern I have
mister president as we go
through this we have a new set
of eyes persons looking at this
Now the feds have their own
rules and such but I don't think
they normally look specifically
at the financial aspect and I
think that's a preview that this
state needs to look at
especially since their located
and I know it's it's it's on the
radar with regards to the
developmentally disabilities
council and just to make sure
that there is oversight and that
not be subsumed into medicaid
managed care which would be a
total disaster for those types
of programs and I I know I
receive some nods at the time in
as they say mister president
senator stephenics would be I
think disaster for the program
thank you.
Thank you center not as we do
have further debate center
hiking
bills were hearing and its
potential impact on the state
and I really want to
congratulate the governor and
the secretaries and so forth as
care both cost and quality with
accountabilities and
this bill in many ways is going
to help new mexico control
care authority either are
already or are getting towards
seeing only a three percent
annual increase in cost that's
of all working with the state
risk uh fund the fire state
employees and then eventually
other agencies coming in and
that that the law of large
numbers will come in to play
here number two the state will
collect data right now it has no
data the way it's structured
major major major transparency
in work where health care costs
are going in where our systems
are doing and assure that
they're serving not only state
contain costs which we will be
happy about because they are the
upward pressures are
really huge and in getting worse
taxpayers and consumers and it
we forget about it but this bill
along with the health
information exchange currently
for the first time how much
value in terms of outcoming
quality we're getting for the
costs that were putting in that
will take about five years but
right now is about the only
thing that I see on the horizon
that is going to contain health
care costs it's the only thing
we're seeing across the country
that's working to do that so
like to remind years ago we
started a strong public health
and point of order mister
president we don't call out
individual senators by name in
this chamber
do have and we'll have a section
in the school of public health
of department and behave to our
health and so we are going to be
doing the studies
Thank you center hecking see no
further debate.
Several minutes
when you take that transfer of
all those and gsd employees and
and move over into a health care
authority and make that transfer
or something happened our
department and meeting at health
care I just cautioned the
executive I mean we're or taking
a leap of faith with you over
the cliff we think it's gonna
they've gotten everything they
needed to do this and make sure
it's done right I just we have
to have it done right in I think
that's my word a warning to the
in the system more than do
something but you know I i'm
going to take the leap of faith
I guess and I just pray to god
that that this works that
it's pretty hard to make big
changes like this in so uh
and all of you want to jump off
the cliff with me well you don't
have a vote but we can read like
you know for the debate service
vanished close on the bill
thank you mister president mr
that the record showed that the
role has been called and all
those present duties in the
affirmative accept those voting
in the negative by a showed
hands thank you all senators to
your seats please
senator brand voda know.
Senate available in now said
river do you know center woods
body now
Senator share voting now
senator verge was voting now.
Send their bucker voting now.
The.
By a vote of twenty seventy five
minute fifteen the negative
senate health public affairs
committee substitute percent of
and I o two senator do
thank you mister president
asking and I was consent of the
senate that the record show that
all action for placing a senate
judiciary committee substitute
senator doing if you'll explain
the bill
thank you mister president
so now that we've had almost
three years of recreational
control division the tools that
they need so they can
appropriately regulate the
industry about today and into
the future I and so that they
can keep bad bad actors out of
canada's out of kids hands and
also make sure the consumers
aren't aren't being given a
dangerous or fraudulent products
thank you for your for
explaining the bill i'm gonna
have the reader read them I
meant that i'll have you move
and explain that amendment the
reader to eat
move and explain the moment and
miss president move the move the
amendment.
And if you'll explain what
amendment does senator think you
or inspection by the candidates
control division not public
records while that investigation
is pending but the language we
have in there was not clear
enough that this would only
records would only not be public
records while that while an
investigation or inspection is
pending once those are finished
they would be public records
with the sponsor of the
amendment yield please
yes mister president
center do we debate the
somewhere in the judiciary
committee in the the question
for the I think before me on
this new exception to the
april are you putting this in
epro or you put in this in the
canaba sack
itself not scattered threat or
statutes that you as president I
wanted to understand the moment
and I agree with it and I can
support the moment on that basis
and that that's firm
an exception to epro those
exceptions now exist all in a
certain section of epr itself.
And and for future members who
want to make exceptions dipper
that's the place to do it is to
so there is some language in the
candidates act itself that right
now says all the records are
public records so that is also
amended to reflect this
exception but the
practing and and his reminder
everything we're doing here
we're passing laws that a lot of
us have to live with practice
interpret help our clients
understand help judges
understand every day and so
require a lawyer or practitioner
jessica through all the entire
statutes looking for all the hip
it breaks exemptions everywhere
they might be buried as opposed
to looking to the improve
also have a question for the
sponsor she dealt to her deal
yes mister president
thank you so in your amendment
it says the
so how does that how does that
work with other investigations
is this is this normal for
automobile accident and very
Is it does the appear only apply
after it settled
saturday and mister president
senator so there is some
language in our statutes that
the the finance committee saying
that there was a a recent case
that might have impacted that
for lawnforcement records i'm
not familiar with that case so I
can't release speak to it but we
president senator in this
situation what we're finding is
that someone will
see see someone doing something
against the law and canada they
house to tell them and that is
creating significant safety
concerns
and it's not creating an
environment that's going to be
industry themselves who see it
up close well before the
regulators got to it
so mister president senator I
absolutely appreciate that um
they saw firearm or anything
else
I just would like it to be
uniform throughout the
throughout the law so if this is
the way we do things and other
So this is how we do mr
president senator yes as long as
as long as it's allowing ccd to
to get that information and not
but if there is a another
approach that achieves the same
purpose I
then then we are open to it
twenty twenty five in a little
bit on twenty eight page forty
eight which is that port the
says that that are
doesn't serve your your purpose
and I understand your purpose.
But the question is if it is it
the same with with gang violence
so right now if I report some
and mr president sen you don't
before that the finance meeting
I probably would have said no I
think there's a an exception for
law enforcement records for
pending investigations that they
I say I do know there's another
amendment out there
this one seems to work for me in
the it eventually opens it up
but not wild things were
happening
Any further debate on the
amendment.
Seen offer the debate instead of
doing it will close on the
minute
self or voice vote i'm sorry
mister president senator said it
is where voting on senate
florida member number one
all those in favor of
significant by saying I
will suppose
Send it floor amendment number
two to send it judiciary
committee substitute for senate
bell six amendment sponsored by
senator jeff steinborn.
Centers I want to move and
explain the moment
thank you mister president I
move senate for a moment too
for discussion.
to prohibit drive through
windows for canada's
dispenseries and being in a
community where we have a number
of these I was immediately
deal with facts
uhm
we have in the state of the
mexico mister president
colleagues over eighty three
thousand medical canada's
customers
and I think when we pass medical
in our society these drive
through instead of since
come as a part of our
legalization have really
provided kind of the next level
of community for these customers
So I heard the discussion about
concerns about you know illegal
consumption and drive through
facilitating mingling of drugs
problems relating to dry threats
and his answer was I have not
gotten any reports of problems
involving drive through not
basically take away a benefit
people some amount have per
problems even getting out of
their car for a perceived
problem it doesn't exist
and we only really have these
I then call their local police
chief colleagues a few minutes
ago and I asked him to have you
had any problems with drive
through any said I haven't seen
any problems with our drive
know trail of criminality or
problem or
it talks about a driving at
least to these drive through
cell colleagues I just want to
say there's no there there and I
think we're conflating issues
mexicans eighty three thousand
medical cannibal users.
And there are several days and
says that this is our whole
business we're actually going to
put them out of business or
tanti business on top of that
businesses and a support this
amendment to
remove this from the abile and I
apologize mister president I
don't know if it's a friendly
amendment or not but i'll stop
the drive through issue with was
never part of the original scope
of the spell this is an agency
bell for the candidates control
the vision
this was never part of the
on on this issue when we or the
other I have my personal opinion
my personal opinion is that we
should never sell intoxicating
substances and to drive through
thank you senator here we are
several who would.
Or whatever munches they have
people will pick up more items
that they really didn't plan on
going in there to get but
they'll pick up the I think they
have a bath bomb now that you
can throw in your battle been so
there for I mean i'm not expert
this I don't know if they still
sell joints in there not but
they sell joint so no cell
gummies but I mean they'll
they'll buy other stuff that
was that wasn't that good way
does it walm won't have a drive
through
I mean there's other stores that
would do that those stores watch
you when you walk in your store
and make a right hand turn in go
down to the tvs when can tell
what I also went down how much
time you spend side tv have what
you're looking for where you
went to next were you when you
that right now
and so
to me after a long far by with
my father and learning that if
you really want to drive retail
further debate center hamlin
thank you mister president
senate body I rise in support of
this amendment so I don't
necessarily need to support the
sponsor of the amendment to to
to yield but I do want to make
go into a dispenser to get
gummies for sleepy time and I
see some really good look and
chocolate i'm going to want to
try those so what we're not but
what we're talking about today
there was excessibility this is
especially those folks who might
have children or pets it is much
easier and safer to use the
drive throughs canada's delivery
is not a viable in the vast
of canaba's regulation act is
that local entities cities and
counties have control over time
place and manner of how those
communities interact with
sleep I am proud to say that I
would much rather use a natural
product like t h c then go ahead
and use any over the counter
canada's to sleep I can tell you
that I don't go through a drive
through and as soon as I buy my
gummy pop but in my mouth I want
to get home I want to get
for home grown businesses to
enter the market making drive
through illegal would put these
small businesses out of business
but also I can tell you that
what i've seen in los cruces is
that many of the dispenseries
and even the drive throughs have
used existing buildings not like
these change stores that you see
coming in like coffee shops that
will build a new building
infrastructure in the city retro
buildings and even if they don't
uh wind up staying there for
long they have already improved
a building for another business
and so as we continue to talk
about ways to make this
legislation best for new
mexicans limiting economic
opportunities and accessibility
isn't the way to do that I would
encourage this body to continue
we start limiting their options
so I do stand in strong support
of this amendment and I think
both the sponsor of the
amendment and the sponsor of the
bill for entertaining this
conversation.
conversation in senate finance I
was surprised that there were
drive windows actually I didn't
know that because in our
community in albuquerque we
don't have that so i'm not sure
if the uh i'm asking the sponsor
Unity to self select yourself
determined whether they would
like to see drive off windows
for this purpose.
if we were to keep this
prohibition it would take that
decision out of the local
government sounds.
And so mister president on that
line community could then on the
the with that old asking as
content to excuse center monus
until the return to the chamber
except for the purposes of a car
and thank you sponsor for
answering my question thank you
president I went the sponsor the
bill will yield a question
mister president yes thank you
mister president
have you
The.
Ten a day mr president senator
i'm not aware of of any
complaints about it I I can tell
you
I have cons i'm concerned for
killing substance to someone who
has already at a toxicated and
they go get in a car accident
and hurt someone the seller has
liability for that that's huge
windows mister president and
senator
as far as that concern isn't
that something that really those
businesses and their liability
And mister president senator
it is absolutely a business
decision um most folks probably
aren't insured against address
and mister president then and I
support this amendment for many
of the reasons that we're
already given we already have
drive up pharmacies where
we ought to that indicates that
this has been a problem in any
community I think it's very
clear that this is a local
control issue for the local
communities that if it becomes
and so I very much support this
amendment to strike the portions
of preventing drive up windows
for the canada's injury industry
we should be making decisions
center sales or do you have
further debate center worth
thank you mister president I
don't need the sponsor to yield
but I do rise in support of this
when this was kind of put
together
we went out to the audience and
I thought there were some
compelling testimony from
business owners about how they
manage this issue and I think
the the things that jump out for
pre emption issue.
It just makes sense if if if
someone in your community if
you're one of your local
governments doesn't want this
been pointed out many businesses
have made this decision so we're
about a shut shut them down it
just seems like all of the
things that going into a
business decision including the
the same as drive up liquor with
us are plain in simple so I
support the moment.
Thank you said worth we have
senator morris followed by
sender per center more thank you
dude come on
seriously you're going to drive
up in your car it's a man can I
get some of this and you're
windows.
That took years to ahead and I
think everyone in this chamber
in this building in a tens of
dozens of people listening
Weeds store and you're like come
on guys to school get some weed
and you have no interaction with
order something you have no way
as a clerk of business owner to
judge the impairment of that
person nothing in this amendment
would stop these companies in
these businesses from doing curb
so they could still do it
without forced a person to get
now you could have special
parking but you're still having
that interaction that is
critical between the clerk and
the other person.
Is this person not going to just
continue to drive in hurt
someone all these arguments and
I know the lobbyist got we got
the lobbyist attention in their
practice and it's not a person
in this chamber that thinks it's
a good idea to have liquor
driver point of.
It is not a good idea to be able
go inside so we know they're not
stoned urge wrong and going to
be on the road and endanger our
families.
That is just common sense mister
president
related to the policy itself as
to whether drive up windows are
are a good idea or a bad idea I
will just point out you know the
fact that it's been stated
multiple times it was stated in
judiciary the other day this is
the agency's bill.
and it's it's centrally our name
that that goes on and and we're
representing it as a good idea.
If we need to make adjustments
to it the agency that's a
separate branch of government
we seem fit that that's our
prerogative and and in no
disrespect to the sponsor of the
legislation I just heard a few
times and it does
an agency brings an idea at the
end of the day we have final say
as to to what we want to do and
when you open up a piece of
legislation relating to canada's
it opens it wide open and so we
has taken this position of that
position it's our job to tell
them what to do in in regard to
regulation
the senate judiciary committee
to meet and put an amendment on
to then just strip it off on the
floor
I the only times I can recall is
when there was an issue found
committees you know it have a
lot more free time if if we
didn't have to go to committee
and and really get ant deep into
the weeds especially in the
judiciary committee where we're
talking about the legal issues
with
come to the floor because we
have the votes to then undo the
work of committees now with
regard to to drive up windows
you know I I think it's
interesting that we have an
to get their act together and do
something as senator more said
nothing prevents curb side and
and I actually had an amendment
to try to meet in the middle
because we've all been to
and and I wish I had the the
type of self control that he has
but most of us go to mcdonald's
go to the drive up window and
then we all get sent off to one
There's going to be that
interaction of face to face
you're not going to have
nineteen year old kids with
their fake id freshly printed
there's this argument of the sky
is falling people are going to
have access to canabas it's just
not true and it really doesn't
get rid of the idea that concept
of the drive through just make
I threat to themselves just
things that that as a canaba's
business I would hope that would
take serious and ensure that
they're not selling canabas to
these individuals
this late new game thank you
mister president thank you
senator pardon where center
survivors follow my senator
canada him then several masters
center servantus
present miss president so the
debate asking for statistics in
date i've got lots of it so i'm
going to share it with you I I
did a little more than my
colleague I didn't rely on the
one person who came to judiciary
said that that he supported the
statistical studies from the new
mexico department of
transportation traffic crash
annual report from twenty twenty
one we have the data and then I
look forward to sharing it with
all of you
Are you serious about this
center you'd agree with me
wouldn't show that we legalize
Well miss president center
you'll be glad to know that I
voted for two legalized
marijuana for medicinal purposes
in two thousand seven and
senator saying where you agree
that we legalize marijuana for
So fourteen years we had
medicinal marijuana before we
had legalized recreational
Fourteen years they were able to
access it
buy it use it for medicine
medicinal purposes but not drive
through fourteen years
fallacious and it's an appeal to
emotion it's an easy appeal to
emotion to say that sick people
need access to this but but six
people sick people and who rely
on upon this for medical
available through drive through
windows for those fourteen years
so
when we hear the argument that
that this is for patient and
medicine and treatment.
be true if you you'll isn't it
true that an individual who
wishes to have purchased
marijuana for medical purposes
can have it delivered to their
home
at miss president and center not
true for everybody depends where
you're at.
people in rural areas who don't
have access to delivery services
not to mention the costs
involved in that.
And I appreciate the distinction
looking at for the folks in
those real parts of the state
I agree with that mispresent we
should also acknowledge the cost
involved in that and not
everyone has disposable cash
extra that they choose to spend
that way.
new mexico department of
transportation on traffic crash
statistics.
But understand where we agree
with me that according to that
Is greater for under the
influence of drugs greater than
the influence of alcohol.
Mr president center I have not
seen that data and even then I
distinction that DO t does not
do so in fact what deal to you
actually does is when there is a
fatality that involves both
alcohol and drugs they count the
reported by any dot by their
numbers but according to in m DO
t
they most and i'm using their
words most prevalent
The other information that I
think will be important to
members in considering this
issue
is that the number of drug
involved crashes
highest level in five years
I don't think we can ignore
them.
The highest level of drug
related fatalities.
In the last year of statistical
data in five years.
According to table seventy three
of the mdot studies drug related
crash is involving fatalities in
twenty twenty one twenty five
point six percent.
many of you heard the story i'll
ask my college girlfriend to a
dwi driver.
I lost my law partner.
Two were dbi driver head on.
address it aggressively new
mexico continues to rate among
the worst in the country for
driver fatalities and alcohol
driver fatalities and we have to
ask ourselves yes I hear my
questions in new mexico and
alcohol we have a presumptive
level of impairment I think
we're all familiar with it.
Point zero eight believe it's
level for impairment for driving
under the influence of marijuana
mister president senator no
idea.
Well and I understand why you
have no idea center because
there is none
we haven't bothered to enact any
with I think most of us are that
there's equipment that can be
used in the field to test an
individual who's pulled over in
driving the test their breath
and determined the level of
influence of marijuana you know
mister president center I had
heard a few years ago when we
were debating this that there
was emerging technologies to
test for that and so I cannot
speak to it
there any standard is there any
procedures and processes we're
using to enforce laws against
driving while high on canada
of of testing center servant and
thank you center steinboard in
center duty for answering the
question I was my understanding
so let's be honest with the
citizens of new mexico
when it comes to alcohol we have
When it comes to alcohol we have
equipment is available in the
field back at the station to
test an individual to determine
whether they're impaired by
alcohol when it comes to
marijuana.
Some of the people that i've
been with in over the years have
fought most aggressively against
cigarette smoking cigarette
machines cigarettes to underage
minors some of the people most
Our canous laws against any
suggestion that we can do more
to make people safe.
The.
These are the same people that
Where does the hypocrisy come
from.
Where does the duplicity come
from I understand the
distinction that my members will
But they both.
Create the potential for putting
very dangerous people on our
roads.
To make a few more bucks.
To get a more tax revenue.
Is the tax revenue is the sales
From somebody under the
influence of marijuana will we
accept responsibility for that.
When we find out that person
bought their mirror one from a
driver through.
Thank you for the response to
the minimum.
Thank you we do have further
debate were still unflooring
member number two and I yield to
senator could I him film
followed by senator masters
robust debate on an amendment so
think it's been really
interesting i'm looking at this
amendment more in terms of
accessibility than improving
pharmacies have drive up windows
and
several prescriptions can also
impair driving
accessibility certainly i'm
framing at around accessibility
for people with disabilities
being able to
my son has been in a wilter for
twenty four years and many
members are many people in their
community if you've never had to
load an unload will cherry
access to people who have
limited mobility who use
will chairs are walkers to get
up pharmacy and although
when my son went to.
High school I remember talking
to school psychologist about the
curriculum and trying to figure
the d level classroom demo with
the most intensive support in
his mind if you were in a will
sure you went to the d level
because for decades that was the
the norm doesn't mean that we
can't look at barriers to access
I do stand and support of the
amendment thank you mister
president thank you we do have
further debate center my estus
thank you mister president will
the.
the previous summer speaker
because I was just thinking of
myself I you know people drive
through or mister president
through a drive through at cbs
or waggling
mister president you asked
people can I do get prescribed
prescriptions to attective and
town would would allow that but
these are businesses that
already exist these are
businesses that already exist in
and in an invested and did
whatever they needed to do to
second or third legislature that
legalized canabas and the other
you know twelve or fourteen
states it was done by the ballot
so art legislative legislation
the stay level would not do
zoning laws regarding retail
cannibates that it would be
based on time place and manner
of that local town or local
county now granted they up to
if there's some cities or towns
that have allowed it
I don't think any town thus far
who hasn't allowed it would
allow it but the ones who have
have.
The that had in the towns that
i've dried through we priced at
change it up here thank you.
Thank you center masters we have
sent the pinto.
about substances that alter or
in can hinder or even hurt
people in the especially when we
talk about fatalities.
What did we learn
And I was probably one of the
few that voted against legal and
legalization because I don't
data people aren't going to
collect the data and listen
spending.
There has to be some kind of
foundation established and we
don't want to ear mark the money
didn't do it nobody wanted to to
air market for that and so now
we're here trying to fix it and
they hear some time some of the
legislation that comes through
many many years many many
sessions that it should have
been addressed.
I would like to think as a
legislator that I will learn my
I wish I didn't have the ability
to put the breaks on this along
with it for it came out just so
that a lot of this could have
been addressed but here we are
today.
responsible gun owner the
responsible drinker the
responsible canabas.
capital so that they can have a
place to address and have these
programs put in there in these
local communities.
That foundation is not there we
They're still going to create
that market we think this is
just one substance now but we
didn't really address a
foundation for all our people to
But when they decide day needs
something to grasp to change
their life I hope it is
available that's what i'm trying
to address.
But here we are.
Thank you mister president.
Seen and center style warning
clothes on the floor amendment
thank you mister president
colleagues and thank you for the
good discussion
we want to make her decision
through in the two years since
we've legalized can of us this
bill is being done to improve
things based pon experience if
there were problems with this we
would hear about it and I
promise you I would glandly
than you know what's going to
put a few more bucks in
someone's pocket and on that no
colleagues also want to show you
I don't know that i've ever
gotten a donation from the
candidates industry you may find
mister president colleagues I
don't know if any of you have
ever known a cancer patient.
The benefited for medical
marijuana personally.
Let me tell you calls it is
who are benefited greatly
affected former calling bars on
the legislature people dealing
with htsd.
Canada is medicine for many many
people.
with all the respect says maybe
you don't know someone with it's
been in a wheelchair someone
with anxiety someone who's
suffering from cancer who had
rather used that drive through
that have to go into a store
to deal with a store manager
than you know young college
worker bringing it out to your
curb and I would argue you can
get a lot more context looking
into the car and everybody's in
but really colleagues think
about the eighty three thousand
medical canabas users in the
state think about the facts and
and think about these more
businesses that you will be
putting out of business if you
move that senate amendment for
amendment number two to send it
to just sure community subsidies
until six two now pass and ask
for a roll call but.
Senator barka centre barco votes
know senator brant.
compose send you campus votes
yes center servant center
servant is about snow center due
high.
Center do hagge both snow.
Sent a guy off.
Center handling.
Send you hammond boats yes
center hampile sent your
handpail votes yes center hickey
center lopes votes yes center my
estes center my estimates votes
yes center cution.
Sentiment catch in boats no
sentence kenner.
Send you available cs internet
center nibert votes no central
nail central nail votes cs
pento centre planto boats yes
center period.
Center per dollar snow center
pope center power boat cs centre
committees votes no centre city
a lot best yes it's interested
in optus votes yes center share
center share boats knows center
shandow center shandow votes
steinbern votes yes center
stewart.
Center stewart boat cs center
than in
center charm and bolts no center
worth.
Yeah.
affirmative twenty the negative
center floor amendment number
two as passed the senate centers
i'm worn
thank you mister president thank
you colleagues we do have
another floor amendment
Yeah.
Senate floor amendment number
Thank you mister president
colleagues are right this is
another good one
get discussion uh mister
mister president colleagues
we've discussed this many of us
here to go when we legalize that
this is an amendment to take ten
percent of the excise tax of
canada's and use it for
substance abuse treatment.
comfortable voting on it was by
partisan we all recognize we
need more substance abuse
treatment in our state new
mexico leads the nation in a lot
says that we're going to find
substance abuse treatment in
this state in good times and in
that
that's all the uh the amendment
does mister president colleagues
and of course you know using on
the medicaid population that six
million with the leverage would
medicaid and generate millions
more for treatment this will
help us generate new treatment
support for more substance to be
as treatment funding
this amendment will do it you
know we almost did this I had
amendment prepared we pass
legalization last time mister
funds but will deal with it next
year
well we didn't deal with it next
year we haven't dealt with it
the next year and I have to tell
president college every time I
see a number about our candidate
sales in the state it pains me
it pains me because we had an
opportunity to be getting a
percentage of that for treatment
be a really great step forward
in helping treat semi new mexico
one and in mexico's toughest
problems in that's addiction and
death so without this president
I stand for questions thank you
when I started on the spill I
kind of laid out what the aims
of the spell was this amendment
I I
my understand is a as much as
this will irk send you a pertal
thank you senators ready to be
an incentive man number three
we'll start with senator minors.
operation in our under this.
That to the amendments fancy
amendment sponsored s they said
the amendments mister president
money is is earmarked for
specific line items silo i.
If I can also answer this
because this is important I
spoke with the behavioral health
including workforce training
support of housing so i'm aware
we appropriate a lot but it's
not necessarily in apple and
orange appropriation that
are my question was how much
general phone money have we put
into or ld for operation of the
marijuana portion center thank
three point five in general fund
to make that operation go they
collect that back in fees right
does it come back to the general
health issues across the board
we're spending one point one
billion dollars inside the
collaborative and so that's a
lot of money in in so I I don't
understand why the collaborative
please keep the volume down to
minimum so that we may be able
to hear the debate center
steinward thank you mister
president you know I I just know
I I did like on the last
amendment I did the research I
Mister president center on my
sheet in the behavior health
issues thirty five lines are
roughly about drug in drug court
court young adult drug court
adult court terrill county
juvenile dot drug court and so I
one point seven billion
covering this
and how much would this
generate.
Mr president center I create if
we were if we were appropriating
for lots of different um reasons
that drug court is not a
substance abuse in patient
treatment program a crisis heart
line is not an impatient drug
to a billion dollars our excise
tax is about twelve percent of
the of
that's the excise tax on canada
of which we will be taking ten
percent so if you look at that
up a percentage point every year
that dollar amounts also going
to grow
so that's how much we're
generating but once you spend
that on a medicaid population as
you know mister chairman we will
we can see what actually costs
to operate the.
Medical are maryland agency in
st will the sponsor of the bill
yield.
Mr president center i'll ask
unanimous consent to bring in my
experience who are robert sacks
who is a general council for
care of us control division and
senator hick so there's the
anatomist request to allow the
extra witnesses into the chamber
yes you don't miss seeing no
objection sergeant in our zero
please bring in our expert
they thank you send someone else
I was doing that for the good
senator crossile from me since I
love mine in my office.
Thank you many of the center by
the
phone have we put in to operate
this program over the years.
fund and the total costs is
around six million mister
president in good center how
much general thunder we're gonna
have to put in this program for
this year.
Mr president senator a little
more than that but there is also
anticipated increased costs are
for increase in regulation
mister president center this
this program is not on its own
millions and millions of dollars
and now it's going to be
dependent on general phone as it
grows us so we call it and so at
some point we're gonna have to
clip the bud and we're going to
target excess money to be ever
health I don't think there's a
problem that we can't subsidize
a program with general phone and
then come back and see whatever
they generate we're going to
and so so that they grew up to
be a big bud one day and so
they're not depend on
the general fund to do that but
I think that
now and they have the ability to
do that as they're growing to
get off general phone operate
within their own limits because
I think almost everything else
operate with revenue from fees
and so
I don't think that is we had
down this path if you want to do
it once they're a full grown
Thank you center center where
we do have further debate we're
on center floor member number
three and I also send hickey on
the amendment.
this is more under of an
observation mister president uh
then it is a one way or the
other um
really pulled together a plan of
dealing with addiction in the
state that's comprehensive
coherent
attachment after a program after
program with attachment in it
as i've said before the way to
sobrie is in a personal
for rtc's and we don't have
enough residential treatment
centers so I just I want to
respress my concern that we
uh III think the intent is there
and if I knew we had a program
and that it was a matter of
getting it funded if it was
going to the rtc's sober living
people in the r t c's what we
needed to pay so we could get
him staffed let alone put
together i'd i'd be a very
enthusiastic about it but I
just.
I want to use this opportunity
and time and then it's a recycle
in another expense in spending
more money on behavior or health
so I don't know if for this year
you'd consider maybe a a pass on
literally takes care of people
for the required eighteen months
minimum thank you mister
senator.
Thank you sir hitting
the amendment yield mister
president ideal senator to him
mister president sender i'm i'm
just wondering have you talked
to a secretary designate or me
administer this mister president
I think our direct words were a
few appropriate the money we
will spend it.
And mr president yes um she also
That's I have mispresent thank
you we do have further debate
we're on send a floor amendment
number three l center my s is
followed by centers the other
consider my thank you mister
and but getting back to the
theme I spoke about earlier
today mister president is that
we we used to in order to
because we wouldn't have any
that or put a fee on that to
fund this and and it got to out
of control we did a bill last
year to do away with all those
all those fees that we attached
as much if we're going to get
into evidence based budgeting
particularly as it relates to
behavioral health
substance abuse treatment things
tax taxation was that all it all
went into the general fund and
then we have money in the
general fund to to program so I
think we're all an agreement
these programs should exist I
think as as mentioned by the
president thank you center
masters we have senators to the
ill offers thank you mister
president with the sponsor of
the amendment yield president
that correct mister president
center yes that's correct so the
legislature would not
appropriate appropriate it or
review it is that correct.
it would be going to be and
probably would be reflected in
our budget we would
in probably what they call other
funds in the budget but we would
working on the alcohol homes um
alleviation fund by raising the
tax and when the things I was
told was that if we if we went
process would not be the same
has if we um administered it you
know through an appropriation
and so
you know I was told that and I I
thing for the legacy fund for
environmental programs we
dedicate we created a fund and
we said x amount of dollars from
this we're talking about six
million dollars a year
and the reality as it comes to
budgeting uh mister president
senator is that knowing that you
have six million dollars there
that they're getting that direct
revenue stream so but what it
does is it does do a committed
revenue stream for these
programs and just like it was
right for the environment and it
because with the alcohol harms
alleviation act that's our goal
is to create a fund that would
could not be easily rated by the
legislature as we experience
oil and gas
so I
I think I support this because
well I have one more question
how much is equal to ten percent
of the network net receives a
canada sales over the two years
it's been legal so ten percent
of that would be
a hundred million dollars and
then six percent
would be
in a roughly point five million
year.
So
then that's what we would have
had finally years so that would
have been ten million over the
last couple of years correct
correct ten percent of the tax
created mister president senator
probably not and you know but to
answer senator hickies question
about having a plan you all may
now and this is the problem we
we'll do it next year times all
always be good so what happens
we don't find it and then times
will not be good and we already
know that that's where we're
headed and then we will have
never done it
was going to say I apologize
mister president center is last
session because we haven't had a
good plan I find it out of my
junior money working with the
department human services a
potentially this amendment if we
pass it is we're creating a
revenue stream to help support
that work and then we'll be able
to calibrate if it's too much
for too little thank you mister
president and what did the did
Oh that's that's too bad well I
think i'm leaning towards
supporting this um because we
definitely know that our
state on so many of our social
problems until we get a handle
on both alcohol misuse and
substance used to sort of
treatment but I will listen to
the debate the further debate
and I appreciate you bringing
The.
We do senator doing i'll come
back to you for a second time
senator tommin.
five reasons for not supporting
this number one
lsc had a recent report that
showed even though we're
throwing millions of dollars at
this problem we're not making
City in the alba cookie and the
county apparently
i'm not working together they're
working across purposes you
The number five if I had some
insurance that this money was
going to be spent wisely I would
be the first one to support it
are debate in center floor
member number three.
Senator doing for a second time
thank you mister president
said that she is neutral on it
but the adding funding can
create other issues such as that
we might not have the work force
to spend the money thank you
mister president thank you
center to do
about substance abuse in the
state we talk a lot about the
death rate from substance use
this and opportunity to air mark
lot of funds just like we've
been doing on the environment
money away from the little bad
from growing up to be at all
grown robust plant
this is from the general fund
and from a lot of general money
services department to get going
with that plan to stand up more
addiction treatment services in
this state try to move the
needle on this issue we haven't
been able to move the needle on
this holding us back as a state
substance and a bill sex
has twice a minute and I asked
for a shill of hands
thank you send us a rare vote in
a cent of florida member number
senator birth volume now
senator garages.
Modino.
Senator sanchez body now.
Senators about this money now.
center by the evolving now send
a share body now
senator greeks voting now send a
neighbor now said i'm a kitchen
body now center or neal boning
now.
Senator tomman voting now.
Senator shandow vodino.
Senator gonzalez.
Buyer would have eighteen
discussion on this one go away
as he is either and thank you
for the discussion as president
center minus explain as well
thank you mister president that
ceiling or growing to bud one
day and we'll be able to
send it floor amendment number
for to senate judiciary
committee substitute first
senate bell six as amended
amendment sponsored by senator
jeff steinboard.
have a robust opportunity and
senate finance and so there's
number of issues this one is on
behalf of constituents for mine
and I so I would move sent a
floor amendment number four for
amendment and it simply says
that a local jurisdiction should
not allow a canada establishment
produce manufacturer store test
research or sell candidates
inside a residential subdivision
a fair approach to allowing
local governments to designate
zoning I want to tell you and
they're probably watching i've
got constituents that actually
had a developer take residential
part of it is an open air uh
grow um
and they were shocked horrified
the county bill didn't quite
quite handle it right they were
protect other citizens saying
that in their neighborhood at
least that they've bought a home
and that they've at least had
that level of certainty in a
planned plattered zone you know
not necessarily down the street
or the commercial court or going
into it but in the lots that
they cannot be used and
converted to two candidates
finished time born centers were
debate in senate florida maybe
number four now yield to the
sponsor center to him thank you
mister president the this is
opposite approach about local
control that the the drive
through amendment dead so if
there's a little inconsistency
there
the amendment sponsored yield
mister president I do you.
And where I read your amendment
marijuana individual that's
allowed to grow twenty plants or
so whatever that number is
uh he can still grow in
may grow this is just for a uh
canada's establishment.
In and is it just the fact
mister president and senator
than the fact it's a commercial
enterprise in a residential
areas that the reason mister
mister president now it's just
but it's just you know other
aspects of the operation that
they did not when they bought
into that neighborhood they did
not buy into
not aesthetically pleasing I
think they put up a channeling
fence I still don't think it's
landscape very nice this is
actually in a very nice
neighborhood with really nice
that's their concerns and what
i'm carrying forward today so
much president in senator you're
you're the home owner's
association wished president and
senator wow mr president senator
it could be but here's a
situation where the developer
himself actually was the one who
deal there to count exemptives
action from being considered
unlawful in his subdivision I
guess at what you're saying it
home owner so association in
this way
yes mister president
senator that's correct.
Okay good thank you.
center period.
Thank you mister president and I
know that I need to sponsor to
yield quite yet but
there was an opportunity that I
had in in the city of al magordo
hardly but I went to check its
own and it was owned or won as
it turns out in alabama gordon
i'm going to imagine a lot of
expected but I imagine if it's
owned for farming you could grow
a variety of things quite
passionably can including
candidate
that part of the world now
miss president in in the you
know the amendment you know is
trying to try and to get at uh
on the safe center steinborn is
in agreement without.
Well present center it's not so
much that I adjack to a canaba's
subdivided lots that are were
intended for homes that that
would not be changed and you
know that that be protected that
they were promised when they
but most most counties have I
mean they they designate
properties agricultural
residential but they they're not
john that way uh showing an
growing of anything uh then more
likely an individual can do that
and I would you know we've got
we've got attorneys in the room
that could probably dress a
what you see a crash counties in
new mexico as you see a variety
of things done
adjacent to
residential property's
trying to do and I don't know
that the that he gets there but
uh mispresident chair I I
appreciate from where you're
and it it creates a real
challenge for them but
mispresident i'm not sure.
I'm not sure we got to write
answer here but i'm an elition
to debate and see where we go
to senator center per
thinking mispresent the sponsor
the minute please you'll stand
the ill center per
thank you mister president i've
in here with this prevent drive
up windows at these
establishments within residences
and really calls a lack of
access to people so they could
just walk across the street
to one of these establishments.
if it's with a prevent that as
long as well as other
establishments being on one of
those plattered lots center
period thing as present as long
as this is gonna you know block
sponsor of the amendment is the
presentative
mister president looking at the
areas zoned residential.
Centers mr president senator
know um
communities develop rural land
turns in urban land things
change so we very deliberately
use the word subdivision here to
delaneate that this is something
it that may be zoned residential
but that zoning may change over
time and I don't find that
objectionable as things urbanize
that tends to happen but this is
lots that were designated means
at any point in time that they
were designated
to be residential they would be
Mr president senator yeah I mean
that word were certainly could
be are and might be might be
make that change mister
president
mr president and
center is time on the
the idea that we're looking at
the idea of a residential
subdivision
seems to me to be one of more
were uh talked about lowering
agriculture it seems to me that
uh for instructions to most
communities in our state there
zoning that would allow
commercial industrial other uses
for this purpose so with that
mister
For a second time we'll go to
center due hick we are debating
senate floor amendment number
four center death thank you
mister president so i'll know
to the extent that there is the
local government as a county and
the
the land area that they are
dealing with is
language here and the amendment
where we say a local
jurisdiction which i'll not
completely prohibit the
operation of licensing
thank you center to hang
close and senate floor amendment
number four.
Thank you mister president cell
colleagues
just we get it in a proper form
and I will be bringing it back
if I can't withdraw the
amendment right now mister
president and then bring it back
slightly altered so they can as
president.
the reader to read the
amendment.
sponsored by senator gerald or
disipino senator articipated the
move and extremely amendment
mister president members of the
senate bill six as twice amended
be brought before the body I
moved the adoption of that
amendment thank you center city
no objections senator disappear
bill that we passed
making it legal to
to do recreational canabas was
was excised this was dropped
from the bill
I think it's an important
measure to have
because since we passed the
invested considerable amounts of
money getting into the business
have found that
that they are all struggling to
survive financially
and whereas in a totally lays a
fair world.
We would let him just go belly
up
encouraging small farmers to get
into this field they could grow
up to two hundred plants we we
encourage of small business
people to go ahead and open a
dispensery
oklahoma all seen this
incredible surplus of canaba's
produced more than can be
consumed in new mexico more than
market is becoming sold
because they can't sell it
through the stories it's being
sold elsewhere
this is I think a way to control
new licenses for the production
or sale to make sure that we
don't have the problem of
oversupply
that's driving some of the small
disappearance we are domaining
center part member number five
and I yield to the sponsor
center due thank you mister
president this is an unfriendly
amendment a lot of what this
bill is trying to do is to
different landscape but this is
unfriendly because the this
isn't a workable approach this
was the initial language that
was in.
it's not a good approach we had
a lot of discussion mr president
about the concept of a pause
over the interim and one of the
determinations that we came to
this one is not going to solve
the problem that we absolutely
have a flooded market there is
no question that mister mister
president but licenses are for
both retail and production
smatching up lots of new
licenses that's not not the
problem that we're dealing with
right now
planning story short mister
president it's an unfriendly
support of this amendment uhm in
mostly just because every common
sense approach that was provided
during judiciary to deal with
and then in the other hand we
don't want new mexico canabas to
fill the gap so as long as we
want oklahoma canada's to be
forty percent thirty percent of
put
businesses in a position where
they buy this stuff from
oklahoma so I think this is a
huge issue
and and I feel.
candidates is grown within new
mexico and that we aren't
dependent on canada's from other
states because if we were
producing enough candidates here
have have legalized in a way
that I thought we should have
done originally here which is a
little bit more of a free market
approach and and the proof is in
the putting that it's it's
definitely working better for
them than it is here thank you
i've seen this approach before
and the thing that there's
different places different
to determine what's right
numbers you know worse
and northern mexico that are
then placed us maybe the horses
are now
right size that number take that
number down to where we need to
shifter I think that today and
good idea supply side management
thank you mister president thank
you central as we are still
debate in center florida number
five and a year to center more.
thirty percent of at least
thirty percent of the weed
marijuana part and the mexico is
coming in from oklahoma and
our markets forty percent of new
york market they're able to
produce that for less and didn't
add shipping cast to it and
everything else enables supply
big fan of this industry but
it's just tough highlights that
fact that oklahoma is able to
fill in that gap and we need to
be talking about if this bill
was really about helping the
mexico small businesses in
at he were or failing these new
mask or small businesses because
we're over taxing him over
regulated in oklahoma's kick in
our tail with the added cost of
a legally shipping it in
enable dominate these markets
thank you mister president thank
you center more
we are still debating sent a for
amendment or five any members
which need to be
I would I would note one thing
uh in
in july the interim health and
human services committee held
the meeting and farmington one
before she left and the issue of
what was going on with canada
came up and she made the point
that this would have been a very
valuable power for her
factor I didn't realize that in
the version that finally passed
it had been dropped
and so I asked her point blank I
said should we put it back in
just let whatever other
factors we've built into this
bill take care of it but it's
clearly a situation where some
of my constituents have come to
producing and we're not able to
to adequately deal with the
situation and some of the
businesses are really struggling
it's a very expensive business
to get into in the first place
really are up against the wall
so I think this would be a way
for the department to use to
make sure that this industry
doesn't just collapse or
employed which i'm afraid it's
done in some other states so
bill six as twice amended do now
pass and I would ask for a
show of hands.
Senators two seats we are voting
and senate plan member number
five.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand center to
compose voting now sender do hig
voda now
send a novel voting now send it
or would voting now
send it greg's body now.
senator rodriguez voting now
send her neighborhood voting now
senator steinborn loading now so
there surround this voting now.
Send her hambling voting now
senator gonzalez voting now.
Senator toleman volume now.
The senate being equally divided
we do have a recount.
Yeah.
Biabolite of twenty in the
affirmative twenty one and the
negative senate florida man
president members no no thanks
to you mister
you didn't even get the vote in
this but thank you very much for
an excellent debate on excellent
amendment the reader to read.
Yeah.
amendment sponsored by senator
perl.
The center per move and extend
the moment move senate floor
you mister president if you go
to page twenty seven it's under
the section of the bill where it
discusses what actions
something they shouldn't have a
license but then there's this
catch all paragraph online
fourteen on page twenty seven
that essentially says any
candidates control division with
any governmental action now I
would hope that they wouldn't
take somebody's licence if they
had a speeding ticket or
something along those lines but
comes up in the future that they
hadn't thought of but I think
there's a way to clean it up and
ensure that we're not going to
have a lot of frivolous cases
coming before courts because the
reality is a lot of these
court so I don't think this is a
language that we need to get in
the habit of this catch all we
we specify everything um you
could basically delete
paragraphs one through six and
catch all paragraphs whenever
we're dealing with these types
of issues and and really get
down to the specifics.
Thank you senator panel we are
debate in senate floor member
also mister president this has
to be read in conjunction with
the language on page twenty six
where we're talking about
all of these things that are
this language does is insure
that if someone is doing
something that hadn't we there
are bad actor that we don't want
an arm in our market and it
hasn't been explicitly laid out
flexibility to address that
so it is an unfriendly amendment
mister president.
Thank you so is there a debate
sponsor would you.
Mr president I yield.
Set senator woods was that the
sponsor the bill are sponsored
the sponsor of the minimum and
i'm sorry
maybe I miss this a little bit
understand what you're talking
about here i'm sorry I didn't
down over to it could you
explain that just to hear more
to me please sir
from a legal license holder then
I understand that the language
before says substantial action
but again that's up to
interpretation by the candidates
control division and so if they
taken against you they could
essentially take away your
ability to make your living.
Nest president and certain
canada mister president and
senator thank you mister
president in my simple reading
as a non attorney it is any
other governmental action
pending or taken and it doesn't
and for some that's further back
than others and so I I think
that is also concerned.
So mister president in terms so
up so in case that one time or
another it didn't turn it up
then it was turned up later
then it would affect you that
you may be a long time
your past years and years ago it
could affect it so if that's the
case
i'm not in favor of this we we
that that they can change their
ways we believe that we should
give him second chances and it
sounds like to me mister
president and senator this is
number six we have senator I saw
very much for as president
mister president well the
sponsor of the members
yes I you send it
thank you as president mister
list of set that that gets us to
number seven
and these are things
miss president
clearly stays the division may
refuse to issue suspend or
revoke a license.
Of any person who does not meet
the qualifications for license
qualification functions or
duties of the applicants or
licensees business in new
mexico.
Thank you it's all okay so these
are these are things that are
it okay it's all number one
would be a tax lane related to
canada's activity in this or
another state so now although it
says another state though that
would be related though to
of the mill didn't pay your
taxes on your residence and and
this would have to be related
specifically too can of this
activity send her every fair
enough and then and number two
involving fraud deceit or
embezzlement
and so and so I guess a given
them the amount of cash that
The mister president senator
correct and that would be a
felony.
Then I have a state I think very
distributing selling or giving
away illegal canada's products
so again that is directly
related to the can of a sympathy
is that my correct.
the denial suspension
provocation of a canous license
in another state that road would
have the same result if
occurring in the mexico so so
they saw the so with the tag
you in terms of your license is
that how you read that.
Interpretative mispresident
senator drive so I I believe
it's redundant language but yes
that's that's how it reads.
on the in the age of eighteen or
person very age whose victorian
trafficking first labor other
exploitation to produce
manufacturer transport or self
canvas or control substance
trafficking force labor other
exploitation but a specifically
with with regard to caribbeans
for constructive since is that
is that how you read that as
well
in mispressed that's how I read
it.
division refuses to follow
division license requirements
still cooperational rules public
house laws rules rather
provisions of the state law
pretending that canama's
but but then mister president we
get down to number seven and
this is the one that is it's
it's it's it's my understand
that you want to strike here
which is any other governmental
action pending are taken against
any other governmental action
pending or taken against an
applicant.
negative governmental action
so I it doesn't even have to be
a punishment.
Send you very sold on.
simply pending as well and and
it's strictly in the division
determination and we don't know
what that determination is in
advance mister president seven
five ten fifteen years from now
and we really don't know how
this is going to be interpreted
used
are they going to use this
like for for other reasons and
they could essentially use this
as a whole card to put people
out of business who really
haven't done anything under one
through six which I think we
would all agree mister president
that the division has to be
consistent between different
applicants in terms of this
paragraph.
Senator every sort of.
I see so another as mister
distilling say beyond the amount
that we're supposed to distell
or or something some tactical
violation
they could
they could use that as the
president center that's exactly
correct I think at that point it
depend on whose desk at landed
on.
San arabis other okay thank you
very much I I you know I
seen for a second time senator
do you mister president i'll
just say they are III don't
think the discussion that that
just occurred was actually
licensing act applies to all of
this which provides do process
for anyone going through this
through this analysis I and also
Since sender thank you see no
further debate senator per close
any memory.
And thank you mister president
construction or farming or
whatever whatever the the
industry is um how sometimes you
end up with individuals who do
get on a little bit of a power
so essentially we're just
allowing for that to occur and
it's just not necessary this
paragraph is not necessary it
doesn't do anything other than
this industry and so having been
involved in business I know what
that looks like I know what it
feels like whenever people who
get on a little bit of a power
trip
in construction I think it's the
the perfect example I don't know
any of us that that have a
constituent that hasn't come to
us and said i'm trying to do a
business and I cannot get a
those lines that just most of us
would just look at it normal's
blath like this this is what
stopping business in new mexico
this red tape like we have on
paragraph in here that is
essentially a license to steal
and a license to kill business
in new mexico.
But yet it's an agency bill and
we're supposed to ignore it they
six to send a judiciary
committee substitute for senate
bill six is twice amended and
asked for a roll call.
Thank you senator pertal
senators we are voting on senate
senator barca center barker
votes yes center brand.
Center brand boat cs center
brantley.
do high centre do hake boats no.
Center care echoes.
Sender guy goes volties central
gonzales no sender gonzalezboat
him hell votes no center hickey
center hiki boat snow sent
driving certain center i've
thought about cs center armio.
cs sent a mechanian so do a
catch in both cs center mckenna.
No send a mechanic votes no
sinner to morris center morris
voda sentiment yes.
verd boat cs central neil
central nail votes know since
the pino center tissie pena
bought cs interpadia.
pope center pop votes no centre
roddery guess sent a rodriguez
fault snow centre sanchez center
sanchez both cs center cities.
Sender shandow votes now center
souls center sauce votes no
center stephonics centers
definex votes no centers time
Center worth boats no center
words center word votes yes
sentence.
Center minor spots no.
I can't.
happy everybody was here thank
you senator hurdle we do have
another floor amendment
the reader to read.
Center floor amendment number
seven do senate judiciary
community substitute for senate
president I move senate floor
amendment number seven to
senator share committee
substitute for senate bill six
amended twice.
Thank you senator pop seen
we will be reinserting a person
who is a member of the new
mexico senate or their mexico
house of representatives on the
effective data the canada's
regulation actually not apply
we passed the spill got a little
contentious but we passed this
this is what he came along and I
just want to reinsert this back
into the bill I don't know the
history I don't know how it was
to send her to him mister
president we are neutral.
Senators where debate incentive
floor amendment number seven
anyone wishing to debate
mister president yes so if the
department is neutral on the
bill
on the amendment and the
from there was in the department
they wanted it
saturday mister president
senator no this was an amendment
that was done in senator deciary
loppers and sender per centers
they love is.
Mr president that that answered
one of my questions as this was
an amendment and judiciary I
stand and supported the
legislators end up taking
advantage of um it just makes
all of us look not like this
public service oriented people
that I believe that we are but
has a as a public body has a
legislative body so I stand in
support of restoring this
language um
like I said I remember that
it's not a good look it is not a
look good luck so I stand
strongly in support of this
amendment thank you center city
I love is where center in up is
followed by center pertal center
ingle proposed the amendment on
the floor and it's only a couple
more years mister president we
could just let it stand and let
it kind of gradually just
disappear it's only in twenty
but you know I I just find it
interesting that we're gonna
single out people who would want
to open a business to employ
people but yet there's members
and they can work in the canabas
industry pass laws carry laws do
all of these things but we're
not going to to tackle those
is what I mentioned
then so I think it's a very
interesting line to draw on the
sand
farmers and and I think it's
it's it's a very slippery slope
mister president whenever we
single out essentially
to be careful and and I think it
would be very disingenuous of
some to support this while at
the same time making money in
the same area thank you mister
president.
Thank you center pardon we have
legislators allowed to own a
license to sell alcohol the
saving of mexico
mister president senator I I
believe they they are able to do
that.
are mister prison saying it was
to present center pope our
legislators lot to be teachers
and how a license to teach in
the state in mexico yes they are
mister president.
in the state of mexico yes they
are.
I can your name as single
profession
senator pope outside of this
can take you know maybe serving
in the federal government I know
I can't go back and work in a
civil service you know as a
federal employee
due to practice any being for
that we we'd license everything
from hygiene to danish three to
everything else all the things
Not that you know of it because
there aren't any so for some
reason this bill was passed I
remember the reason and I
and this is the only area a
legal area and I posted this in
legal area but is the legal
profession and stated new
mexico.
dangerous precedents because we
mister president center repope
can then start adding all of the
professions I just talked about
we can say doctors cannot
hijanistic we've had dentist
here we have a lot of lawyers
here we could go through and all
those things that we have
regulate.
This body in the governor and as
a state decided this was a legal
enterprise.
there is absolutely no reason to
then say legislators cannot
participate in this one it's
become legal
there's no reason unless it's a
different than everything else
we regularly but by saying
legislators cannot do it we're
setting a huge huge precedent
that you can start seeing
everything else that we do.
consider that economic
opportunity
for a legal product in the state
in the mexico to be excluded is
sends a horrible horrible
to remove this and i'm glad I
did and I don't plan to ever
take advantage of it but we
should not penalize legislatory
or citizen let.
uh information we have senator
worth followed by senator
masters senator schmedies then
sander pinto sent worth thank
you mister president I also
with this language in here it
also means that no one who is in
the canada's business could ever
run for the legislature it works
both ways so you've got work we
be quite frankly helpful to have
someone on this floor who had
the experience and certainly
this debate might be a little
different if we had that so i'm
going to a policy amendment as
now he cares a tremendous amount
about perception of this body to
the public but I instantly
believe bringing bringing
something like this forward
end prohibition on a worst
policy decision to this country
over made
to end prohibition took eighty
years
here and here in the most good
took fourteen years from the
industry never came up until the
last moment of the last day will
of the bill on this floor I
voted to concur mister president
so I voted I suppose for this
language.
implies something that's not
true the folks are in this in
this room yourself serving
the you could put a provision
like this mister president on
bill to do are we prohibited
from pursing alcohol till noon
on sundays because we voted for
it stuff like that so anyway I
am I appreciate where the
gentleman is coming from it
that thank you we do have
further debate we have senator
meetings
thank you mister president with
the amendment sponsor yield
please
yield mister president thank you
is it not june twenty ninth
twenty twenty one.
Mr president that is my
understanding thank you so miss
president just a clear things up
for the body is want to make
So it's not going to prevent it
in my understanding it's not
going to prevent anyone from
running for future office would
you agree with me center.
say I I think the difference you
know people are saying this is
going to set a dangerous
precedent.
You know the only president that
I see is if we are creating a a
valid argument because to make
an analogy here you have to pick
an industry that was illegal and
we're making it legal we have to
right as big andre agassi family
images everything ads back in
the eighties mister president
all if you remember those uhm
but this is and I I think it's
about the integrity of the
illegal operation legal and we
didn't want to say hey we're
going to legalize and create an
entire new industry and we want
to be part of it we're going to
say kind of like if you so if
clocks in iran listen to you we
can just wait two years the
effective day was three years
ago right ish two and a half
years ago so let's just let's
just adopt this amendment I I
Thank you mister president and I
don't need to sponsor to yield
but being one of the few that
didn't support the industrial
bought it for this amendment to
be put on because if that was
one of the issues that does that
carried that boat through
this was going to eliminate that
really what's the justification
because we aren't really that
comparison to his isn't I don't
think it is valid especially
when we talk about the integrity
and even when we talk about
in some sense
put a lot of money in to
get smoothing the legislators at
that time that isa I was not a
so that's my integrity that's my
ethics and I think one of the
things that should have been too
when we looked back is those
that should really recuse
personally thank you mister
president and you send it a
pinto.
See no further debate on the
amendment center pope the calls
and send a floor member number
living are going into an
industry.
And you're right this is a
president that has been set that
doesn't happen a lot.
But the reason it was set.
There were concerns on who would
be working in this industry and
would there be conflicts of
interest.
disagree with my colleagues and
what was said here I I believe
from reading this that folks
that are in the industry now can
run.
When when we hit twenty twenty
six folks can get in the
industry.
And so I just don't think
there's a rush.
So let's just stick to what we
passed.
Without mr president
I moved at senate floor member
number seven for senate
judiciary committee substitute
for senate bill six amended
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand
i'm sorry the clerk to call the
rule
senator barcar centre back a
vote snow center brand.
compos votes no center servant
centered savantes votes no
centre do hick.
Centre do haggle cs center guy
hose.
Center handling center handling
boats yes center him pile sent
you him pale votes no centre
hate.
Center lobbismosis sent to my
estes no center my estimates
votes know central medication
sent a mechanian boat snow
Said you're in yours pass centre
in av
centre vinnia nevel votes no
center niber sooner nibert votes
know centro now
bidee votes know centre pento
center bit pentabout c s
interpertal.
Center per although snow center
pope
interested deal or best yes
center city a lot of sports cs
center share center share votes
know center shandow.
center steinborn center
steinbern boat cs interest door
center stewart boats no center
thomas yes center tom and votes
Send you in yours.
Sender in your spots yes.
Center sanchez.
Yeah.
that we are halfway through the
amendments on the floor
we have another moment the
redicary
this is going back to amendment
to move and explain the
amendment thank you mister
president this is same amendment
we discussed before so we don't
have to go back to it all again
but I will remind you what it is
would prohibit a local
jurisdiction from allowing a
canous establishment to
basically set up shop in an
existing neighborhood that was
approved by a local juror
are but the past terms was very
important as my constituent
reached out and said hey this is
a passed hand situation of when
this is not a jurisdiction
cancelling or prohibiting a
license this is about time place
in manner that we do give local
jurisdictions the opportunity to
location issue saying cannot
exist in a subdivision so
essentially colleagues there was
no change made to the amendment
but i'm glad.
That took the opportunity that
a channeling fence there was
constantinal wire bill to round
this thing so little guantanamo
base suddenly showed up across
centers time where we are
demanding center floor a moment
number four and I yield to the
sponsor center doing
mister president so this still
is going to allow for bring your
done on this and to affect the
intent of the sponsor thank you
senator doing we are debating
senate farm and number foreign
law to sender servant.
is across senders time on deal
that uh miss president aylen and
the answer is correct it was
not.
Yeah in mispresent the
colleagues reason I challenge
and lost cruises back in his day
and the issue here when you deal
with zoning this what that's
what amount is what in the law
reproduce spot zoning which is
sooning I think which is be
taking what would be normally
residential property and
allowing for what would be
considering a greater use or
which is for all my colleagues
who said earlier the importance
of local control was important
on a zoning issue like drive
through the windows
and at same time say well but we
can't allow for local
governments to make zoning
decisions which we historically
always do I i'm not sure the
reason I asked if where there's
use their zoning and i'm i'm
trying to think of any examples
where we impose ourselves at the
state level on that local of
control of a given property take
a residential property and say
zoning and they act in in case
like this with a specific
property they act and what
lawyers will refer to the words
quite crazy judicial.
Role and other was there acting
essentially as a court whereas a
the chance to see this in
judiciary don't fault the senate
right now we can't see
everything and can expect
everybody to bring every
amendment and and I do welcome
the chance to see these on the
Thank you send your servant as.
See no further to me
there's time when it closed
baping we have set the set acts
for alcohol um we chose to not
do it on canada but there are
local jurisdictions doing it
that's what we're doing here
day to find an establishment in
their zone neighborhood in their
actual subdivision across a
street from which is the
situation in my constituent and
we're just saying hey.
have to find themselves in so
with that um
I move that up to an floor
moment number four senator
issuer committee substitute for
popular demand role call thank
you senators.
We are voting and send a floor
amendment number four to send a
judiciary committee substitute
for centimeter six is twice a
sent your brand boat c s center
brantley center brantley both
see as center birth center bert
boat cs center compose said your
centre guy echoes words yes
centre gonzales intergonzales
votes no center gregs.
Center gregs voltis center
center hickey votes yes center I
reserve the.
Santarmeo center mio vote snow
center lopus.
centre michael chin
yes center mechanic no centre
Sentence version centre never
centre an available yes center
neighbor center neighborhood
Centre video votes know center
pento center pinto cs
interpertal.
Sent your part of our cs center
intermittence
center smith's volte has center
city low best pass.
Center city lopus passes center
share center share boats yes
center shandow.
bonus votes know center
steinborn.
Center steinburn boat cs center
stewart center stewart boat snow
No.
Center cidel or best well to
know mr president point of order
will the senator who used to be
the parliamentarian yield
clarification on that that is
correct thank you center morning
senator
the clerk to continue kind role.
twenty one the negative senate
floor remember number four has
failed to pass the senate
center steinborn well mister
president I guess losing that
talking about it through the
session but and take it in my
constituent in the house in the
house we share well thank you
mister president thank you
committee substitute for senate
bill six as amended amendment
sponsored by senator jeff
steinboard
were going to talk about and and
on this particular amendment set
senator by the opposed purpose
during the mispresent we had a
made a clerk we're not going to
hear this amendment or the next
one and you know we are going to
talk about that and I apologize
that and get to you I did talk
to the division about their
The program.
the reader to read
send a floor amendment number
eight to
send a judiciary committee
to send a judiciary committee
substitute for senate bill six
is twice amended no objections
senator to explain his amendment
thank you mister president
essentially all this does is
it was passed was to get small
businesses started and so this
will just help them and ensure
that that are product is coming
from new mexico and not coming
from out of state.
so first of all under the
current plant count limit it is
met true plants at one time so
the current limit of two hundred
raising this to five hundred
means that folks will have two
thousand to twenty five hundred
plants at any one time that is
is an attempt to avoid playing
paying plant fees plant fees on
potentially two thousand to
twenty five hundred plants at a
man mister president nobody
wants to have any funding here
yes it's late
but I I appreciate the sponsor
the bill making the reasoning
their excess can abise on our
market
this would ensure that our local
small micros are able to produce
are struggling to do as well as
other states that have legalized
and so I think this is a nice
step that allows for our small
growers and opportunity to
and two hundred thousand dollars
into a green house and isn't
just growing outdoors so I I
think there's an issue there
saying that's gonna be two
thousand plants or or whatever
it is because of the language
two hundred plants and so this
will just help them be able to
grow more and ensure that
oklahoma is not dumping its
excess into our market with that
I move sent it for a minute
every senator to your seat
if you wish I apologize we'll
have the clerk other all.
center birth center birth votes
know center compos center compos
votes no center savantes center
servant is worth snow center do
center gregs votes no center
hamlin center handling votes
knows center him pill.
Sent your handpale votes no
snow center lopus sent your
locust votes now since my
estimate center my estimates
votes know centre mccatch in.
yoursender many spots yes
internet view
centre never votes no center
neighbor center neighborhood
votes no centre panto center
pendo votes no center pearl.
Centre mervies about cs I mean
Center ride riguous votes know
center sanchez
center sanchezberg c s interest
mideast
center smithies voltsia center
Center souls center sales roads
know center stephanics
interested fine exports know
center steinborn
center worth center worth votes
no center words center words
about cs center branch.
By about a tenth of the
affirmative thirty one and then
they get a senate floor
amendment number eight has
failed to pass the senate center
thank you
thank you
we are back on the bail senators
senator when yours mister
president show the main question
be now put.
That being that the propromotion
that is the proper motion mister
president of the main question
be now put the difference as you
Senator when you ask you still
have the floor
today
whatever you said that's what I
want to do
Senators there's a request if
the main question i'll be put up
all those in favor
questions and now we put senator
when yours a senator but yeah
thank you mister president and I
want to make that help you know
it's consent to excuse enter
main question no other motions
are german.
Just president senator senator
thank you that's correctly was
the unanimous consent.
So we are voting on the bill
the body for the great
discussion today i'm sure this
is not the last time we will be
here working on the candidates
regulation acts but this is a
really good step
twice amended
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the senate that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
Senator birth volume now
senator guy goes forward
center in a cution
center breathley body now
senator greggs voting now center
share body now
send it our neighborhood money
now.
The.
Send an available.
Yeah.
Bible would have twenty five of
the firm and fifteen the
Thank you mister president i'm
not one to say I told you so so
I want.
Thank you.
Senator thank mister president
thinking body.
Seen objection the rediterate.
Mr president i'm directed to
informed the senate that the
house has passed house bill
senate respect lease submitted
lisa and marked his macatin
chief clerk.
The journal show that the
message from the house has been
received
said it was over the third day
the reader to read mr president
your finance committee to whom
has been referred to senate bill
three has had it under
consideration and reports same
else move adoption the community
report centers we have emotion
to adapt the committee senator
share for which purpose to your
mister president so that was a
motion in those emotions are
so this this particular bill
I do not believe has gone
through the proper systems of
things yes that they'll
everybody will point out why it
thirty pages of which say new
material
section one is the title and
that's new material I got that
section three is creating a fund
we spent
precious little time and senate
finance talking about creating
number five its eligibility all
new material again uh section
number six is claims who can
make a claim on this all new
material again even though we
have ways of doing such things
work after you've taken twelve
weeks off all new material
although we have parts of our
law that deal with that as well
section number nine um that's
did not go to senate finance
section number ten and adverse
decision what does that mean
again this includes punishments
section thirteen now there's
only fifteen sections in the
last two were kind of minor so
while this did go through
unaddressed by the judiciary
committee and many of these
are sections actually include
To the motion to adopt the
committee report make a senator
share we do have further debate
i'll go to.
Celebrates.
the sponsorer of the bill is in
issue in the room at the moment
but the uh
the bill is in him i'm sorry
the the issue with the bill to
me is that again if she brings a
brings up the point that thirty
pages are show or brand new
material never never seen by the
if you want this bill to be the
best bill it can be and there
are things in the bill that I
believe the senators pointed out
already I think that uh it would
questions would be addressed I
mean it's an important bill to a
lot of people and I believe it
needs to be the best build it
can be and I believe the only
See no further debate
center share.
we can do that by voice for.
Senator sure you would like to
explain
if you do wish to accept the
flood committee report then you
would say no.
Thank you center share.
committee report others in favor
of significant by saying I
was opposed need
the knees have it
to challenge the ruling of the
chair but in all ten minutes go
I would have done they thank you
senator share
we are still on that order of
business committee reports.
under consideration report
reports same with the
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted senator
george munios chair
thank you mister president is
they were acted on individually
here in our objection.
The senate bill one oh eight do
Senate bill one sixty one
recommendation that it do not
pass but that senate finance
committee substitute for senate
So we have a motion to do report
all those in favor of
significantly saying I thought
is a browse name the eyes have
at the committee port has been
adopted and the journal will
The reader to read
house bill eighty eight
program to distribute funds
appropriate to the department
for statewide and local
firefighter recruitment making
an appropriation house bill
eighty eight
Husband seventy seven introduced
by representatives of dixon and
armstrong and senators woods and
emergency house bill one seventy
seven house bill one seventy
seven having been read twice by
title is referred to the senate
finance committee that's house
bill one seventy seven
senate majority thirty to put a
president now being eleven fifty
nine am and move we adjourn
until twelve o one p m senate
has come to order mister
president will mrperiod
president.
Can I
you're i'm not sure of the
answer that question but let's
just pull it back I didn't mean
to do that interfere with any
plan over there thank you we do
have other members who would
like to to make announcements to
Senators there's a motion
so
send it a share mister president
as a as I point it out before
There's a lot of it in here of
the fifteenth sections
fourteen are all brand new.
One of them is temporary
of justice it talks about a
limitations for grievances the
timeline for filing an
administrative action with the
department alleging violation of
this permission of the bill is
extremely short
however the new mexico human
rights commission allows three
hundred days so thirty or three
hundred which is it
or steamed attorneys have not
about a person that has one or
more employees within the state
but then further our in section
four it states each employer
and take this seriously and even
question comments and semicolons
or to look at the difference
between one and five which I
think is a significant
significant issue
if I have employees in in new
mexico and colorado that total
five is it
which jurisdiction in my end but
who would would look at in short
through and come up with
probably a substitute bill to
address all of these.
Because these are real questions
effects everybody in new mexico
because everybody almost
everybody is either an employee
or an employee
right if we're going to pass it
out of here in soul while I have
tried to be a bit jovial on the
floor today
this to judiciary committee is
the white and traditious move so
without mister president all
support of this this is a huge
issue others ten days eleven
days left in the session as
plenty of time we've seen bills
fly through here and thirty
minutes as senator worth
remembers less than thirty
actually not hurt small
businesses much as it could
happen as it's currently written
to written so this is an
important porn to measure if you
guys are going to pass this bill
sponsor of the motion please
yield senator shared absolutely
mister president mister
president and senator can you
remind me what the original
committee referrals were on this
finance but finance could have
been the third committee
referral so it should have gone
to tax and judiciary and then
finance
was that uh thirty six page bill
it's highly technical it
involves many businesses in our
state
and a dad in itself for should
this is its fifth go round now
you know so that again alone
should subject it to additional
you're working and employed or
you own a business this effects
you.
Mister president on I think the
track than normal if that's what
we need to do but are the
additional scrutiny should
certainly be taken on this bill
there is plenty of time we have
a full third of the session left
properly vetered and ready for
public consumption thank you
miss president center back a
center period and thank you
mister president and I support
the motion and and mostly just
mean most of us remember it was
it was done quite quickly
enforceably
and we didn't get it right
because we didn't take the time
that was needed to to go through
And that's the seriousness here
and and I don't want to delay
the bill to kill it i'd think we
need to get it right I think
that give me concern being the
the the father to a daughter
that's going to grow up and is
eventually get a job
to be prudent and take our time
and and do what we need to do
especially in the the senate
judiciary committee which I so
thoroughly enjoy being a member
of the center per.
support for this motion I will
tell you that as a small
business owner and with all of
the new material in this not
only is it going to create a
huge burden on small businesses
complicated how expensive this
can be so I think it'll be
prudent
if we're going to come out the
box with this legislation
very serious I think I think we
may run into some of the legal
problems that then we'd have to
come back and and correct after
this let's get a right the first
Center share i'm sorry senator
brandon raised her hand center
brought me think you must have
present I too would value the
judiciary committee taking a
look at this and providing legal
the last committee that strikes
the words related by blood or
affinity and at that point it
really just leaves this as paid
close association leave and I
like to hear from them it seems
that in his builder is clear
discrimination against my grant
weren't workers and in my
district a large population of
cross the border to work for us
and I would like to have that
the opinion of the judiciary
committee also to address that
issue thank you mister president
instead of reading senator with
drafted through the drafters
upstairs and and I accepted the
fact that they had on drafted
right when I got to judiciary I
bill or six page bill reduce to
one and a half pages
so I don't know I don't blame
That's why I accepted their
substitute it's important to get
the right so.
Center chair.
Think missed president just
again not only do various people
current law and in what we
propose in this bill
contradictory even inside the
bill itself.
In yet none of those were
have spent most of our time on
section three creating the fund
and we didn't we talked about
everything but the fund
but that was the only part of
All new material every single
definition is new so this is
employment law
that we already have an
new material the applicability
who does it apply to
in one of the flaws we saw is it
applies to
one employee
all new material how you make a
claim all new material you
accept it in in current statute
we have ways to make claims
currently have in law.
Employee notice.
Returned to work
those are already some pieces in
our
interference so if an employer
interferes with this.
Now all of a sudden there's
penalties.
The.
Then if there's an adverse
determination.
There's also penalties there's
play at all.
But it does talk about
collective bargaining and what
collective bargaining can do so
the cities and counties can't do
anything but the union can.
who gets to make the rules again
all new material and yet we make
rules for bills all the time and
in this particular case we had
to do it through new material we
In new mexico history has done
this.
We became a state in nineteen
twelve.
Thirty three page bill thirty of
which
are new material thirty of which
are new material never been
explored before.
But as it stands we don't know
what the flaws are
and this was pointed out a
but because there's a mine field
in front of us that we don't
know how to maneuver around.
And that's happened in here
already that happens all the
Their family the people that
they work with our family and I
don't mean blood relationship I
which then dis- which which then
make other people unemployed
which then it's the counter
productive to the very purpose
of this because now all of a
certain we've destroyed a
judiciary committee
go through this and figure out
where those mine filter and
sometimes they miss stuff too
but at least there's an
opportunity to get it right
And i'm really concerned about
that.
This is also become a highly
And for some reason we can't
stop the partisan ship
that doesn't need to be here.
It's all i'm asking mister
president.
Is that we allow the judiciary
committee to go through this
and figure out what the.
I ask that
the motion to
revert.
I don't think that's the right
work.
Thank you senator share centers
there's been a motion
to refer center bill three back
a refer
and say that's why that was put
up there there's been a roll
call
the clerk to call the role.
Center branch votes yes sent a
brantley.
Sent your brantley votes yes
center birth center birth boats
yes center compos sender compass
votes to know center servants.
Sent a guy a hospital central
bizarre no sentence votes no
center gregs center exports yes
Center meal center meo votes no
centre low best.
Sent your lobbies about to know
No sentiment cannot know senator
morris center morris vodcs
center minius.
Centre minor sports cs internet.
Centre novelboard cs internet.
Center tissy pino
center tizzie pino votes know
center padea centre padevotes no
centre pento.
centre roddery guess sent a
rodriguez votes no center
sanchez center sanchez both yes
center smithies.
Send your smith's volties
interest to deal or best.
Santa shandow center souls sent
yourself votes no sinter
stephanics center stephanics
votes know center steinborn.
worth center worth boats now
center words.
Center wed boats yes.
My vote is sixteen firm whenever
twenty two in the negative the
motion to refer senate bill
three back to senator committee
that order business announcement
similar
center peter worth thank you
mister president so that is it
for tonight we're in tomorrow at
announcements firm senators we
have center on
thank you mister president
you're indian and cultural
affairs committee will be
meaning tomorrow morning at ten
conservation committee will meet
at nine am in room three eleven
tomorrow and we will finish up
with secretary and then we have
a few bills thank you thank you
coming in it won't be as good as
the UNM dinner but it's dinner
and then we have a still a
pretty heavy agenda we are
ruling a couple of bills at the
will pick up uh citizen get
there so that includes monos
standborn i've been so to two I
think so worth rodriguez had a
something center minions under
the place
about this you know most
president personal privilege
earlier center more is just
talking about all the licenses
manuals be given a license for
hygiene
seen no objection
I I believe I have my gun in the
parking lot
horn nor on his desk in the
conference room which we were
very fond of when I was fourteen
back in high school
judiciary we've gone long hard
for swallow I want to thank
really sincerely
a lot of confidence in the
judiciary members and the staff
allow the counties to set
salaries for their elected
officials this is long overdue
it was been vetoed previously
sent joint resolution sixteen
will hear at seven forty five
serbant to send anyone else you
know most present I actually
mean my effort to church
yesterday and as we were walking
in the church we noticed the
confessions are blocked off
right locked off but all the
to roughly twelve they had a
roped off
to speak into you senator model
I think god speaking to use of
hundreds
conversation with our subjective
and he says yeah I don't know we
may have to be here till monday
so as the lights went out and in
center sir wanters had to
go in we're going to go in
immediately following the floor
we have three or four bills I
think the sponsors know who they
are we're going to try to get
dinner plate tonight send to be
an ideal
mister president senator monus
i'm not sure it was either going
to be pizza or sandwiches
pizza parties are limited to the
elderado
and it's lowball night so I
figured they'd be serving worth
since there's a woof bill out
tomorrow we do have grow wrapped
up again so we're all set to can
move that forward there's a long
drafting process in house built
the triple checked center bucket
is not paying attention so we're
going to make sure that he's all
good and we don't have a prom
there some immediately after
floor senate finance will go in
senator morris and center per
thank you mister president just
to let you know your text
business and transportation
committee will be meeting
tomorrow afternoon and you at
one thirty or thirty minutes
after the floor are in room
three twenty one
are taking action on that yeah
over under his lease forty five
extra minutes ah so if you want
to see us we'll get that so
there's no way they'll be done a
thirty minutes mister president
just just information thank you
They said that apparently a
center bucker thank you mr
president I do unacknowledge
that I did go line by line i'm
made a list and checked it twice
by there thank you mister
president senate democrats will
caucus tomorrow at eleven am in
the senate lounge for thirty
minutes.
moving until twelve one pm
senate will come and order mr
president I ask you to consider
that the rules we suspend of the
journal show all those present
this morning session are present
this afternoon session.
revision and approval of the
judiciary committee there's no
objection it is order senator
peter worth thank you mister
president thank you members for
a good day of work on the senate
