center composs
center survived this.
The.
Centre do hick.
Centre guy of us.
Senator ivy sought them.
Santa armio
senator lopez.
Send it to my estess.
Senator nevel.
Senator neighbor
senator onion
sinner torroddery guess.
Senator sanchez
senator smitties.
Santra city a lot best.
Senator stephanie.
The.
Senator steinborn.
Senator stewart
senator tom in.
thank you it asked at all
members and those who are
joining us in the gallery please
rise for the invocation to be
led today but doctor jennifer
reach chaplan christopher st
mess of like to be led today by
senator mckenna.
to do as I did when you invited
me last year which is a time to
bring seeing francis into the
round house as one of the
senators kindly put it last year
everywhere you cannot escape him
road schools health centers
hotels churches apartments order
torians are named after him and
read an adaptation of his name
six prayer ops noting that peace
is the true news though his
message was written regarding
Lord make us instruments of your
piece.
Help us to recognize the evil
latent in a communication that
does not build communion
brothers and sisters you are
faithful untrustworthy me are
words besides of goodness for
the world.
The.
is confusion let us inspire a
horror.
Where there is ambiguity let a
spring clarity where there is
exclusion let us offer
questions where there is
prejudice let us away again
trust where there is hostility
let us spring respect where
flag.
could represent the owner thus
here aren't the steels in
deceively colleague that it was
this year but I thought.
Senators were you like to
welcome you back to the chamber
to get things going today i'll
yield to our senate majority
florida to peter worth tickets
to that order business
thank you mister president good
you dreak for your invocation
which couldn't be more
appropriate
you know we had a good
discussion on the senate floor
yesterday about the importance
course here in our city of santa
fe that has stances in its name
we very much appreciate that
a couple reminders tomorrow is
secretary of state who will be
in the senate lounge this
afternoon from 1-3 so if anyone
needs help with the electronic
filing 1-3 this afternoon
today is the department of work
and the village of las lunas is
holding its annual matanza on
the east side of the capital
from eight to one o'clock and
they are providing lunch for the
small business development
center network day and senator
compose has a certificate which
will be read also it's four each
county day and there's a
legislative reception that will
fond a ballroom from five thirty
to seven thirty it's the credit
union association of new mexico
legislative reception the real
thirty by invitation and
conservation voters is having
their reception at the end in
spa lorado five thirty to seven
mister president I do have two
guests all introduced and then
will go to other members but
before I do that let me yield to
send it a pede just to do an
excuse all right up front.
center by the and mister
president in its consent to
allow cameras in the senate
chamber in the senate gallery
here and objections cameras are
to be allowed both in the senate
gallery and in the senate
who are in high school but are
already plugged in and working
big time on a variety of
difference things and i'll i'll
talk about that first a ha- john
visual in performing artists has
been the principal violence of
the santa fe use symphony for
two years and was worth the rick
lounge in scholarship and twenty
twenty three furthermore he
explore very various areas of
learning and is looking forward
today's session in the
legislature list gave him a big
welcome.
that he's involved with he's the
treasure of the student council
he's copresident of the model u
n club and the founder and
president of the youth and
clerks of the house of
representatives during the
session going to the gym
spending time with friends and
playing with his pet cat so
let's give lucas also a big warm
to see our young folks engaged
and I just got to give a shout
out to having them on the on the
school board and actually
participating in the school
board I know that's something
decisions that we all know very
well so I think that's super
core so with that mister
president yields other members
to introduce guess upfront.
Thank you single worth we do
have other members and how
that it's really great to go and
have our young people here and
they are the future leaders as
we continue to indicate mr
president members of the senate
forestry and he's a legislative
fellow he's a native american
power dancer and singer of tous
pueblo at telstra but it but if
focused on people and most
importantly he really has a
heart for people for animals and
for the land round of applies
for this gentleman please thank
you mister mister president.
i'd like to introduce my guests
who are with me today done joe
is alone in a patchy and that
i'd like to greet you mister
president with me today is one
she's not only a wrangler with
four age she's also learning
from those and the he carry a
nation the importance of animals
and plants as medicine she's
also joining her from dules in
the heaker patchy nation is our
four age coordinator joe let the
semiti and our four h assistant
guest to the new mexico senate.
Thank you center head of me our
center concern is.
couple of friends mine and one
of my known for a long time
change I graduated from high
school
john and monica jinkins are or
ensure would ash that the body
please recognize john in monica
I would like for you guys to
take notice
of the cheese that's on your
desk today now I know that
you're all cheese lovers
and there's what we can do and
we go out and and and look for
industry to come in to our part
of the state any part of the
employer in my district and
actually it's not in my district
and senator neighbors difficult
but I was afraid that he
wouldn't speak up in time so I
ring me again to this
particular facility and were so
grateful for them to be there
our local candle producers so
that we can bring new mexico
meat and to a restaurant into a
for the opportunity today and
there are thank you for coming
last night I hope that that was
a a great meal for you in a
were very kind speaking and
thank you for the chance to
promote my chief spectrum
love tuesday on the capital on
the in the senate floor in the
reason why is i'd like to give
you a quick bit of history about
this this is a shape of brick
he came to america and eighteen
fifty seven from switzerland and
he settled first in upstate new
york and then two years later
was managing a small cheese plan
in southwest wiscanson
milder but firmer than limburger
he also wanted a lower level of
the red molds that grew on the
outer right and developed the
flavor of the cheese part of his
plan was the idea of using
has married me is because i'm
cheese royalty so thank you
mister president thank you
center
certification day of action
including and I want the I
really want the body to know
about this including some
visitors today who benefited
parallel we are welcoming all
those who are visiting but I
want you to especially meet
those formally increasingly did
an advocate and those who have
been given a second chance I
going to make all of us proud of
the second chance we gave them I
want to say that this party is
considering a number of public
safety initiatives this session
the state constitutional
protection
we need more creative approaches
to create strong and safe
communities i've been very proud
to work with my colleagues to
punishment and keeping people
filed away all individuals who
eh most individuals who go to
our jails and our prisons are
going to be out and they're
the time to talk with the people
in our building and to listen to
their stories and listen to
their perspectives on on whether
can't see them but I understand
they're up in the they're up in
the gallery.
other announcements
center goes on
thank you mister president ten
member sum I like to
he's a new medical highlands
university legislative
lettership fellowship nation
and is committed to the public
landstoreship
public participation in
government and the protection
graduate and twenty twenty five
and go on his work in water and
resource manager members the
police help me give a one
thank you for president members
thank you
seeing no further announcement
someone going to send their
peter worth center pet north
thank you mister president so
we're going to go ahead and do
the two certificates starting
would well be read so ideal to
senator complex.
Senator cobbles
thank you very much mister
president we have a certificate
data january the thirtieth
my boys but it wasn't because of
uh yesterdays is over are
imitation but anyway up mr
president if I may please ask
the reader to read thank you
acknowledgment do new mexico a
small business business
development center whereas small
business development is vital to
new messages growth and
and soul of the american dream
and whereas small businesses are
the life blood of new mexico
which salute small business
owners entrepreneurs and
employees for enhancing
development of new small
businesses for the wealth of all
residents and whereas the new
mexico small business
development center has been an
assistance two entermanners has
contributed to the creation of
more than
forty thousand new jobs one
billion four hundred two million
mexico that the new mexico small
business development center be
recognised.
For its contribution to the
state's economy in that january
thirtieth twenty twenty four be
fe senator beat compos mimi
stewart president protem sherry
de luhan chief clerk new
mexico's date senate thank you
to a reader and senate a couple
mexico they continue to go ahead
and help us the help small
business people and the
individuals are very diligent
very knowledgeable and most
importantly
basically what we do and how we
believe that this organization
continues to make a positive
difference so without mister
president of there's anyone else
yesterday and I thought it was
covered very well in the media
so congratulations with that
center by the thank you very
much mister president I do rise
in support of the certificate a
will tell you when I started my
business I don't know what the
heck I was doing and I did
interact with the small business
development council the version
of it at that point it was
incredibly helpful and I I think
this was said somewhere here but
that are actually less than five
people so you might not always
have all of the other secondary
interesting benefits of having
more people around to help.
You solve things but the small
needed to run a business and so
I just want to thank them for
that and help that they and hope
that they will continue their
work in new mexico thank you
mister president thank you
senator by the we have
of six counties that are very
rural most of the businesses in
those counties are small and
they often come to me and say
what we're doing here at the
Thank you center cities we have
similar handling
thank you mister president I
appreciate the the senate
pandemic my colleague debit more
who is the sea of the greater
chamber is up on the day is
right now and our chamber the
greater chamber several business
brunt of the up the
responsibility for helping our
small businesses they found that
many of our small businesses
came down to applying for
federal assistance during the
pandemic they didn't have the
infrastructure in place and the
SB DC and I want to give a shout
out to our SB DC executive
have the ability to be in rural
communities all over the state
are really providing incredible
and valuable resources to our
small businesses so i'm very
grateful to the senator for
bringing the certificate forward
mister president thank you
sender have them.
businesses for a person in new
mexico to comment say hey I want
to start a business they think
that you open a checking account
newer ship how to fill out for
your credit you're nine forty
one your workers calm there is a
whole bunch of things work force
solutions money get id numbers
and then to help them get
financing and move forward
you know mister president the
governor has a housing
initiative to build housing in
market we got to open a business
and now we're going to do it in
so as we move forward they help
them along greatly and I I think
the sponsor for the moral.
miss president you'll never know
how many people have great ideas
out there but never get moved
past those ideas they don't
helps people with ideas to
create business and to maintain
a business it's a very
worthwhile deal and I would
mister president thank you
senator woods senator worth.
Ah thank you mister president I
also rise in strong support
our son
something like that off the
ground and the fact that that
this
entity is there to help and
provide that kind of guidance
for bringing this uh in its true
we talk a lot about
big businesses and trying to get
big businesses to come here and
yet it's our small new mexico
businesses that drive this
what this this agency provides
which is that guidance and
navigating through all the trap
doors and there's a lot of cell
again I very much appreciate the
president I had thank you for
the honor people standing rise
for songs strong support on this
uh appreciate center complete
for all he does for small
participate in that to see how
they can help small business
grow did want to tell you though
I was in is been your law on
saturday I restaurant there in
we're looking at uh I asked him
to bring all his family or
follow family in followed
business owners up here to the
capital to be able to
accomplished for all he does I
think we just need people listen
to the small business it's not
just getting open but keeping
them keeping them from thriving
measure I appreciate senator
cobbles bringing the
measure forward
i've been in business for thirty
five years and I started about
to use the services and i'm five
seven years in the business and
talking to the director at that
time about speedy senses
community let me show you what
businesses we've we've talked a
lot about starting a business
but if you've been in business
five ten fifteen twenty years
and you need some additional
information you want to see
what's on the horizon out there
category so I I encourage anyone
who is in business with your
just starting out or you've been
there for many years I suggest
you contact SB DC and and find
singer sir.
Thank you mister president I
just want to join with my
colleagues that are complete and
appreciate small businesses
along with the others here the
businesses fail twenty for our
quarter of them will fail in the
first year
fifty percent of them have
failed by five years and after
ten years nearly seventy percent
of businesses have failed after
because the odds are against
them and it's a very difficult
thing and we we've talked a lot
about this in our committee last
night about the new marijuana a
businesses and industries we
businesses to fail and expect
those failures to regulate the
market itself allow the market
tickets place in in the and the
numbers bear that out if you're
of join with my colleagues who
recognize how difficult this
isn't as a small business owner
my lifetime and my parents
lifetime and my grandparents
lifetime I I know how rewarding
that can be so very exciting
you thank all my colleagues for
recognizing the importance of
small business in new mexico.
They use send us about this we
from center servant
I and I and I I remind the body
I come from a a family of small
business owners myself and so
and and those resources that lie
in the community that are
provided by by small business
development and I I remind the
body you know our policies in
policies and how how things like
uh paid family medical leave and
ma- mandatory minimum wages and
those sorts of things affect a
small business I know how the
this is we're going forward and
support small businesses and all
the ways we should thank you
mister president thank you
center bucket center branding
think you mister president I too
remind everyone that included in
the small businesses are hard
working farmers and ranchers and
the reality is is that as
legislators it's going to take a
constitutional and penvents or
even paid family medical leave
requirements for our seasonal
and temporary workers.
All have negative impacts on
those small businesses and
these certificates thank you
mister president they could send
businesses
but are small businesses all
across you mexico I own the
small business I own the title
insurgent company
I know a lot of other business
owners here who have who have
think it's important that is we
look at the legislation it's out
there today we look at all of it
and see that what impacts it
evaluate stuff carefully and
thoroughly to make sure that it
does when we believe it does
better evaluated because new
mexicans jobs new mexicans
livelihoods are steak as we look
at this stuff new mexico
make it hard on new mexico small
visions that we're talking about
right now and how much we
believe that they are important
of the comments we're making
today so thank you mister
president.
They certain gregs
any further common centers
core the foundation if you will
of new mexico uh my parents and
myself were in the restaurant
business for I was with them for
our employees were or taken care
of the best that we could uh
these are struggles
and as each member continued to
elude to as we go forward the
would be a level of success so
without mister president members
of the senate what I would like
to do at this time is to
introduce some guests that are
development corporation and
chair of the new mexico small
business development center
advisory board we have debbie
more who is president ceo of the
greater las vegas chamber of
board we have a very monex who
is the any mexican small
business development center
senator director at the
advisory aboard their in eh
clovis community college.
And then with me we have mister
glen walters who is the director
of operations and if I may
please
small business centers
throughout your mexico he's here
to champion to recognize and to
bring forward if you will the
issues that you all represent
have some guests who would like
to introduce center button
thank you mister president I
just want to welcome everybody
to valencia county day most of
most of the people that that I
wanted to introduce or they're
and and get that lunch I would I
do want to recognize a I am a
small business owner as I said I
want to recognize one of the
people that is helping preparing
keeping operations running while
i'm appear at the legislature
he's up here appear in the
gallery his names are through to
rural metal please raise your
hand or total
satches for a couple of words
about valencia county finish
such as thank you mister
president I would also like to
think the people that are
valencia county i'm very proud
of this day and just all the
people that i've seen here today
that come up and visit us it
does get a little longer appear
and we haven't seen our family
so all the people here from
the contributions of valencia
county has made to this state it
is a booming area of growth in
law slutes where we see the
matter matters establishment
middle real grand valley and is
shadowed by the months on
no mountains and has a deparator
and i'm hope that you enjoyed a
part of that heritage and
culture today thank you
thank you mr president I know
that you are well aware but i'd
like to share with members of
the senate that we are
recognizing and acknowledging
that today genuine thirty yes is
fifty six legislature second
session twenty twenty four the
new mesco states and it does
here by extent it's recognition
and acknowledgment to declare
for each bunch of clubs in rural
and urban areas throughout the
state and whereas more than
thirty thousand youths between
the ages of five and eighteen
important life skills including
leadership responsible
citizenship critical thinking
problem solving decision making
conflict resolution and
report having greater confidence
any more positive self identity
stating that they have greater
control over other events in
many things and that their lives
have purpose and meaning now
therefore be it resolved by the
senate of the state of new
mexico that in recognition of
in the city of santa fe senator
crystal diamond bradley
mimi stewart president
and joni anna county a member of
h per c and I actually credit by
public skills to two four agent
and parliamentary procedure and
counties and in fact it is
expanding in the urban areas at
a very rapid rate
currently in twenty twenty three
richmond programs we are so very
proud of the work that four h
does they contribute to
agliteracy health and nutrition
leadership stem and career
expiration and mister president
since you asked me a question I
guess you have sent first by be
able to answer it
thank you seeing no objection
thank you center more i'll go
ahead and retempt to answer that
you're stumping me a little bit
on the four ages you're gonna
have to help me out on what
those are believe I can't
remember senator you can have to
help me out I will it I assure
you there are chief clerk
default you actually got one of
the four ages they pledged their
head to clear thinking their
heart to greater loyalty their
hands to larger service and
The.
president i'm so grateful for
senator brantley for bringing
this bill we might have a mutual
friend russell walter who
overseas and I remember the four
age for presenting in committee
and they were so incredible just
about their passion for their
community what they want to do
to give back and what they're
learning in the program and so
our annual fair and so i'm
grateful for the senator for
bringing this forward and and
and big support mister president
my other question is to the
minority floor leader about
those amazing teacher on us i've
so many ways thank you mister
president thank you senator
brand new think you senator
bucket hamper then we have
others who would like to speak
we have senator how to meal
followed by center woods mister
they do and so at least a band
is with me today that I
introduced earlier and so she
loves everything about for each
which happens in our county in
rearing by but another thing she
has been a major component of
her being an active member and
we would like to invite the
leadership team to come and see.
rodeo queen but we would love to
extend our offer to have you
come to rearieb a county we
would love to welcome you thank
you mister president thank you
quake you need and also some
from real river county that they
they sh- uh texted me
i'm so lucky to have all these
time to develop
young leadership what a what are
wonderful project it's it's a
I think very much show mister
president I do rise in support
of this certificate I was a very
small amount of my mid school
year as I was actually in for
each and is a wonderful
See no objection thank you
center for the senator sanchez
thank you mister president I do
rise and support this thank you
senator brownie for bringing
this I remember when I was in
they can't move it so it's there
forever but it's it's under the
shed heart the violence account
affair but for it was a great
thing great coming up you never
know it'll take you
thanks to the senator for
bringing forth this this
memorial the the thing that I
want to say is that we all get a
little concerned sometimes when
concerned just find a four age
person spend five minutes with
them about who they are what
they believe in their values.
how to get things done and I
apologie in every one of them
and and again fully support this
action here in the senate today
president to follow up on the
last senators from park so to
agree we see a lot of
challenging situations in your
mexico the direction that this
is taking us but you can look at
our four h members and later
respecting yourselves and
respecting others it is my honor
to welcome you guys here in the
senate and if I may mister
president I have some interest
in our deductions if I may.
I see seven
skylist stran and adelaide all
the way from vernon who mexico
her active for each participants
and next to them is the four h
leadership team two of them
send the other two were from
eddie county her in the in the
house right now but for the
majority of you who came to the
senate we thank you and
collectively I joined with my
colleagues here on the floor and
Thank you send a brand new
center peter.
Thank you mister president so
let me just give the members a
reading and do the two items on
the calendar today and that's
the that's the plan for today
tomorrow will be the
confirmation of secretary
We are in that order business
messages from the governor the
reader to read january thirtieth
twenty twenty four senate
executive message number fifty
five the honourable meaning
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of senate
bill two oh eight a bill
enacting the automatic license
the collected data respectfully
yours michelle the hungrishm
governor general reflect that
the message from the governor
has been received
sent a majority floridated
seem no objections committee
reports the reader to read
this president you're health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred senate bill
ninety five has had it under
consideration reports same with
chair artistic you know uh
president asking and it was
consent of the senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee senate bill one sixty
one do pass and then refer to
the finance committee senate
two do pass and then refer to
the finance committee.
Senate bill one ninety due pass
as amended
and then referred to the
senate bill one twenty nine that
it do not pass but that senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for settle
adoption of the committee
report.
Soon as we have a motion to
adopt the community reports all
those in favor of significant by
saying I was opposed need the is
Mister president you're a rules
committee has approved the
following certificates of
recognition certificate number
twenty three to the following
you are named they declare and
respectfully submitted kdm duhig
chair senator mister president I
ask an animals consent of the
senate that the reader really
treat all the committee reports
recognition certificate number
twenty four certificate of
recognition certificate number
twenty five certificate of
congratulations certificate
number four
certificate number five
certificate number six
With the committee report
centers we have emotions adopted
many parts all those in favor
signified by saying I
was
the nose have it.
The.
Several words thank you mister
president challenger ruling the
the ruling of the chair so we're
gonna have the explanation of
that so on the community report
the chair ruled in favor of the
needs not to accept the
committee reports if you
Senator barca
santra back of oats yes then to
brown
center brand boats yes center
Men mister president a
senator just vote from next to
you that senator she's going
down to receipt to do the lot to
that's cold cheating.
You will come back to send her
brantley.
Center do hick no centre do heg
boats no centre do hag
gonzalez votes know center
gregs.
Center gregs votes yes center
hamlet sent your handling votes
no century hampel.
driving so the votes know
senator armio sent our mio boat
snow center low pess.
Sent your lopest boat snow
center my estimate
no center morris center morris
votes yes in germany us yes and
explain my vote sender minions
votes yes
nail votes no sent or tcipino
central tc vina votes no senator
bid
centre video votes know center
pinto.
center part of cs senator pope
center public snow santa
rodriguez center rodriguez votes
smitty's votes yes center city a
low best.
Center chair
center share votes yes center
shandow
steinburn boats know
centers do were.
Center stewart boat snow center
tomorrow
center thomas boats know senator
worth.
Center for there I missed
presidents want to remind the
clerk that senators courier him
pill and staffandics were
excused.
Sender guy costs how do you go.
Sender guy goes votes yes.
what was about can count was
sixteen to twenty one sixteen
yes I have drive out of sixteen
thank you
to twenty four the ruling of the
this is cheating the senator
from tierc at the vote next to
you the center from alva cricket
they called her twice.
Then send her the good senator
thank you setting me up this is
not the nfl
the ruling was done fairly I was
over ruled but I think it was a
each of us to do I think it are
clerk for doing the role call
and they believe senator wars
that you have something well
before I do that the committee
reports have been adopted
ear test for all these years
they they finally worked your
ears work we're with you
and that was better than a cup
of coffee to wake this chamber
up so thank you mister president
thank you
bill one twenty two referral to
public affairs to be dropped and
it be moved to senate judiciary
committee senator brantaville
give us what that title of that
bill is present senators this is
more committee reports so let's
wait until run announcements and
we can all think about that and
figure out what direction to go.
Thank you we are in that order
business committee reports will
go back to you on announcements
of you choose to do so at that
same with recommendation that it
do not pass but that senate
judiciary committee substitute
four senate bill six do pass and
then's referred to the finance
but the doctors committee for
centers we have a motion to
adopt the community report all
those in favor signified by
saying I thought.
We are that order business third
bill five on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
where that order business
thirteen legislation seen
last session we did pass senator
bill forty four in this chamber
twenty eight to nine
this bill however is gone
through a lot of changes and I
does is not to insure the safety
and fairness of elections for a
new mexico citizens exercising
their right to vote I want to
quote from the department of
risk and intimidation that fire
arms pose for voters mister
president members in designing
this bill we started from the
in most cases and we'll talk
about the specifics are yet for
all the polling places and other
voting
mechanics and mechanisms outside
of a school there's a different
the rules across the board I
would like to kind of walk
through some of the changes in
the committee substitute there
have been that came out of.
was dealing with polling places
in malls for individuals are who
were walking past a pulling
place in a mall for some other
business
we've specifically put in
post office you are not in any
way violating the law senator
neighbor raised a couple of of
issues in the senate rules
committee where a person has a a
line eighteen that now allow
someone to leave the gun in
their vehicle well they're going
to vote he raised the issue of
the hundred feet
raised a couple things in the
definition of fire the
definition in this bill included
a muffler or silencer I think he
correctly pointed out that that
senator moores had a couple of
changes one deleting postal
boxes think that was a good
change and so that is eliminated
from the bill also making sure
secured monitor container only
applies during the election
period not your round senator
barclay raised an issue about
law enforcement officers.
establishments that had specific
language about when certified
officers could be there off duty
and we included that amendment
toxic political environment we
vent were in it just doesn't
make sense to have a local
government barty bringing in
a much better bill that has
struck the right balance here
respecting the different rights
that are in play with this with
Thank you we do have a floor
amendment
the reader to read
center floor member number one
to senate judiciary committee
substitute for senate bill five
senate judiciary committee
substitute percentage of five
objections said they're worth if
you'll explain what your
memories thank you mister
president this is just a clean
bill applied to early voting uh
voting on an election day and
the council service suggested
changing the word and to or so
that's all it does thank you
senator industry committee
substitute for senate bill five.
See no debate center to work to
close on their floor thank you
mister president I move uh
senate floor amendment number
one decent year can be
substitute for senate bill five
and ask for a voice.
sent a judiciary committee
subject to the percentage bill
five has been amended
seven is where debating senators
should committee substitute for
senator five will begin with
center more
work on this bill and very good
faith in a it is a much better
bill uh it's improved over last
year I think if you continue to
work on it for four or five more
ready to vote for this bill
mister president and the one
issue that we
talked about in both rules in
judiciary was dealing with
conceal carried
their license to photograph
their other a license owners
that go through training they
have to pass their test a lot of
the conversation to end about
this bill was about intimidation
is concealed and no one knows
it's there when one of the
testimony about the amendment I
ran in judiciary on this we said
that can see all carrier license
owners were able to carry guns
actually is limited to what they
are allowed to carry under their
license so if you have a conceal
carry up to a twenty two economy
carrier twenty two if you have
and still carry up to a forty
five hard five.
they're trained we know who they
are uh it is limited to what
they are allowed to carry with
their conceals are carried by so
I didn't actually rise or miss I
center floor amendment number
two two senate judiciary
committee substitute first
sentinent bill five amendment
sponsored by senator mark moores
bill five best surprise I want
to think mister senator were for
the.
Thank you sir morris
this is not a friendly amendment
although I appreciate the tweak
because again I think the issue
though that was raised in senate
judiciary by senator servant is
difficult to get into an
interpretation question of
whether the firearm actually
would be concealed again we've
had this discussion about this
and it it this is one words I
think there really is a
is really debate incentive for
amendment number two we have
senator purdle followed by
senator brand center per thank
you mister president I I rise in
support of the amendment I think
think it's interesting that that
the entire
path of this bill through both
committees that I sit on we were
told multiple times that this is
because you know guns being on
somebody's right to vote but
also protect somebody's right to
defend themselves their license
they they've taken the course
they've qualified with a
specific firearm and they're
one's right to vote and then
protects the others right to
defend themselves so I think if
if we're going to move forward
as a body and we're going to.
Present bills to be one thing we
think it's just an attempt to
make another gun free zone which
in my opinion and and many
people's opinion across the
state regardless of party
affiliation is a direction that
amendment send a floor amendment
number two send a brand follow
my center survanters.
I'm thinking is president and I
too rise in support of this
amendment and also just yeah I
being told is that the reason
that we want to not have gone to
polling places so that we're not
intimidating other people
but.
intimidated by a far around if
they don't know the firearm is
there like if I was carrying
right now
how would anybody be intimidated
by that if they don't know that
i'm carrying right now
we're concealed means and for
those who don't know it means
it's concealed you don't know
it's being carried so I don't
understand how that would still
be intimidating and keeping
takes care of what is stated as
the reason for this bill this
morning it takes care of what it
we're being told is the reason
constitutional carry stay for
open carey so
that that's also a concern that
i'll bring out during regular
questioning thank you mister
president.
fact this amendment really seems
to be lack and even compared to
what we did in judiciary which
at least in judiciary the
language that was proposed would
be
that persons who have a
concealed this that language
seems to be missing now from
this uh this proposed amendment
so for example I think probably
no secret by now I can see what
that I keep it concealed so the
very fact that I have a permit
means that I could carry it in
and not have to keep it
concealed at all there's nothing
about a conceal curry permit
that requires you to keep it
they have a conceal carry permit
and I don't I don't think that's
it seems to be complete counter
intuitive to what this bill is
intended to do I could carry it
carry in any fire and I want
simply because have a license.
But thank you thank you mister
president you know listening to
that I mean it's it's plain to
read your person carrying a
conceal fire so you have a
firearm one be concealed and two
you have the license so my
reading of that would be
contrary to what the good
you're in violation of the law
and so I think this is a good
amendment I think it's a good
compromise I think you've
already mister president been
been offered even by participant
might be able to drag over a
couple of people that would make
this truly a bipartisan effort
and I I think that's something
to be commended if we're able to
worker in those very same too
committees a constituent who
stated he was a constitution of
the good senator here
concealed carry license holder
who has done nothing wrong and
deserves to be able to maintain
that right and so um
constituency here.
It would uh it would show
something um anyway that's all I
have I urge the body to support
this minute.
Thanks center bucket would you
is is is I look at their sin
in clearly I have always voted
against bills there that I
thought
have had a background check the
people who have had training the
people that know what they're
doing
but it doesn't stop up any bad
guy
bad guys going to do it a bad
people there that are that are
trained and ready to defend the
place.
Then we've done something good.
And and I know there's people
that try to do things like that
they don't belong there.
They don't belong there at all.
But the people who are trained
the people have had the
background check the people that
are the good guys are not the
people that we want to punish
and yet all of the all of the
gun control bills that come
good guy but let's make the bad
guy bad guy.
And I wish that that simple
mindset would change.
So I think this is a great
compromise I think this helps
everything I think.
That we ought to try to find
can all have a cool by our
moment and volt for it thank
you.
Thank you center share.
if he accepts this amendment
he knows my views on guns.
I think pretty much all you do I
will vote for this bill if
It it's taxic talking about guns
i've been on these committees
and when I was in the house
concerned public affairs you
know very heated.
New mexico passes by partisan
gun legislation
when have you heard that
headline lately.
let me know
where the last time montana was
virginia california florida any
anybody
so I I know we've had some
republicans and democrats are
willing to come together
to talk about guns in a buy
bipartisan manner can we do it
out on the table and sir I am
putting my chip on the table
thank you.
And you send me these.
first i'd address the issue
about the conceal care about
bill if you didn't read the
memory actually says a person
care and it could see old
firearm who is a possession of a
concealed hand gun carrier and a
concealed handcut in the conceal
pank hit gun carry out is
defined as a hand gun and loaded
bill and we're that close and I
do want to congratulate the
senator for working with us and
even the senator for the other
senator from santa fe county for
just whispered my ear that he
would even vote for this I want
the body to think about that
four of the most conservative
members of this chamber all with
strikes gun rights i'm willing
do that if we just include a
conceal carrier so that's four
of us I can't speak for the
other eleven members of our
caucus but that's four a plus.
for center floor amendment two
the century share committee
substitute for senate bill five
as once amendment roll call or
just show hours
i'll send it as to your seats
before.
The clerk to call the role.
send your back of a cs center
brand
center brand votes yes center
brantley
sent a rantley vote yes senator
birth.
centre do hig center dueh boat
snow center guy costs.
Sender guyco's words cs
intergonzales no singer gonzalez
Center hickey
centre hiki votes know center
ivy southern.
Said driving so the votes know
Central mechanism both cs
interview kenner no
mechanic votes know center
morris.
neighbor center nibert vote cs
center o nil central nail boat
snow senator or tizzie pino
center perta both cs center poet
center pop votes know sent a
roddery guess center rodriguez
Center share.
Yeah center share boat cs.
The.
Center shandow.
Center steinborn center
steinburn boat snow center
stewart.
Center stewart boats no center
thomas
Buy a vote of seventeen the
affirmative twenty two of the
negative senate floor member
number two has failed to pass
the senate center more thank you
I want to think the body for
secure in my a plus rating
anyone wish to debate
senator brand followed by
synerge meetings center brand
thank you mister president would
I forgot to post one thank you
mister president thank you
senator for yielding could you
tell me again why we're doing
this bill because i'm really
really really confused now.
places who were intimidated
because there were guns being
brought into the polling places
not intimidation to rise to the
occurring outside of pulling
places that are not in a school
again caused concern and so
that's when we started working
on this legislation.
let's council when we decided to
ban people being able to part
carry firearms and here it was
because people were being
protocol intimidated you know I
right but should we should be
banned motorcycle writers
because some people are
intimidated by them should we do
to you but in this particular
case pauling places are one of
the lanes within the bruin
decision where justice thomas
so I just think that as we kind
of go through these different
issues the specific one brought
today is within that
in my opinion and I respect that
there is a difference of opinion
on this but I think it makes a
lot of sense.
Senator brand mister president
senator what about so on to
I think to the extent that that
are baseball bat was being
brought in and was intimidating
certainly if it rose to the
level of criminal intent which
any type of weapon in is going
to raise flags I think what this
bill is dealing with this fire
specifically.
Center brand the thing was
public intimidating there are
some people that you know they
they don't go to a movie theater
because they find sitting that
Yeah so
there's a lot of different
things that make people
intimidated and yet we're gonna
go out after a constitutional
firearm but but this state it's
history
is that we're an open carry
state
i'm carry open anywhere except
you know here because the lights
but you know I can I can carry
open everywhere
but.
We're going to banner here
be the thing you got to get a
permit for and make concealed
carrier be automatic everywhere
because if you're can still
carry no one knows you carrying
again and so there's no reason
yeah it's just doesn't make any
sense
mister president without being
said I now move for a call on
the senate.
senate recurtion
center accomplish
ceremories
center source.
saver gregs
center sanchez
center gages
sort of ill
if you'll bring all members into
the chamber
please close the doors.
earlier senators could I him
hell and stuff and it's are they
required in a call of this
nature.
started arms at senator city
locus was not excused and
they're finding her right now.
Senators mister president
excused except for a call of the
senate so I think the day are
required to be here send a share
so the motion that was made was
that.
unless for the purposes of a car
mister president that is correct
I did not add this second line.
So sir started arms if you can
hold and place for a moment
thank you center for the.
Mister president.
I believe center stuff
The clerk to call.
Sent your barca center center
brown
high center guy host etcetera
eagles his parents sent a
gonzales present center gregs
center hamlen.
Yeah center him pill.
senator my estes here center
mechanian.
Sent a mechanic here senator
morris sent him in yours.
Senator pinto.
Center period.
Center pope.
Santa rodri guess.
Center souls center stephanics.
Center steinborn.
Center stewart.
Senators we were holding place.
So those who are watching via
webcast in those who just joined
we are in a call to send it so
we are waiting
for our senators to arrive for
us to proceed.
The.
Sergeant arms.
I can report it this time so
that the senate has a reported
to the chamber.
bill and so senator brand
news that they are sunday I I
apologize for a week once second
there.
Think as I was saying we did
have a call the senate it was
after the floor amendment number
two was rejected center brand
does have the the floor still I
just want to remind members that
brand net thank you president
and before I continue
questioning I I just want to
call out the historical fact
that this was a bipartisan call
a pretty historic thing so I
think the other side for joining
me on the call I think this is
obviously an important enough
issue that we all feel like all
of us need to be involved in the
judiciary so i'm just going to
make sure i'm on the right it's
i'm I should be looking at the
senate judiciary sub for the
bill correct there's no
amendments after that.
Sender worth
the custom is rather than bring
down a bill with a stack of
different amendments we rolled
them only and so it's easier to
track and follow senator bread
but thank you
few things in here and I just
want to clarify
uhm
the the possession of the
pulling place
a hundred feet from the door
from which a voter may enter the
already there senator worth so
mr chair it is to make this
this what will be a new section
have on their the hunter feet
from the door and which voters
may enter to vote
and then the alternative voting
location
have a strip mall right there at
a in chanted hills uhm so that
would be basically that business
location with the acceptance of
that's exactly right the bottom
of page two section c
this was added this actually was
a an issue brought up during the
hundred feet from the door to
which voters may enter the vote
or nearer than fifty feet from a
monitor secured collection is
not guilty of unlawful
possession of a firearm with
pulling place so exactly right
carriers you pointed out and
we've made that acception for
exactly the reason you state is
that we do know how polling
places that are are involved in
right next to the voting place
if I was carrying my firearm if
if that wasn't put in there so I
do appreciate that I think that
was thoughtful to make sure that
there and and that person could
have signs any further than a
hundred feet from the election
point place so I I think that
those two or are covered in that
so can you help me with
carry into a pulling place so mr
president on page three are
section d it is a petty mister
ninety days or five hundred
dollars or both and just in
response to the referral
question because it's a
misdemeanor.
That's the reason it did not go
to
senate finance petty mister
meaners it's ninety days in the
county facility not a state
facility.
criminal misdemeanors and then
we have I I don't know what the
other ones are like you're when
I get pulled over actually am I
going to ticket in the state and
over thirty years but if I did
sitation mister meaners but that
is different than what's here
this is a petty mister mean our
undersection thirty one nineteen
dash one it is a criminal I
we make a twenty five dollar fee
for you know texting while
he said five hundred dollars
fine is that a minimum finers
could a judge saying well i'm
going to give twenty five
minutes worth mr president
center I believe it's it's up to
could be a twenty five dollar
fine and that was the extent of
it are depending on the specific
facts thank you mister president
thank you senator and and i'm
being told it's six months in
the county jail
but when I have to feel myself I
am maybe I lose remaining
fifteen pounds anyway I
appreciate the answers I I
really wish that we had put
concealed carrier here I think
we're running into some issues
some unintended consequences in
that and that is in an act told
us the governor we're working on
our crime bills together that
and
people break into those vehicles
and still the guns out of the
glove box and so I think we need
to be really careful about where
rare occasion where concealed
carry person is committed to
crime but when you talk to the
the uh d PS they have a hard
time finding anything.
will tell you sir so on does
those people that have gone
through the training to actually
know how to use that fire on and
that was one of the things that
he insisted upon for the
consiler carried permit that
these laws back I think that
should be the exception in this
building as I think if you're
concealed carry holder in this
building you're not intimidating
we haven't had a single incident
so thank you mister president
thank you I appreciate uh you
bring the bill I just don't
appreciate the bill itself thank
you.
five amendment sponsored by
senator griggs.
The.
Center grades to move and
explain a moment
for senate bill five as you
many.
The.
Here in the objections senator
greeks if you'll explain what
your memory does
thank you mister president this
other parts of new mexico they
send amendment situation says
that this bill will only apply
to classe counties with the
population in excess of a
thank you mister president
I don't consider this a friendly
amendment but I do understand
where senator drinks is coming
from are currently in all
carey not being allowed
exceptions probably the wrong
word but there's a specific
provision in that statute you
can't conceal carrier school and
so I just think this would
three.
Senator
thank you mister president so I
think
the bill is to solve a problem
in urban new mexico
in soul once again we have a a
this this dicademy between the
There were hundreds of guns on
campus every day hundreds and
you could see most of them cause
they were in a rifle rack in the
different mindset of what's
going on
and so I believe that senator
griggs here is actually trying
to to solve the mindset issue.
If you go to albuquerque
I would be very surprised to
find a rifle in a living room of
But they're not going to pay
attention as law anyway so I
think this is simply trying to
address.
The issue of urban versus rule
thank you mister president.
We do have further debate on the
amendment center woods
as you know my district is as
covers a lotta miles.
From school district to school
district career corner it's a
two hundred miles.
It's not
an intimidating process when you
see that happening they have
today.
me.
Thank you mister president we do
have further debate on the
amendment center minors.
The.
Any further debate on the
amendment.
there's both senators share and
insider would and center words I
believe they all understand the
all of new mexico wish president
members of the body's not the
shame tonight the shame and I
think it's worthwhile to point
a new mexico is different in a
lot of wage so this issue says
it okay okay this law is going
to go into effect but it's not
to them show with that mister
president uhm
I move the senate four amendment
number three to senate judiciary
Thank you senators there has
been a request we are voting on
senate floor amendment number
three.
The clerk to call the wrong
yes senator birth center birth
boats yes center compos center
compos votes no center survived
Center guy was votes yes centre
gonzalez no centre gonzalez
votes no center gregs
sent a gregs volta centre hamlin
center I reserve the votes know
center harmeo sent her meal
votes no center low best.
Center lopus votes know sent to
my estes.
central mechanic votes know
center morris center morris
votes yes senator minos.
Centre minor spots no senator
Central tc pino boat snow centre
pidea
centre pedea boats no centre
roddery guess center rodriguez
votes know sentence sanchez
center sanchez bolts yes centre
smith.
Centre smith is about cs
interested deal opens.
Center shandow boat cs center
souls sent yourselves votes no
center step by next interest
upon exposed no centers done
born.
Center worth votes no center
words.
Center word boat cs.
Yeah.
the senate center grix
thank you mister president thank
you membership we are back on
the bill.
And we have senator smeaties
followed by center of
neighborhood.
Thank you
the senator i'd like to
try to understand what the
present state is
Mister president center she
meetings it depends on where
they are not in a school there's
Okay so mister president center
is so
you'll be saved too to say that
this is not going to change much
voting center in like a retail
shopping center it is that
correct in other word
specifically someone now could
conceal carry and go vote in a
Mister president that's correct
what they'd be required to do
is leave their concealed carry
weapon
that was really at the request
of I think originally center
nibert
you know for folks that are
showing up within a hundred feet
I I understand that better now
knowing what you know
about.
Gun owners.
certain class of people.
State worth so much president
and I think again
by adding in the exceptions that
exist on schools where a private
automobile was one of those
certainly the intent is not to.
Not to influence or change
voting patterns it's just to get
the guns out of the actual
appalling place itself
intent because I know you
personally
but my question was not on the
intent of your bill
gun owners and methodology of
voting
would you expect
this regulation
meetings I would not I think
this is
uh the state regulating in a
and the legislative building and
so I can't speak for what
others are might do in their
as i've mentioned that
a across the board
prohibition that will apply in
in an awpalling places.
I find that answered to be
unreasonable.
And i'm going to make a case why
I want to congratulate you on
the only gun bill
there has been introduced in
this body that is constitutional
under bruin and I think you just
because we have a new standard
by which we determine
constitutionality of fire on
regulations in this country and
that is is there a national
it's black and why if you read
the decision we have a national
historic tradition of
decision so there you go for
that peace and I say
constitutional under bruin under
back to my my question
that that I find to be
unreasonable
they're the answer to my
question which I find and
in two thousand and twenty two
seventy three percent.
would you agree with me that
that is a significant despair
seventy three percent versus
fifty four percent.
if my question was not clear
but I asked if you expected a
certain group of people to be
disproportionately affected to
percent versus fifty four
percent
and so my position on this
in a quite common sense way
So mister president and center
should be it's interesting I
think in your question you've
basically are given me the
answer as to why I disagree with
you
find very different numbers and
so one of the things that I
really command
or body and our secretary of
absentee ballot for anyone who
felt somehow they couldn't vote
without having their gun next to
them the very easy solution is
to cast an absentee ballot
current numbers because those
numbers could very easily change
depending on a certain candidate
who runs and says people should
do something differently
Finish me to mr senator or
mister president and senator
there's a lot of things in their
that presently
republicans predominantly vote
in person now it's interesting
uncomfortable without their
weapon and therefore
to consider mail and voting or
more democrats to feel
uncomfortable without their
weapon and therefore
party registration of those who
want to have guns and of course
we're leaving out declined to
states and libertarians are
I think everyone has choices
located.
Senator smith's mister president
senator I very still
respectfully I understand the
very unreasonable because of
what we know about demographics
of american voters and new
mexican voters if you list to a
reasonable person is going to
say republicans tend to do that
kind of stuff who turns the own
guns in this country republicans
conservatives and it's not just
So I don't understand how
someone can make an argument we
don't know who is going to be
predominantly affected by this
forty one percent of republicans
own guns in this country.
You know what the percentages of
democrats that on guns sixteen
percent how can we say that this
demographic snapshot of our
country
seventy three percent of these
folks over here in this group
vote in person.
Only fifty four percent of these
predominantly affect a group or
not
so center i'm asking you to take
that last step with me and
justice anyway I I guess you're
this will this is my concern and
this is where i'd like to go
with you
certain class of people's
preferred method of voting.
Okay it is going to
disproportionately affect
Mr mr president and and senator
worth
can you see how I have a concern
elections shall be free and open
and no power civil military
shell at any time interfere
to prevent the free exercise of
retail center right now a person
can go conceal carry and vote in
that place and after this bill
passes they will no longer be
method of preferred voting and
it is predominantly for
republicans
and i've showed this body the
data to prove it
and so mister president mr
present spab sender worth.
Are we preventing
the free exercise of the write a
suffrage for republican gun
owners in this bill.
Thank you mister president then
center
I don't see how that's the case
because they are no longer able
to vote in that manner
and we are a bridging
certain manner in this bill
restricts that this bill
restricts aspecific manner of
now
us constitution
fifteenth amendment.
On a kind of race color previous
condition service so
once again I think we have a
pretty compelling argument
senator
and we have a fifteenth
amendment violation and we have
an article to violation in the
state those are my concerns
of voting is hey i'd like to
vote in not have like a big gun
you know some scary gun guy
voting next to me and that made
have some people that are afraid
to vote in person because there
are guns present but there are
some people that could also
reasonably be afraid to vote in
person because it's a gun
So much mispresent centers
meetings I can't really or pine
as to the percentages of new
mexicans but I think it's a it's
the books and again determine
what matter they're comfortable
voting.
you.
So mister president I think that
is the decision that each of us
are going to make on this floor
again as you stated there's no
decision in bruin and just as
thomas's opinion and I think
that's it's up to barties just
like this to make this decision
and this is one place where
again each of us are going to
waaay.
The.
I probably are not going to vote
the same way on this but I
respect that I and I get the the
constituents that we both
represent are are different and
and again each of us are here to
I want to make sure i'm making
myself clear even though that
that the bruin test with this
bill will pass the bruin test it
rights was ratified uhm in
seventy ninety one
much different demographics
and if I was
such in such gun owners all
those arguments go away
all of them go away in that
situation and we should not
conflict those two situations
disenfranchise a specific group
or class of voters
and we know that we're doing
that by this bill
any reasonable person looking at
this regulation will be applied
to more republicans than
democrats.
I don't see how you can make an
argument for that in a court
twenty twenty four we know how
people vote and that is my
problem
it's partial treatment I am very
that we are legislating here and
in other bills
my constituents believe in equal
treatment for people
equal treatment by the
progressive goal of sameness the
progressive goal of sameness in
our society we're going to bring
this per this group down we're
going to try to bring this group
person knowing anything about
modern american martin new
mexico just knows this will
disproportionately disin
franchise republican gun owners
zone I like to take my children
with me in person they like
getting the stickers senator
very fine good photo up right
kids the stickers it's really
positive for everybody.
But people like me
I realize I don't represent
everyone in here but people like
me in my constituents
we have genuine concerns safety
majority floor leader
but
I mean any any reasonable
person's gotta say this is going
to disproportionately affect
republicans I mean I just don't
but you cannot deny the fact of
the modern day demographics and
of which this bill is going to
be applied you just can't get
around it
so mister president closing this
unconstitutional
and
you know if we're gonna we're
going to do this and by the way
I think it goes the other way it
know they're there the lot of
the blue okay and so hey who's
going to favor you know stopping
the the receiving point a little
early hey it's gonna be postmark
And that's what I have concerned
about this country as we now are
so part of zone that we we we
don't we don't just drive
different cars and where
different clothes but we vote
differently and so now we can
please resist the temptation to
a bridge the right to vote for a
specific class even if you
disagree with them resist their
temptation mister president
thank you.
worthy yield i'm as president
happy to center neighborhood
thank you mister president
miss president I may disagree
with my colleague regarding his
to make sure that we are lying
this type of legislation is
closely as possible to the
announced the announced
article two section four article
two section six both
I submit deal with this issue
is to recognize bruin and say
that polling places are
constitutional argument against
it
and while I appreciate the
sponsor amending the bill to
provide an exception it's still
The polling place certain
prohibit guns in the polling
place then this bill could be
pretty simple it can prohibit
maybe a one page bill but it
goes beyond that and and those
are my concerns uh mister
president and and senator I I
believe that if this were just
analysis and i'm still concerned
with the breath the hundred feet
the fifty feet
that is also included as well as
places to drop off a ballot and
then move on and so I just
question whether or not we have
done a sufficient job in
I have no further questions or
comments in an every we do have
further debate center gagas
had any instances here in the
state new mexico or the pulling
places have been
an issue with consilery
carriers.
stated uh before this bill was
brought to me
by poll workers who were
extremely concerned about guns
are in the polling place
concealed carry I think we've
got an issue someone with a
concealed carrier permit I think
we had testimony in the
judiciary committee it's not
required to conceal it so I
think i'd be careful with that
had happened because we watched
our pulling places and so when I
gives my concern is is we are
creating a ball along that is
did have question uh mispresent
center um
there's a poll is statewide paul
that sort of concerns me and
this happened to deal with
governor lungregion prohibiting
coming up and I want to give you
some number so as state wide
fifty eight percent of the
do not want their rights taken
away earlier test money that you
know it was going to be
targeting certain areas certain
people I do believe that this
hispanics will feel that they
are being targeted in and as we
go into the selecting cycle it's
gonna be
something they're going to
notice and they're going to go
ahead and be
missed president center is
if there are people already
there to intimidate a voter poll
worker
thing is that I think that we
are going to be allowing those
people that are trouble makers
already
there are not going to follow
wondering if you've had any kind
discussions on how we keep those
are causing problems not the
innocent no excuse that are
The.
trying to find out if the people
that were there to intent our
time a day that are
non law bite in citizens
citizens don't listen to
attempts to change statute
anyway and just wondering it
goes back mister presidency to
the question if we don't know
Senator worth thank you mister
president so we had quite a bit
of discussion in both the rules
committee and the judiciary
committee about the statute that
of criminal intent that charge
can be made
the reality though and I think
the what brought this bill and
again I fully respect and
understand we may disagree about
this but there's a different
kind of intimidation when guns
are in a polling place and again
this that doesn't necessarily
when you go to vote to a mall
and so the same set of rules is
going to apply in both places.
Senator gaga miss president
center thank you I guess that
overly broad restrictions on
fire and possessions which
potentially encroach his upon
areas reserve for the federal
thinking is your president and
you know a I I think that my
colleagues here articulated very
well of the decision put in
to say is uh.
Would we legislate in this way
we we had a an incident where a
categorically across the state
for everybody I mean we have
such different demographics in
this state where where people
and that's exactly what this is
this is this is saying hey we're
going to we're going to go ahead
and restrict everybody for a
concern of a person and if it
be an especially to take no of
the vote that's going to be
taken here and and will be doing
a vote just a few minutes i'm
sure and I have pretty good idea
how it's going to turn out but
senators representatives
is voting we are accountable to
you
if you're in a rural district in
your far up following the party
line you need to be held
accountable furner urban
examined this fall is your
senator serving you thank you
mister president.
See no further debate.
differences that we have are on
this issue I also very much
appreciate the the import in the
way we're able to shape this
bill to make it better I do want
to be sure that everyone
leveling the playing field equal
treatment regardless of where
you vote so with that mister
president I move that senate
judiciary committee substitute
We are voting.
The clark to call the role
brantley center brantley votes
no center birth center birth
bolts no senator compose.
Center composed votes yes center
Sent a guy a hospital no centre
gonzales yes sent a gonzales
votes yes center gregs center
gregs votes know sent your
Sent her I resold about cs sent
to her meal sent our meal votes
yes center locus.
cannot boats yes center morris
center morris will know centre
many us.
Send you minor spots yes centre
center tease pena votes yes
interpreter centre pidea votes
yes center pinto
Send your sanchez votes no
centre smith.
Center smith's vote snows
interest the deal best yes
souls center source volte cs
interest departments interested
by an exports yes interest time
born.
Center steinburn votes he has
worth boats yes center words
center words votes no.
Yeah.
senate joint senate judiciary
committee substitute for senate
bill five as amended has passed
the senate center worth
thank you ladies and gentlemen
chief clerk please give me that
list.
Send a bucker
senator britain
sender souls.
So the worth.
The call has been removed.
yield to senator nevel for the
night next item on today's
counter senate joint resolution
nine is amended third reading
said available
thank you mister president
mister president I ask you to
substitution.
See no objection senator feel
explained what the builders
mr president if I could like an
please escort mister rounds into
the into the chamber and provide
a seat for him
thank you miss
mister president mister
our current situation where we
have a state secretary appointed
by the governor of the premise
of twenty some years ago is that
and education ratings and so
forth around the around the
country
you know there's a kind of
a facetious model that we've all
kind of heard
know what they were referring to
is that mississippi always
ranked lower in education the
new mexico did and that's a
that's a terrible thing for
mississippi but do you know
is still fiftieth is now
fiftieth we take the bottom room
depending on which which reading
statistics you see we're always
at the bottom of the heap so
uh best I can tell we were about
thirty fifth giver take.
Uh in rankings about twenty
years ago now we are running at
without mister president all
stand for questions.
Center is real debating senate
joint resolution nine as amended
we have senator brant to debate
brought to me by the charter
schools
there you know they're concerned
about uh right now that the the
chartering authority is the PE c
and you know everything's going
To make them feel like that like
they won't be targeted through
this mister president the same
ten districts of existing the
attention to charter schools
that they do this new board
board of education that we would
set up for the state would not
only then deal with charter
schools because statistically
many of the charter schools are
the better schools we have in
the state and if we're trying to
raise our standards in our
statistics and make a new mexico
Miss president dump center would
would we be able as a body if we
saw that that the peace well
would be then the the public
them starting to go that
direction to be able to pull
them back would we be able to do
that as legislators.
Absolutely we could do that
that uh this process takes
governor is not impacted by this
particular constitutional minute
this would take place
and come fully end of into
positions and would be able to
have that direction going
forward is one of her final acts
in her position as governor.
Senator
with several members that
charter schools are important
and I know some
in the other
side the isle that actually
serve on some charter school
yeah it's just something as we
go forward this i'm going to
support this measure but I think
as we go forward with this it
needs to be something we really
pay attention for and keep our
eyes open to
we do see scores in our charter
schools that are above our
traditional public schools and I
think we want to continue to do
that we also want to continue to
to give the choices to parents
have that ability I think that
we that we
know we support those schools
and and we'll be able to do that
so I will support this measure
uhm and I I thank you for
under richardson that we went
away from this
and to the appointed position
the twelve years that i've been
here all i've seen is is a
years and I think senator souls
has seen in the twelve years
he's been here because we came
up here together has just been
nothing but partisanship when it
comes to the department.
because we have an any factive
and the public education
department that one day they're
telling everyone to turn left in
the next day they're telling
someone running that department
that's going to keep the
policies the same
keep the standards the same and
then make tweaks as we need to
make them and I think we have
think that this change will do
that so I thank you for bringing
it
I I hope that everything will go
well and and i'll keep an eye on
not done but there are groups in
the state
that don't like charter schools
and so we just need to make sure
that we're were prepared if
job thank you thank you as
senator and if I could I was
remissing having a senator soles
he might have some comments and
I I did not yield him at the end
list center souls thank you
mister president and I apologize
I was in the other room getting
the financial disclosure stuff
finished up uhm.
it won't always be in the most
important thing in education
whether it's at the school level
at the district level at the
state level is consistency for
depending on what your
philosophies are but a few years
later when it changes that
disruption is worse and so this
education system in the the
world based on results and we've
been working on trying to do
several of those but the one
pillar of what they do that we
are like buying savings bonds
you don't get full value next
year you have to wait for them
to mature and when we have
changes in administration those
investments in education never
this it does not affect the
current administration it would
go into effect before the next
administration again that is
designed specifically to not
cause disruption right now but
Thank you we do have further
debate we have senator pinto.
Thank you thank you mister
president and at the senator the
bill with you
mister president.
Senator
that this
the former school board is at
what we're you're asking me
senator mister president center
the when we had school border
after coming out of coven I
think consistency is the best
way to move for things for it
but I do not think our education
that was there before it's going
to really move education for
because one of the things coming
out of covid was we were not
prepared for a lot of the things
this we need that but also if
this board was in place prior to
copied and then we get into this
lawsuit with yazi martinez.
getting to the classroom and
getting to our students and any
eliminated the board
and then we get into this last
suit and then going back.
The.
not specifically we spend a lot
of time to start it last year
with senator start myself with
the initial bill and we spend a
lot of time in the rules
using just the tanning
public education the commission
slots and people we've changed
it around several times and we
and you have a good example in
san one county we have three
school districts that have very
stable administrations and one
that does not and the one that
for many years I would like to
point out for my mister
president prior to changing
there was about a forty year
period I think senator store
programs and policies and put
those in statute and law and
policy and then the state
superintendent would be in a
position to carry those out and
various cultures and so forth
around the state.
Center printer and mister
president and senator in a bill
so these so there are some
they're they're not necessarily
all in one part of the the state
there's some in the southeast
corner some in the north of
corner and some in the albucker
carrier.
In mr president center in a
same system they operate under a
different systems part of its
the state control of course if
you understand that and part of
it is what the local
superintendent local school
board put together.
people into these positions and
when they think that is
reiterate was are they qualified
do they know the system can they
work the system and in some
So
if the tribal collaboration for
my district was not really a
barchaves nations and quablos.
One of their things is the
representation.
everybody's always trying to do
these hype at that a cold oh
hypothetically we're going to
get to hypothetically litigation
it's gonna cost to state money
we keep hearing that.
trying to be first and trying to
be forward thinking and
the call of our students is that
they still need more
but yet we see it seemed to hang
That has to occur in order for
you to maintain your language in
order for you to maintain your
culture and make an order for
you to maintain your identity
forward as far as moving to
making sure that are tribal
nations and our people are
seat too.
To really see the results of
that so not really in support of
the bill thank you mister
president center number thank
mister president with the center
behind me yield how a deal must
present.
A miss president center we had
this in committee and I had a
football in in ours when I first
got on school boarding units I
remember the old system in we
want to pd
the enabling acting the three
years as it's going to take to
implement this for me.
Yes sir mister president what
would happen as we would have
the current governor's term when
we would have second election
it would happen at the election
of the next governor we would
various districts there's ten
districts around the state some
of those are located in the
northwester that I think there's
two and albuquerque there's a
there's ten districts total and
state and that's kind of the
goal we did and why why we the
logic of why we kept it a
relatively large board.
Thank you for their mispresident
electeds or six years but
they're all staggered so that
the
the initial election would be
somebody who gets two year terms
I may get a four year term
cause the electrical ins as well
that's one of the things it's
been successful in our boards of
regions with the universities is
that you don't have governors
changing the board of regions
what the board of regions are at
the very she universities.
Thank for their misprison center
I guess that my next question is
then
one of my civil tendencies sent
is that they would have liked to
have seen it in writing this
year because they don't know
that and and you look at the
wondering if there's any way to
write in I know now not the time
but as you go over to the house
is there any way to add some of
the enabling act
amendments there's a lot of
limitations or what you put in
there you can't put the whole
statute regulations so forth and
and it's it's it's difficult to
do what you're what you're
enough time in there that we can
come in and right enabling
legislations to deal with things
like charter schools to deal
with all kinds of things it
might be of concern that we
This present center I appreciate
that I I guess
what we're looking for what
they'd ask me for it is
transparency i'm still going to
listen to the debate i'm having
a really really hard time I do
see a lot of positives in this I
want pd to have oversight and I
think that we're going in the
right direction I just don't
want to be at the end of this
twenty years from now looking
back the weed wished we'd done
something else thank you mister
This thing working here.
Um pr we.
Are we just a rearranging the
going to change to turn to ship
around
mister president there's
absolutely no guarantees but the
facts are our current situation
doesn't work let me give you a
sectors of education under that
administration one of them was
very controversial and we spent
a lot of time debating and
arguing and complaining about
the education policies or being
resigned and we had another
secretary come in under the
current governor and the corone
number five something like that
secretary number five you can't
whether we can uh rearrange the
can't get anything so hoped and
ten years to try to minimise all
of that to try to sit together
and put together more stable
secure board that can directors.
cause stagnation so
i'm that all that
hepped up about stability but
let's move on
you know we are we're already
talking about
the commission to have oversight
over the health department which
one could say is got a lot of
promise and this functional so
legislatures if they think that
that's the case then I was
encouraged to have to come over
the different model but what we
know is that educations in
trouble the martinis as he
start to address it and not have
a new philosophy and I have no
problem with the people who have
been nominated and either
administration for secretary of
we have to try it out for awhile
it may take a couple of three
years or five years we can't do
it by just changing every day.
Oh thank you for the answer
you could have the best
organization in the world
but if you don't have good
people
you're not going to
hiring good company people
trumps
organization every time so in
other words unless you
this commission hires
about changing the chairs and
attack unless you
hire good capital management
That really get too excited
about a capital changes cause we
have a long history here of not
the president thank you center
time and they do have further
debate setting up
as present with sponsored.
Send in the real deal I would
yield present senator does the
get away from all of it but it
would take a whole bunch of the
politics out as was mentioned as
I mentioned earlier and senator
stewart had pointed out in
fifteen year ten years that kind
of thing that's what we need if
we're going to have and for not
doing their job we get rid of
them but because they're not a
protected job it's it's a it's a
mister president I would assume
that I don't think that's the
way we normally do business.
Mister president center how
be the person in charge that
person within higher environment
that various
department hits and so forth.
Certainly us in mister president
center
the good senator from to hatch
his question about
that it would be similar to what
under a new type of
administration it'll be a state
superintendent instead of the
secretary point about a governor
the state superintendent would
run the show similar what
happens now but it would be
co- sponsor might have some
other points they he'd like to
add.
superintendent in our districts
and be under the control of this
board but would be the one
charged with running the schools
and with tribal communities it
Mr president if I might on the
the appointed tease that the
governor would put together
there would be a tribal
making authority in this board
and commission turned available
similar to what's currently in
position yes they would send him
us mister president center with
there any policies would be the
supernet might come up with the
bright idea he'd have to have it
approved by his school board.
Send him in us and mister
president center so that the new
That's correct.
Okay
mister president I don't know
what we do with education right
twenty three hundred ninth
graders repeated ninth grade out
of the twenty three hundred two
hundred and thirty seven of them
graduated from school.
get bonuses of bonding or
something for their future so we
can attract them and hold them
and retain them and and that
he mentioned which and what
mentioned but that's that's
really important how we move
education for from being at the
bottom eighteen hundred students
is not a lot of students to move
schools maybe little pressure
from a new commission would help
resolve that more efficiencies
in education I ask the peace
secretary several times they
and rust not keep adding money
over over to the system but
something has to change.
Tempting has to change the
amount of ped secretaries.
ministration they nobody wanted
the decide i'll then want the
peace secretary in order to big
fight in a big issue with them
the day but did it change
anything not really because she
martinez will they be the
negotiators in the zoony in the
sunny compact will they be
negotiated with the courts and
binding legislation legislate or
Sound available
thank you mister president
nothing would change from the
standpoint of with legislature
sites policy or or financial
the head of the current
secretary the current sector
makes these decisions
unilaterally possibly in
consultation with their staff
i'm not sure if you're chomping
at the bit add something that
that uh if you are good but uh
that's that's the way I see it
we were not going to change the
overall process but we are going
again it's not a proven system
except that before it was
considerably better it was
considerably better than when
after we've changed it and that
i've got some statistics if you
means but we were much better
off europe toward the mid point
in graduation rates and so forth
statistics are different where
they can keep the same records
they do now but it's the ones
thank you mister president and
yeah I want to make sure
everybody realizes this is not
going to by passing this that
suddenly new mexico's going to
sued are found in the way the
local boards work where school
boards are allowed to be sued
and they are the entity and very
Center minutes mister president
center potential to go back to
that question for just a minute
if if the commission in the
policy.
Mr president and senator I think
it's very similar
it it's similar to what it is
and if this board this new board
has a priority get funded it's
incumbent upon them to convince
us to fund that.
Terminals mister president you
know
and you know I may get it a jump
up from the good center
judiciary judges should not be
telling us what to do in
education or giving awardies and
Judges should not be telling the
legislature or we find you a
violation that's fine but then
spend eight hundred million to
change in turning point that we
have that we can get out of some
of these some of these problems
that we have in the mount we
find education I mean two
billion dollars over the last
I mean I asked almost every
superintendent accident
that support him
every cabinet say your traces if
you have a vision i'm good with
that kirkstein house can had a
no stability and education the
superintendence is gold
districts everybody wants
stability in their system in any
budgeting agency you need
for a short time we're here for
a long time right that is the
difference in how that changes
in education is such a slow
change people in my district
sale we're not seeing the
to make a slow change in new
mexico's educational system and
and maybe this will help speed
it up but I agree but I I am a
little bit skeptical to make
may have an impact on how we
feel about them later on
because royal making can get be
a vain very dangerous situation
because they're not the ones in
the grocery store.
They're not the ones in the ice
can you do about it and that but
I just cautionary tale is maybe
limiting their I think this is
going to go to the house amy
bind us in boxes in the perfect
example it is agencies early
childhood some of the some and
pd take federal money from arpa
the new administration comes in
they say well we don't like that
we're going to different
direction that's the cautionary
tale that we got to add
stability and so I agree with it
that's the main thing thank you
think syndrome and you summed it
up very well I think you know
the PED is not going to go away
it's going to be in place this
current regulations and statutes
that are in place for not
changing all we're doing is
setting up a new hierarchy as
many of the folks that have been
appointed in the past the past
few years have been professional
educators any one of them might
have been a good candidate to
run the state school board but
now pass and I ask you to see
the same thread show that role
has been called in all those
present voted in the
affirmatives of those voting in
the negative show hands.
Ten i'll center to your seats
your hand.
The schender were your voting.
By everyone of thirty six in the
affirmative one of the negative
set of joint resolution I as
amended has passed the senate
server bill thank you mister
messages from the governor on
that order business messages
from the governor of the reader
to read january thirtieth twenty
twenty four or senate executive
message number fifty six the
two of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of senate
bill two forty one a bill enact
providing for procedures for
conducting criminal history
record checks ensuring the
confidentiality of the criminal
history records and providing
the honorable mimi stored
president pro temporary
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate person
to art pursuing to article for
forty two a bill required
residential behavioral health
facilities to allow patients the
opportunity to notify the
patient's family that the
patient has been admitted to the
senate majority florida peter
worth take a set next order
thank you mister president and
it's considered we go out of
business committee reports we're
going to have order business
scene or objection committee
reports the reader to remiss
that a due pass as amended and
that's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator elizabeth lister fanics
chair finished the vetics mister
Here in no objections and reader
to read
the senate bill one sixty due
pass and that's referred to the
finance committee senate bill
one eighty five do pass and then
refer to the finance committee
respect lease submitted senator
the elizabeth lister fannics
chair spending mr president I
move adoption of the committee
they were acted upon
individually the reader to read
this president your indian rural
and cultural affairs committee
to whom has been referred senate
senator shannon de pinto chair.
Senator by the air
upon individually objection the
rediterate
senate bill one thirty one do
pass as amended and that's
referred to the finance
committee
submitted senator shannon
dependo chair senator senator
but there are move adoption of
the committee reports we have a
motion to accurate reports all
those in favor significant
saying I
the reader to read
mister president your committees
committee to whom has been
referred sent to bill one
seventy eight has had it under
consideration fights seem to be
Their story mr president ice
cunanan is considered the senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the community reports
that we thought on them with one
health and public affairs
committee senate bill two thirty
five find seemed to be domained
that's referred to the education
committee
senate bill two thirty nine fine
seemed to be german events
referred to the education
committee
senate bill two forty five
seemed to be german that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee.
find seemed to be german that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted senator
mimi stewart chair
at the common report has been
adopted and the journal reflect
they were actually upon
individually send a majority
floridator peter words to take a
set next order business
thank you mister president you
know is the same we go to that
the senate bill two forty six
introduced by senator rodriguez
and act relating to capital
expenditures reauthorizing a
reappropriation balances
expanding or changing purposes
letters legislature in prior
years declaring an emergency
senate bill to forty six senate
bill two forty six having been
read twice by title is ordered
munyos and act relating to
economic development amending
the bioside's development act
authorizing investment in by
science companies establishing
is order printed and referred to
the senate committees committee
then sent a tax business
transportation committee that's
sent a finance committee that
said a bill two forty seven
senate bill to forty eight
introduced by senator how to
prescribing penalties senate
bill to forty eight senate bell
two forty eight haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
servant is monios and macaman
act relating to the oil and gas
reclamation fund changing a
distribution to the fund to a
dollar amount requiring money
a reversion of the balance in
the fund senator bill to forty
nine senate bill two forty nine
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the senate committees
by senators monos and souls and
act relating to higher education
enacting the innovation
fellowship act making an
appropriation senator to fifty
two fifty senate bill to fifty
one introduced by senator pertal
and actually dating to taxation
a just in the rate of the
grocery seats tax to a rate
ordered printed and referred to
the senate committees committee
then sent a tax business
transportation committee then
sent a finance and senate bill
two fifty one
senate bill to fifty two
introduced by senator compose.
to the regional health council
and access act providing for
regional health councils
establishing duties of regional
health councils senator bill to
committee that senate bill two
fifty two
senator two fifty three to fifty
three introduced by senator
share and act relating to
bill two fifty three have even
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then sent a
tax business transportation
committee then sent a finance
that senate bill two fifty three
senate bill to fifty four.
Senators i'm gonna re read
senate bill two fifty two
so senate bill to the ditch is
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate indian rule and cultural
affairs committee then send it
health and public affairs
four set a bill to fifty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the senate committees
committee then senate education
committee then senate finance
athlete harrestment defining
terms prescribing penalties
senate bill two fifty five
senate bill two fifty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
introduced by senator hickey and
act relating to health care
required reports created by the
health care work for work work
group to only include complete
data sets for each health care
committee and then send the
health public advertised
committee that senate bill two
fifty six
the senate bill to fifty seven
introduced by senators moores
on.
Unless the sized or unconscious
patience sent a bill to fifty
seven senate bill two fifty
seven having been read twice by
senate bill two fifty eight
introduced by center duig and
actor dating to children
specified to whom and under what
circumstances information that
is held by the children you some
fatalities or near fictalities
protecting personal identified
information of department
clients requiring the courts
written order when excluding
bill to fifty eight senate bill
two fifty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate health public affairs
and act within the finance
amending the statewide economic
development finance act
providing lows and grants to not
profit organizations to complete
capital outlay projects adding
center bill two fifty nine
haven't been read twice by title
has ordered print and referred
to the senate committees
committee then senate tax
business transportation
committee then senate finance
for students attending public
schools in the pueblo of zoony.
And the naval hornation in new
mexico senate bill to sixty
senate bill two sixth they
finance committee that senate
bill to sixty
seven bill two sixty one
introduced by senators bucker in
brand and act relating to the
delinquency act allowing for the
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the senate committees committee
then senate health public
affairs committee then senator
district committee senate bill
high speed passenger railroad in
new mexico senate bill two sixty
two senate bill two sixty two
having been read twice by title
introduced by a senator such as
an act making an appropriation
to higher a sports nutrition to
consult with new mexico state
then senate education committee
then senate finance senate bill
two sixty three
senate bill to sixty four
introduced by senator my estas
and act related to education
of the adult high school diploma
pilot project providing
reporting requirements.
Creating a fund making an
appropriation senate bill two
finance committee sentimental
two sixty four the senate bill
two sixty five introduced by
senator munios and act related
to public schools and acting the
incident response plans for non
violent drug related incidents
involving students requiring the
public education as part of it
to commence a study
entertainment drug related
restrictions requiring certain
data to be read d identified
providing for confidentiality
agreements providing definitions
making an appropriation senate
senate finance committee center
bill to sixty five.
establishing setbacks for oil
and gas facilities state senate
memorial eight seven memorial
eight haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate rules
bope and severe lopes a memorial
requesting the crime victims
reparation commission to convene
a statewide gun violence
prevention task force to study
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate rules
committee then senate health
public various committee senate
memorial nine
senate joint resolution eighteen
agricultural property owned by a
foreign nation against which
property tax rates are assessed
to be a at a higher rate as
provided by law senate joint
send a judiciary committee
senate joint resolution eighteen
senate majority floridator peter
worth to take us to that next
order business thank you mister
announcements we will be on the
floor at eleven tomorrow.
And I do know that the senate
republicans are going to caught
us so I just would ask that that
susan is that several members
would like to make announcements
i'll begin with several more I
think this president that you
sent a worth for it saying that
the republicans are going to
have a caucus meeting in the
senate lounge immediately
thank you center more
center souls
thank you mister president
senate education meets tomorrow
morning room three eleven at
eight thirty we have bills by a
Thank you center senator brand
thank you mister president and
yeah I have taken a couple of
days and inhabit you know that
so III not forgotten I want to
make sure you knew i'm not
forgotten that i'm just trying
to you know keep my air open for
what's happening over there and
I do know that uh there's been
representatives went over I
think they met in paris with
israel as well as hamas
leadership qatar and egypt were
involved in that and so they
american people and and try to
bring some stability that region
although we we see that that
region has becoming more more
volatile as a ran continues to
to pay attention to what's
happening with our troops also
have family that's in the
military right now so again just
you know continue to keep them
in your prayer continue to keep
your our military folks that are
young and that's not really
counting the ones in turkey
which we've had there for a very
very long time but but just you
know keep them in your prayers
keeping in your thoughts uh as
they are in in more and more
and talk about the fact that
iran is the one that's pulling
those strings there.
Funding all those terrorist
organizations and I really hope
that our congress and our
president will start dealing
important that we stand with our
greatest ally um and and a
country that honestly has done a
lot of things right when it
comes to their military I don't
and those women have a man there
are some of the best fighter
pilots in the world they could
teach us some things and and we
actually work together with them
quite a bit so i'm i've been
thank you mister president
you're senate tax business a
designing casadoes for cyfd
and for anyone who was
interested in providing public
comment please check the
procedures for the rules
sure but he's paying attention s
j r one which is insenate
finance which is a power judges
nomination commission uh there's
no fiscal impact that joint
to remove senate joint
resolution won from senate by
announced committee see no
objection
so order something else thank
lieutenant governor has given me
his funding sheet so i'll move
it around in or move it from
who weaving in that rugs in the
gun not a reds in the two great
hills and the colors that come
from stage brush and flowers and
how they were even but two grey
hills is one of the most famous
of the chamber to my
understanding so we're all safe
we should get all the way around
third in get it to home pretty
quick
so that for members know that
but III need to make sure that
you have enough money on your
state card.
I was informed yesterday that
you know at the land commission
celebrity also you don't have
any idea could you share that
with us twenty five dollars per
minute for every minute you're
over the one hour time limit to
your kids basketball gaining
they are over the hour at twenty
five dollars an hour do you know
what that does to one hour of
charging at twenty five dollars
an hour
so twenty five dollars a minute
for over charging after one hour
that that's an impossible fee
for people to pay so thank you
mister president thank you
to the members that are tomorrow
is tough county day and we will
be providing some lunch boxes
from much one of the very fine
I thank you mister president the
committees committees will meet
tomorrow morning at ten thirty
in room three twenty six thank
you.
Thank you history and we have
your sponsorship less that you
have you will be getting four
you sign them and you introduce
them and then you will get a
copy back thank you so much and
be as a place holder because the
staff needs a little more time
to finish proofing and doing all
that they are doing so just
wanted to let you know thank you
thank you center the center
share
heard from today so I wanted to
read the whole thing to you
mister president the protection
of the state's beautiful and
helpful environment is here by
declared to be fundamental
natural resources at the state
comma consisting with the use
and development of these
resources for the maximum
benefit of the people for the
from the from the oil again that
was an old number our current
number is nine hundred and
it's like money I believe that
it's maximum maximum
here we go maximum benefit for
the people.
mister president new mexico just
a power has the best
pollution controls on our
industries of any state or any
country in the world and in fact
our extractive industries
all we do is encourage other
places to do it which will
increase the pollution in the
world
all their money would go away
so then what we would do but we
wouldn't have any jobs for one
thing we would have any schools
because well we would all have
to leave or die.
In your freezing to death in the
dark is not maximum benefit of
the people so we can have clean
the dollar amount was I think I
put to me zero seven there
anyway it's a lot more than
canabas oh lot more than canada
goomies might be fine but that
many could means it's just way
too much mister president so I
do believe that we're absolutely
doing the right thing here new
balanced and should stay
balanced and I love that and
according to the american long
association
the place with two gigantic used
to have to gigantic power plants
natural gas worlds and still had
the cleanest air in america
wow so we know how to do it we
know how to do it right let's
mister president I do have a
unanimous consent request this
was a memorial senate memorial
six the israel is real ceasefire
from senate finance to senate
rules present senator senator
brent at miss president with the
majority leader yield for a
couple of questions before I
agree to the announced concern
yes some had a breath thank you
mister president and yeah I I
just want to make sure i'm i'm a
clear on which memorial this is
Center worth so mister president
I don't have that memorial right
in front of me and I don't see
senator lopez behind me but I
think you've got it up on your
screen so you certainly could
you know this this memorial is
very very
hmm well sorry work
disappointing to me
military aid
to israel.
In
ceasefire from israel
the others may be alluded to in
here but they're never called
out in here.
Never calls for his below to
start firing missiles that never
But it calls out israel several
times in here.
Our greatest
ally
will stood next to us as people
I think about if if if israel
had done that when we were
attacked on nine eleven folks.
Israel had said you can't go to
How would we be responding how
would we have responded.
And and there is a question that
that serious easy pino asked and
The others a big big difference
between israel who tries to
target military assets
no military function at all.
Now it's really hard not to kill
we saw more proof and more
evidence where militants were
found
in a hospital
forces the palestinian civilians
to provide them cover
what do you do
as a country.
know talks about how how it's it
is
a violation of international
humanitarian law to target civil
billions.
israel's targeting military
assets they're tarding where the
rockets are being launched from.
But we're gonna call our israel
Might make big supporting this
memorial.
We're joining her mass in saying
called for by hamas.
And by the way that is the
genocide that has been called
for by hamas.
The day after israel became a
state they were attacked.
And they won.
The.
So there's benny an announced
insent to move.
So for the bodies knowledge to
go to rules committee then to
public affairs.
See no objection so ordered
senator worth thank you mister
