Senator brand.
Center brantley.
Senator birth
senator compos
Centre gonzales present senator
gregs
senator hamlin.
Center hamphill.
Senator hickey
santa mechan
santa mechana.
Senator morris.
Centremen yours.
The.
Central tissie peanut
senator pedea
senator pinto
santa perta
senator pope
Senator share.
Center shandow
center soles
Senator tom in here senator
worth
senator woods.
You do have a corrupt mr
president thank you i'd ask that
spanish please remain sandy for
the pledge of lead just to be
led today by senator media
leaders and spanish to be that
today by center by the and the
solution mexico flag to be led
and whose laws truth we mercedes
out a guide and bless our
senators in this state
legislature that they may enact
laws that show please need to do
to that glory and bring glory to
The.
Once again we like to welcome
each of you to the chamber you
may be seated.
To start things after the oil
two senate majority went michael
recognizing the work of my
colleagues here so much work is
put into this and all of the
time in energy away from family
business work and community to
Senator michael for there thank
you very much mister president
i'll take us to that first order
of business unions consent to go
that first order business
announcements in miscellaneous.
Hearing the objection center
there thank you mister president
today is CNN community college
day at the legislature center
hickey has a certificate for
central new mexico community
will be providing lunch for
legislators in the chambers from
eleven am to one thirty pm today
so that is I saw them setting up
setting it up mister president
so that should be very
interesting I have a couple of
more comments before we move on
but i'll just start leave it
mister president to others who
would like to introduce their
guess thank you center my
company we do have others who
double senator gave us would you
like to do that on the floor and
in the gallery just on the
floor.
I guess gallery probably
appreciate that too thank you so
there's a unanimous consent
in i'd like to introduce your
honourable tenant governor this
morning I have so zavana tuper
she's sixteen year old she's a
and she has been three times the
mexi has called shooting sports
champion she's represent the
mexico's ute in twenty twenty
three world shooting competition
president of the sir chapter of
yesterday for a couple of
reasons but today i'd like to
introduce monica kelsey i'd like
her to stand uh she's founder of
governor gave us three hundred
thirty thousand dollars to start
the installs but it was her
dedication to this opportunity
john which him to stand his
deputy fire chief in espenially
in john was actually the brains
was not waiting on us they
started the process even before
we started so I just wanted the
body to know who's here and
recognism given her annual plaza
welcome to the senate.
Thank you senator gave us
senator special president i've
forgot to yield to I don't know
uh center hour meal was one of
head and thank you mister
president and welcome into the
chamber i'm happy with the same
book that I got was happy to
work with center guy goes to
secure the money from the
governor who ensured that one
you in that action and so with
that mister president i'd like
to introduce my guests first I
have ram christian culsar who's
a community advocate for
college and to my left mister
president is no stranger to the
new mexico senate is missing the
naval just as a reminder to
those who may not know cindy now
housing and urban development
under the leadership of
secretary marsha fudge working
as a senior policy advisor where
she overstar had ten regional
administrators and served as
needed help and actually allowed
me to come in to her office in
washington DC to discuss housing
in really by and in northern new
mexico cindy has a long history
of serving as an education
mexico and the c a o at the us
hispanic leadership institute in
chicago illinois mister
president city was undocumented
for over twenty years and became
the first doctor recipient to
rostrum with you today members
of the senate and and mister
president this is hockey baca
the new city counselor for
district two and albert he was
professional hydrologist and uh
there's been working over the
less several years as a member
of the mid rear grand
water conservancy district and
well but he's ah
well he's new to the city
council he is very very
experienced in public service
and we're looking for a degree
got senator compos thank you
remits mister president members
of the senate to course here
with me today is ethernet on
your civilian and he'll be
graduating from rearantial high
school in may he'll be attending
lifter when in fourth place in
new mexico in the new mexico
state competition his soft more
year ethan has been a rear until
dodge of santa rosa ethan spent
several years in center with his
grandmother leaner and his
grandfather tony dodge ladies
and gentlemen if you will help
me to welcome ethernet here not
here knows the center of area he
knows real round show and of
course he's looking forward to
his education there at the
university new mexico so nice
thank you mister president to
follow up with center guy goes
as comments
and
about the baby boxes uh mayor
afternoon and so mary jimming's
left santa fe to go to ross will
to be at that event and so we're
pleased to be the newest city
that now has a.
Ah baby box and we appreciate
thank you very much thank you
center nightmare senator souls.
Thank you mister president i'd
like to introduce two of my
guests today first many of you
education and now runs the p the
nursing programs at UNM and then
also with her I have saundred
cathedrals who is a phd nursing
student so they are here
learning and part of the course
policy in health care by seeing
how the senate functions and so
there might guess today if
thank you mister president and
members some today is a
department of transportation day
at the legislature number
department attract
enjoy some swags and you can
even sign up to take a ride on
an electric vehicle on the west
side of the capital of also
visiting our several road
members are critical to put in
more than one hundred million a
month in improving state roads
on behalf of the new medical
today thank you senator gagors
mister president thank you for
allowing me for the second time
members of the senate.
I'd like to introduce in the
gallery I failed to do this
earlier uh savannah brought her
the gas company in the mexican
for thirty years with him in uh
it's probably why i'm here is
because I learned how to argue
and fight during work but I
thank you
center higgie.
Thank you mister president it's
are honored to have board
members nancy barca
virginia true here
really want to do a call out for
the president tracy hartsler
uh it's been my honor to go and
work with president hart slow
am in seeing what they're doing
and innovation and so forth but
I uh an incertainly tracy
couldn't do the job without a
done it's it's no nationally uh
it is the state's largest
undergraduate student body I
think getting close to twenty
thousand and it provides
the business community and
what's so wonderful it's common
sense they're training for the
needs that we have in the state
ten week course to learn how to
make robots and programme
just amazing what they are
teaching and I was.
Told that I didn't have to have
eldes of our two or one to
I I really also want to honor
their vision very simple
changing lives building
Thank you so much send a hickey
center michael by there
thank you very much mister
president I want to rise and
support of this recognition
mister president I have to tell
you a little personal story of
one of my neighbors close
neighbors and I do want to
highlight though and that show
is evil accrues are bored member
for the southwest quatch in the
bernalio county essentially
want to thank her for the guy
and she's given me personally
and also just the leadership she
provides in our communities had
a great career with cnm and then
decided you know she could be
member thank you thank you
center by there.
See no further announcements.
Senator michael barrier to take
a set next order business thank
you mister president so with
and it's in the senate lounge
right now for you as well mister
president whatever you'd like in
there and I would like a tasking
asked consent to excuse senator
do high until she returns to the
representatives.
Here no objection we are in that
order business messages from the
house the read all read
senate respectly submitted lisa
and mortis macuchin chief clerk
the journal will reflect that
the message from the house has
been received
the concurrence of the senate
respectfully submitted lisa am
ortis mccuttin chief clerk the
general reflect that the message
from the house has been received
submitted lisa emertes my
cutting chief clerk journal will
show that a message from the
house has been received
sent out majority whip my
company to take a set next order
see no objection we are in that
order of business messages from
the governor of the reader will
read.
February eighth twenty twenty
four amended senate executive
article four section forty two
of the new mexico constitution
and animals say nineteen seventy
eight twenty nine dash two dash
four end twenty nine dash two
as cabinet secretary of veteran
services department for a term
commencing september fifth
twenty twenty three to be served
at the pleasure of the governor
february eighth twenty twenty
four amended the senate
executive message number one the
honorable maybe store president
pro temporary dear president
record a nomination for
appointment victor rays for
appointment as the student
member of the university of new
mexico board of regions for the
submitted michelle luhangrisham
governor.
The journal will show the
message from the governor has
been received.
Set a majority microphone there
over at the chief do we have.
Thank you very much mister
president unions consent that we
go to that next order of
business committee reports here
no objection where in that order
business committee reports
had it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
that a due pass and then
referred to the finance
committee respectly submitted
senator elizabeth liz stephanics
chair.
was supposed need the eyes have
at the committee port has been
adopted readable read mister
president your judiciary
committee to whom has been
referred senate health and
public affairs committee
submitted joseph servant is
chair
stewart I must preside a nice
unanimous consider the senate
that the reader be allowed treat
president your judiciary
committee to whom has been
referred sent a bill sixty six
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the finance
committee.
same with the recommendation
that it do pass
senate joint resolution five
report all those in favor
significantly saying I
was a prosony the eyes have at
the committee port has been
adopted and the journal will
reflect that they were acted
reading of legislation and I
will yield to senator ivy soto
seen objects aware of that order
business third meeting and
legislation senator I resorted
thank you very much mister
president mister president
forty eight
on final passages but take this
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution see no
objections that I thought I
really explained the bill thank
you very much mister president
that mister president.
grocery seats tax are the state
has taken three percent off the
top and have has a dedicated app
to the state general fund what
twenty five or twenty six it
starts to face it out one
percent at a time beginning with
f twenty seven twenty eight and
then it is a phased out with FY
as those are not a governments
that existed since the time was
stated with that to be happy to
stand for questions thank you
senator every sort of senators
were debate incentive finance
with mister president i'll be
happy to.
Tennis do so mister president
perhaps I miss this in your
opening but uh can you talk
about does this cost us money or
does this increase revenue.
Mister president and center
short so are it has no impact on
FY twenty four twenty five
and m r as
the the the source of the
revenue however is is the money
that we were taking up from
lawful basis we're looking for a
political way to simply ease out
of this.
As so much person and I am not
sure you answered my question
you gave me a lot of information
fund be about twenty two million
dollars and twenty seven about
forty five million dollars and
twenty eight
Center student.
Mr president what happened since
twenty nine.
This president and center store
Thank you mister president I
don't really need the the
sponsored yield I just want
telling that I appreciate him
bringing this bill forward
actually doing something it's
going to make things better for
local governments to be able to
find an operate in the way that
they need to do
Thank you center grades who do I
further debate we have senator
novel thank you mister president
I think with what senator greeks
just brought up I just wanted to
clarify that that's all I needed
bill thank you very much uh
mister president him as
president colleagues again this
simply allows the taxation to
remain with the people who voted
for that taxation if they vote
substitute for setting bill one
forty eight do now pass and ask
you manners consent of the
senate that the record showed
that the role has been called
that all those president voted
in the permit of except for
those voting in the negative by
please raise your hand.
By what of thirty four in the
infirmative zero the negative
senate finance committee
substitute percentage bill one
consent that we go to that next
door to business announcement to
misunions see no objection
center thank you very much
mister president just for
information of the body now that
we've got the body here mister
president there were going to
continue on the next item too
then item for
item five six seven and eight
lost five of our men women
marines as helicopter went down
and think we need to remember
those who have given the
ultimate sacrifice for a country
Thank you mister president thank
mr president since how are our
announcements miscellaneous
business i'd like to make a
motion
that we remove the committee
The governor and how the
continue on its pass thank you
sinister do we have it is either
the sponsor of the best
president I want to change that
unanimous concern typologists
want to you to senate nibert and
you can give us the title of
that bill
thank you mister president this
is an act relating to health
care amending a section of the
additional disclosure of
confidential information.
The.
Thank you soon and I would.
See no further questions.
The.
to committees committee has been
removed
thank mister president perhaps
perhaps you could mention where
it goes next the next to
referrals.
is in health and public affairs.
Thanks in a neighborhood do you
have the second committee
assignment on that.
We're still on that order of
business announces his lenies
are you to send it when you.
Mister president I think i've
resolved that issue thank you
they're in your shot I wanted to
welcome them to our state
capital building once again as a
former athlete I relied on them
for ductape and a lot of aspirin
and I reprofer to get through my
because they're there's going to
be a lot of need for athletic
trainers here pretty shortly
after tonight thank you mister
president
this president thank you more
saturday nightmare uh thank you
mister president the second stop
for senate bill two thirty is
consent that we go back to that
order of business committee
reports objection where on that
order business committee reports
the reader or read.
do pass as amended respectfully
submitted senator george monos
chair senator my us.
Adoption the community report
been adopted reader marie mister
president your health and public
affairs committee to whom has
been referred senate bill
seventy one has had it under
these epino chair sees it you
know uh mister president I moved
that both the committee reports
be read and that we vote on them
with one motion but the the
ninety five same with the
recommendation that it do pass
and then's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator gerald or the
zipino chair then our decent you
report has been adopted and the
journal will reflect that they
were acted upon individually
senate majority whip michael for
the end of take a set next order
of business thank you very much
center monos than over the item
for which will be me item five
senator stephanie's item six
senator sharer item seven center
stephanics and gagas and item
george came in us george came
when you're and thank you
senator mister president
mister president asking asking
this considering the senate.
debate amendment or substitution
seen no objections senator will
explain your bill.
Thank you mister president of
you guys all look at the trip
reports and everything that's
happening along our roads the
the current cost of deferred
maintenance on roads right now
for every dollar we don't spend
today cost us four to five
dollars in the future for
maintenance and repairs
percent in the last crucials
thirty four percent santa fe
that may improve with a help of
the governor
in statewide bridges two hundred
dot has a one point
two billion dollars budget the
cost of escalation costs with
maintain roads has gone under
water and so as we moved to
getting them ahead getting them
sound financially saving money
on money that they wouldn't be
there's about one point three
billion dollars worth of roads
that are deficient
in the north these quadrip of
new mexico
and in west central new mexico
galup grants district six one
point eight billion dollars of
road deficiency.
Mister president it's time to
have spent seven hundred and
forty seven point eight million
dollars on roads this year
mister president and with that I
will stand for questions.
And.
just want to stand in and say a
great job to our finance
committee chair for coming up
with this incredibly innovative
way to get some of the most hard
this is a great approach and
excited because as it turns out
one of these major projects will
land in my district some very
happy about that as you can
imagine to bridge that's about
to fall into the water mister
Seen objection thank you center
for the center more thing was
present I just wanted a
cent of romania switch kmart he
bought that sued at today.
and so it wasn't it came out but
if there would have been a blue
light special for this one I
would probably underprive bottom
anyway
mister president it's obviously
since we're doing a
transportation bill it looks
here in highway transportation
tonight thank you mister
president mister president
there's another member of the
body that's wearing something
brighter than me I think and I
mean I don't know why i'm
Senator pope in relation
president transportation project
center more mister president
Thank you as president of the
provide center municipals thank
you we do have other debate we
have said their neighborhood
center pertalent or branch and
and thank the sponsor for this
bill I know that in my area it
addresses a critical need of one
counties and the tremendous uh
traffic that it receives and so
I am really appreciative of the
sponsor and his committee for
courts body to vote for it thank
you mister president thank you
so I would say a pertal and
thank you mister president and
thank you to the sponsor for for
been on
especially friday afternoons or
sunday afternoons and monday
mornings it's a two lane highway
really do feel
at risk and at danger
and just this last month I think
there was another fatality on
that on that stretch of road so
If you've driven through texas
on their farm to market roads
mister president they have
passing lanes and speed limits
of seventy five miles per hour
like this is something that's
really going to improve the
safety of my area and it's
economic development it's
tourism taxes aren't coming
because it's dangerous and we're
the mountain god so I think this
is really important for them
this is going to help them and I
just want to appreciate the
sponsored taking the lead thank
you mister president thank you
our objection thank you frankly
sorry.
They use effort to rent.
We do have further debate we
have senator pinto.
members of the body so one of
the things that came up right
before the session where the
cattle guards along for ninety
one with this cover those carol
gardens.
Senator mister president center
six dealt
districts each district could
normally get six million dollars
a year and mean it's repair pair
money will now get twenty
so right before I kind of
adjusted to the o t and they
told me that according to the
mexico administrative code
eighteen point three one point
you're familiar with the area in
my district that that road does
not just serve one home owner or
when we we have communities and
that was what they also know how
work too because maybe if the
right away with
me I didn't have a honation gim
can be achieved just to me
maintenance on these catalogues
because i'm thanksgiving when I
another category there was a
tree growing out of the cattle
guard and the grandma that lives
on their road
she doesn't have a back co two
president and senator and mister
president to go to that response
DO t is taken regularities and
pot patching polt holes and
santa fe that's not part of the
it matters when somebody hits a
horse or a cow and eroded pretty
much destroys everything they
got if it doesn't hurt the
person so as you pot patch pot
Thank you very much mister
president you don't consent we
excuse senators worth answered
about this until they return to
the chamber except for the
purposes of a call objection
thank you center by the air.
body to know that inside DO t's
presentation whether you heard
it in finance are you heard in
transportation
nobody selected these roads but
DO t
reference on page.
project king from no legislator
came to me and said I want my
big road on it we took dot's
recommendations from the agency
priorities with an additional
seventy million sitting there
and additional fifty million and
bonding sitting there for one
twenty to start filling those
legislators roads as they were
do this we made a list of may
fix these roads we gave them
money to fix these roads maybe
not quite enough but it fixes
these roads
and back fill some of that
bonding next year so we don't
really ping double interest we
have the cash we just can't ever
dollars a year we've taken seven
hundred and forty seven million
dollars worth of projects off
the plate this is the largest
my thought in my
comments to dotries you better
build cash and you better with
the cost savings at the
mexico to fill part halls on I
forty and fixed guard rails in
whatever else clean cattle
guards to fixing the whole
entire road system in new mexico
get the maintenance work done
get the jobs done you don't have
an excuse that you don't have
the money to do it anymore
finance committee substitute for
senate bill three hundred and
they ask for this consider the
record show the role has been
called and all those present
voted in the firm except those
voting and negative by show
want to yield to center pathet
our senator brant there's any
announcements that need to be
made.
If you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
Center finance committee
substitute percentage bill three
me in in and he's wearing the
other classy suite today this is
like a miami bice move.
They think you said anyone else
president I ask you now it's
consent of the senate that the
record show that all actions for
placing sent a finance committee
substitute percentage health and
public affairs committee
substitute for senate bill one
president you know that we've
been going through several
gyrations of how to protect
ourselves from an information
security standpoint at the state
level and are we created last
year the office of cyber
that they are to adopt an
implement the rules that we said
we wanted uh for establishing
minimum security standards and
policies conduct it and security
state auditors office they are
also charged with the
legislation in approving agency
information technology requests
for proposals for other requests
contracts and they issue orders
of compliancy on a voluntary
basis for county municipal or
tribal governments mister
president and so the last thing
is we finally battened down the
technology standards related to
cyber security and so that'll
help to bring our our state
agencies into complaints that
way and so with that mister
president i'll answer any
questions thank you center party
See no debate center my company
they ever close thank you mister
president with that we're going
to be heck of a lot more secure
for senate bill one two nine do
now pass and I ask an ins
consent of the senate that the
record show that the role has
been called in all those present
voted in the affirmative set
those voting in the negative by
show of hounds thank you all
committee substitute for senate
health public affairs committee
substitute for senate bill one
twenty nine has passed the
senate center thank you mister
president members of the senate
thank you we're going to move on
record show that all action for
placing senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
senate bill one thirty five as
amended on final passage has
many sponsors senator brand in
center I resolute who both will
be saying something center my
estimates senator career hamper
senator pad and senator stewart
cancer and auto amun disorders
medication will be available for
no less than the duration of the
Senator brand thank you mister
president does this bill really
helps to maintain that doctor
patient direct relationship
computer hundreds of miles away
shouldn't decide whether or not
the medication the doctor
prescribed to you is what you
need to take
for the different if it's not
available but that's not what
and a pbm says i'll know that
that medication just won't do
it's too expensive
this bill is about patience
calls out and protects some of
those very serious illnesses
like cancer where people get
that you know people are people
and he had a lot of money he
probably could pay for whatever
you wanted.
But.
It just shows you that the
matter how much money you have
patients and helps them to be
able to get that and that's why
support it that's why i'm a part
of your center brand center
every other thank you very much
uh mister president uh mister
As we prepared the spells we've
been working the spell we met
with a number of the insurance
companies I really want to
appreciate
the conversations that we had
with the insurance companies
blue cross blue shield while so
came to a neutral place engaged
in some very healthy
conversations even even the pms
bill as a we have a proceeded
through the legislative process
it is not quite as ambitious a
bill as we might have otherwise
This really is about maintaining
that secret relationship between
the medical provider and the
patient
and that course of treatment has
been approved
that that course treatment will
be able to continue
and and as long as there's a
therapiric effect
had to reprove and reprove and
reprove.
That that treatment was
necessary.
and being willing to engage in
conversations for the benefit of
the people who are most affected
on the in this on the human side
which are the patience thank you
this as well mister president
this is a tremendous tremendous
left the original step therapy
guidelines it took a bit it was
towards towards patient health
and towards quality of life that
that appears to to be on a path
to the governor's office were
grateful to the governor for
giving this a message in a
thirty day session
president you uh you have a
horrible ailment dealing with
with cancer or dealing with the
auto immune
deficiencies you go to the to
you don't we're not gonna give
you that medication
that with that has that has to
stop if a doctor if there are
incredible wonder drugs on the
market incredible
and because of the cost and so
with this bill folks will get
the medicines they they need to
be alleviate horrible horrible
will be less expensive if we
have people not debilitated by
horrible horrible medical
conditions but he leviated from
you center my assessor we do
have others on the list who
would like to speak we have
senator hickey all of my senator
there then sent artistic
penalty.
Center credit pale and senator
hambling.
to the bill although there are a
large number of safety.
Issues to be maybe aware of uh
with a script to uh with with
the the authority to write a
script that includes dentist
of these drugs are really
wondered drugs I mean they they
they have major impact and I as
much as anyone want to see the
people who really need them get
there all being advertised there
and half the advertisement are
the complications that the drugs
can cost and so it it takes a
prescribes these drugs not just
because they saw money tv or not
just because the patient asked
for him but they really need to
originators of the legislation
to holding these down to a
couple of areas for us to learn
from and i'm not so much worried
future
I am a bit concerned about the
imminology component.
As I have heard from one health
plan of a dentist for no
further over this summer how do
we work in who is the right
prescriber for these drugs in
their categories and are there
some way now that the health
to go further and in in terms of
patient safety in terms of the
credentials of the individuals
are prescribing what
particularly the new drugs and
are tears in many of these drugs
are going to cost a thousand
dollars or more two thousand
dollars right out of pocket even
though they're prescribed in the
appears that if you find someone
on a branch plan who has a seven
or eight thousand dollars
deductible and you prescribed
these drugs when there is
healthy so there are many many
many components to think about
as we go through it but I think
this is a good start and I would
therapy you might think that
they save money but in fact the
twist that they do.
Are ones that generate
unnecessary expense which is
drugs how drugs are procured by
the state in our death they done
in a way that saves significant
money for everyone I mean there
is probably twenty percent
states who are coming together
and as you've heard me say you
know health care costs is all
about the numbers the larger the
number of the lower the costs
and that's one of the avenues
this is definitely a step in the
right direction people should be
able to get on the drugs that
they need are we need to figure
out how to rewrite health plans
of the cancer centers in the
state has a
uh a push together of a fund
that helps by people insurance
and helps them with their drugs
back to safety and affordability
and I just want to point out
something that may be some of my
colleagues are not going to be
so happy about.
eighty four which established
peer review and quality
assurance in the nation and at
that time virtually every
physician or provider was on a
review is a fundamental standard
of quality in health care but
guess what the vast majority of
doctors are on hospital staffs
and our profession needs that
oversight not just mail practice
laws but needs that oversight
because it's a quality oversight
quality so I hope as we start to
move down this path we use this
is a way to restitute peer
review of medical professionals
relationship very sacred so I
think this is a a good start I
will be working diligently over
the summer to come up with the
steps to take more money out of
our pockets and put it into
their profits most of her own by
health plans the big three are
owned by the big three health
plans.
uh again in many ways I I do
thank the sponsors but I I want
to explain that is a physician I
did take a note and there is
a harm so I will be voting no so
i'm explaining my vote before
but I agree with this bill
moving forward and I urge my
colleagues to work with those
harm is done if the potential
for it is there thank you very
much mister president.
Thank you center hitting we do
have senator but they are
this piece of legislation after
I had a great run down from the
advocates and folks are keen by
the walk me through exactly what
this would do for the people of
new mexico and it's it seems to
know if you've ever been into my
office I have a beautiful photo
a painting of my mother hanging
on the wall that's been hanging
in this building for twelve
years now and I lost her back in
days and back in that time frame
I might still have for here
today or would have at least
extended her life a little bit
and I sure do miss or every
single day and I I just I work
here in honor of her and the
I think there is also if we if
we do this right it seems to me
like you know this exploding a
cost of health care would
definitely benefit by having you
know this type of an option for
our people here in new mexico so
i'm glad to support senators to
president and we we heard this
bill in senate health and public
affairs we heard a committee
substitute
and we pass that out and then I
noticed there was a change made
a few questions about those
changes
mister president i'd be happy to
send our dish if you know
I notice that
conditions as once that that
might qualify for not having to
get prior authorization for
a lot of what center hickey just
shared with us and and I
appreciate very much center
hickey's words are and
is one which which he is I think
beautifully
balancing a recognition of its
need to move forward with his
own hesitation about it
protection for harm
when you go into the areas of
the behavioral health
two skip
without having some more study
and without having some
additional guard rails put on
that process
could be created now having said
that mister president service
he's been up behavioral health
are still on the table not for
this year.
But behind the store on the
table and that is when when
yes and in fact we have had
incredible assistance from the
officers superintend uh tenant
who who has been able to
to also provide us with AAA lot
of tactical assistance in this
Schools are deputy so pretended
yeah
we're going to be able to
build those guard rails through
accommodation of future
appropriate ones but we want to
make sure that we do it right
well thank you
center and mister president I I
would hope that is that effort
that are that carry with the
potential for good such a
similar
potential for ill for home to
Credential of the prescriber and
i'll tell you why that.
It's it's my experience and I
think a lot of people around the
nurses who work in the community
clinics and and to exclude them
from this possibility I think
would be a mistake just because
somebody has an md after their
somebody a prescriptive
authority
it should be the nature of the
drug rather than the credential
of the prescriber that we uses
this is the drug issue that
they're going to be dealing with
they don't have cancer they
don't have but many many people
have behaved your whole problems
and if there is a way to
them before they actually get to
the one that's that if occasions
so thank you very much senator
and thank you mister president.
Thank you server disappearance.
for their efforts on it i've
worked in the public schools for
over thirty years as a school
psychologist and before that a
teacher and also special ed
prescribed what it's not
approved and they had to go
through trials for their less
effective medications before
getting the approval for the
is a recommendation that his
physician gave but it took a
really long time for insurance
companies to actually approve
that so this is a way to make
training and expertise so with
that I yield back to the sponsor
thank you senator could I handle
before we all back to the
sponsor we do have others who
sponsors to yield I just want to
stand and rise in support of
this we saw this and committee
the other day and i'm very
grateful for bringing this to to
to this this body today
with a single parent with my mom
who is a nurse who taught me to
ask questions to my doctors and
not leave until I got the
answers to those questions and I
felt that I was getting the
health care that I deserved I
able to question their health
care muchless advocate for it
and so many view no last year I
tore my ministers on the opening
night of the session by slipping
having to have an extra
expenditure for an unnecessary
diagnosis was very frustrating
for me and I can't imagine what
opportunity to speak on this and
thank you to the sponsors.
Thank you center hamlin.
Centers meetings.
this bill and if we're serious
about having a conversation
about how we can improve the
health of our population we we
need to I think at least take
one of the winners in this bill
is the doctor patient
relationship and that's i'm
gonna I mean i'm a doctor rate
i'm gonna that that's at the top
them and looking at all their
studies and an insurance company
comes and says well now you
can't do that treatment plan
can't do can I do surgery can't
prescribe that medication you
i'm telling them I this is what
I think we should do but I have
no idea if we if we can do it
and we may maybe get to do it
but it's going to take like
three months
country and what they're doing
is they're winning by treating
chronic illnesses look at
burning sanders website I I urge
you to look at bringing singer's
website he's got all the
idea how many but I encourage
in any anyone feeling the burn
in here look at his website he's
got a great resource ah yes yes.
so far as winning insurance
companies
they they they lose out a little
bit on this bill in I want to
bit of of the pain right we
gotta share the burden and so so
I just wanted to point that out
now what what are some solutions
therapy just banned all together
now I I imagine the insurance
companies
they would have pushed back a
little more forcefully I guess I
hear some neutrality probably
some reluctant neutrality mister
president.
that may not be uh be workable
or doable or negotiable with all
the parties involved but here is
here some things for farmer that
we can't do in this bill
advertisements that were seeing
us and new zealand we should be
in it it should be gone
if I can roll that under this
bill I I would I think it's
wrong they're paying for fifty
is it doesn't appear to really
be
aimed at the sick person
I want you to imagine you're
running a business.
are going to be more or less
likely to run news that's
critical of the pharmaceutical
industry
Why would why would they keep
that oxygen was not addictive.
Why would you run stories like
that why would your own stories
about conflicts of interest that
we have in our medical schools
everywhere the fda what why
would you want to inform the
public harming
the profits of pharmaceutical
industry if you're a news outlet
that's the majority of revenue
is coming from what you think
about that should we allow that
no absolutely not we're an
extreme outlier in the entire
world and we we've got to take
about this with our medical
research in new mexico right now
the federal government they are
paying forty times as much to
study cancer treatments instead
to tell people what medical
students are being taught right
now all across the country
they're being taught that your
success is a well managed
chronic patient that goes to the
we've got a reorient or
incentives for curring and
preventing illness and we can do
that in new mexico we can
incentive eyes really good
We can also watch out for
conflicts of interest in our own
academic constitution
institutions and we can do a
better job.
continue to increase the cost of
health care like like many many
bills that we do in my opinion I
think that we are going to
increase costs premiums are
once again III do I wish it was
more of a blanket stuff there
business so that's more on
criticism I i'm very happy to
support the bill but I just want
to inject a little bit of of the
president.
Thank you sended her smeanies we
have senator hickey for a second
time i'm sorry said he is we do
have senator see the lowest or
an honor and ownering of
senator schmedies who will be
this this is going to be one of
his last session but I really do
fixed them even on the floor he
has found he's just such a
careful reader
and I want to see that i've
enjoyed having him on spec
are very very well taken as you
all know I think the whole
medical system is a mess and we
should start from scratch and do
medicare for all and try to take
profit out of it completely but
this to this body
thank you mister president thank
you senator lockers for a second
time we have senator hickey.
public health in the state
instead of just oh i'm sick or
go see the doctor but if we
engage in public health we can
have initiated a school of
public health to help lower the
demand by keeping people
unsecond the first place the
other thing I do want to point
out that
covers mental health which is
gets afraid and
severe depression by polar
etcetera etcetera very very
through medical school to
actually do the prescribing that
we certainly can with nurse
presitioners in advance practice
but that's after several hours
group over there with
to
slow down a little bit
the other thing that's very
important is that in the mental
health party bill we passed last
addiction that is a straight
shot very clean very clear those
drugs are easily understood and
known by our providers and so
that does exist.
since the fan extra close on the
bill thank you mr president and
thank you to all my colleagues
for their comments
record show the role has been
called and all those present
budgeting the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands thank you all
senators to your seats please
we're voting
i'll send interest to your
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Center hickybody know.
Well you know.
The.
Five out of thirty in the
affirmative two in the
Thank you and go on to the next
item in the calendar day that's
going to be item number six
center bill one of six and our
yield to senator share
thank you mister president I ask
See no objection center share to
explain the bill
so mister president what this is
is this is the creating of the
two hundred and fiftieth
anniversary of the declaration
of independence and so mister
president here not written on
to dissolve the political bands
which have connected them with
another and to assume among the
powers of the earth separate and
equal station to which the laws
of nature nature's god entitled
sense heard like in schools and
so forth what we don't hear is
the last sense
and for the support of this
declaration with the firm
reliance on the protection of
so mister president the question
is who would sign such a thing
and what happened to them
for them
what was the price of freedom
two sons captured nine of the
fifty six fought and died in the
revolution
what what kind of men worthy
these men were
were these guys twenty four were
lawyers and jurisd eleven were
merchants nine were farmers
these were these were men of
means there were well educated
knew the penalty
would be death on the gallows if
they failed
they signed and they pledged
their lives their fortunes in
their sacred honor
the debts and he died in rags
thomas mckeen was hounded by the
enemy so much that he was forced
to move his family almost
vandals for soldiers or both
took the properties of claymore
hall walden when that he worked
ruthledge middleton
occupied by general corn wallace
the commander of all the british
forces.
Nelson went over to general
washington
were destroyed and he died
bankrupt
francis lewis had his own and
property is destroyed the only
major his wife and she died
his fields is grissmill were
laid waste he lived in the
forced and in caves and when he
returned home
he found his wife dead and his
children gone
stories and sacrifices of the
american revolution these were
not will died rabble rousing
roughiens these were soft spoken
support of this declaration with
the firm reliance on the
protection of the divine
providence we mutually pledge to
each other or lives or fortunes
the entire planet a liberty that
almost no body in all of history
on any continent in any time
could even dream of.
certainly not but this document
moved the world to a position
were liberty was at least an
senate bill one or six is twice
amended.
Center for the air followed by
seller when you're center for
the area thank you very much
mister president really
appreciate senator share
the time to that only introduce
a piece of legislation like this
but also tell us a lot more
about it i'm surprised if the
sponsor would just yield for a
question or two
absolutely mister president.
been signed not been ratified or
would have you from the I
believe was kind of a congress
at the time or however they were
moving forward with with these
documents what what is your
in the vast british empire which
at the time the sun never set on
because some part of the planet
was always designed with the son
time at least the british people
on this contact face this time
is that they were felt that they
were being abused by their
government through taxation
without representation through a
taken that step that would have
continue to be and the british
empire would have grown in in in
and so we would all continue to
have been subjects of some other
crown in not citizens
thus having the liberties that
citizens have her thank you very
piece of legislation and trying
to pull coalitions together to
get things done there's a lot of
work that happens there there's
a lot of things that happen
ahead of time before we even
arrive at this building for a
legislative session.
So mister president you're
talking about the declaration of
independent document or the
bill.
Both
sold the bill was actually
such commission so it that's
certainly been building and
working across the country but
for this
there was there was great debate
harvey paul hervey paul review
her sorry about that.
Paul river writing along saying
the british are coming now he
didn't say that because they
were british
took almost a decade more than a
decade actually before this
document even became a
possibility
and then as people were sitting
around trying to figure out how
Put pin to paper and made it
happen
thank you very much mister
president again I want to thank
senator share for the eloquent
response to the questions that I
had and this is again they
one of senator shares true
heroes in life candidate share
always has a lot to say mister
president thank you thank you
with the rest of the story
appreciate that senator by the
we do have others on the list
mister president with the
sponsoring inner shared yield
yes mister president center went
into miss president I
white point in time that did
time we celebrate the fourth of
july and seventeen seventy six
but it was actually written and
then rewritten and rewritten
the
it was drafted and presented on
the fourth of july and at that
point there was general
agreement but until people until
these various men
pledged their lives their
signature.
There was.
The.
Of the fifty six nine were
killed in battle
several others died broke most
of them in in fact died in
poverty will not most of them
but a lot of them died in
poverty having everything done
but nine of them were actually
killed in battle in two were
executed.
tried his traders and executed
mister president we talk about
all the things that happen in
the world today and member
everything they did was by horse
back and whale oil and
making america what it is right
the claim are independence allow
us to be insulationship moving
along where everybody in the
world wants to come.
world will be looking at you
differently seen why you're
doing that what happened but I
mean you really it really rings
a bell from in and
you're those general are around
they've been gone a long time
they did it for us and everybody
in america
it really changes the world
thank you make you send him in
your center sir.
omitted which was one particular
individual sign the declaration
of independence charles carroll
of carlton was not on your list
he distinguished himself for me
among the other signers in the
served in the state legislature
and rose through the ranks but
was invited to sign and that was
remarkable at the time at the
time he was probably the
wealthiest of the very wealthy
and elected to take on war with
the king of england and and all
of this might enable power at
the time and I I bring it up
we talk about how hard this is
or how emotional it is or how
stressful it is to decide
whether to oppose one group or
one bill or one issue in every
it'll make my primary hard or
make my general election harder
I can't message it back home I
know the right thing to do but I
I can't someone that cruise do
it and all ever have to do is
families at risk in jeopardy
against the king of england
because they believe in the
principles of what they've dot
was the right thing to do it
makes what I do here seem very
easy and its inspiring and so
were set here and one of the
interesting things as a catholic
of the thirteen colonies
none allowed catholics to be
continental army because they
believed that freedom was
available.
And that's an amazing thing to
most powerful land force on the
planet
unbelievable that there are
there small group of people
consent of the senate that the
record showed the role has been
called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
should hands thank you center
chair also just your seats
The.
good day thank you we'll go onto
the next item on the calendar
and that's going to be eight or
seven centimetres seventeen and
i'll you'll see centers to
panics thank you mister
president I guess you know must
There is no objection since the
vanix to explain the bill thank
you mister president members of
the senate the health care
authority the hospital
the solution to address the
serious financial situation for
many of our rural hospitals in
your mexico out of new mexico's
twenty eight rural hospitals at
mexico called the health care
quality surcharge which was that
nursing home surcharge which has
created some financial stability
to increase medicaid payments to
hospitals up to what's called
the average commercial rate
hospitals would pay an
assessment on their impatient
up to mis a proximately one
point three billion dollars in
medicaid matching funds the
health care authority would use
these funds to increase medicaid
the program will be tied to
quality metrics.
Hospital read mission rates
seventy five percent of payments
made the hospitals will be re
currently available the program
will favor our rural facilities
rural hospitals were pay ten
percent of the assessment and
receive forty percent of the
and we have senator steinborne
followed by senator neighborhood
center stem one thank you mister
president uh similar we yield
for some questions mister
president center I will you
mr president senator thank you
for asking an additional one
point three billion dollars of
federal money would come in into
point three billion dollars and
then we're going to be turning
around in giving that back to
the hospitals of our state.
Mr president senator forty
expansions salaries for our
direct care workers in the
hospitals and the expansion of
new services.
Mr president the quality metrics
that are tied to this money are
more about health improvements
hospitals they fail the ultimate
quality test of pay should
improve him because they deny
people patients health care who
don't who don't have health care
president in senator yes we do
recognize that and in our
discussions I
try to insert that in this bill
but it was not quite accepted
Well mister president this bill
is halfway through the process
it still has to go through the
house
we have a bill is can be heard
today in the tax committee and
if it makes it through that
uh who accept uhm you know or a
contracted hospitals who get
government money which this
would be the case here too
clearly have to accept all
access for all people in the
state in new mexico mister
president the second thing this
bill does is it says that if you
do not have insurance because
maybe you have a policy outside
amendment that hopefully will
pass today says no greater than
I think the medicaid
reimbursement rate that you have
to make an affordable payment
plan for people um
mr presents that center here are
you taking but an amendment for
this bill are you talking about
for another bill well i'm
talking mister this president
center i'm talking about another
been great on this issue like
you are great on a lot of
healthcare issues I want to urge
the house sponsor and the
governor and you senator and the
governor's office may be most
dollars that we require the same
hospitals to accept all the
insurance although the exchange
or people will be denied health
care in rural areas and number
two that they provide life
saving treatment and don't deny
so I think this the perfect time
to do this mister president
senator because we are giving
them one point three billion
dollars and in return
this is what we need to do to
can work together to incorporate
that into into this bill later
this session because I think
it's an appropriate vehicle so I
have missed present thanks
senator thank you center
mister president I will yield
better neighbor thank you mister
president
miss president in in the
some of the dire straits that
are rural hospitals and clinics
are in and as I understood that
that that was a part of what
this bills aimed to do is to
help the small rural hospitals
and clinics to remain open and
to continue to serve the
Center niver and mr president
and center I believe that
hope we do see those clinics and
hospitals remain in in effect
during that interim before this
new money comes in but I stand
clinics because the demands not
there they have increased cost
having to fly in a medical
professionals because they don't
the medicare reimbursement rates
are not sufficient to sustain
those additional cost and we
need to really help them out and
so I appreciate the sponsor for
bringing this and seeing what we
can do not only to the
president thank you center
neighborhood.
Send him us
thank you mister president you
know this is kind of a tough
bill and in we got to fix our
health care new mexico but I
review mergers and acquisitions
when you get eaten up by a big
outside hospital in the small
hospital that corporate money
will get eaten up transferred
do not let this be corporate
welfare do not let this money
leave new mexico because they
bother small hospital in in it's
there is going to be people out
there for green especially the
way the shape our health care
systems in so do not let this
forward in in controlling health
care costs in work dollars are
spent new mexico thank you
mister president I guess anyone
know center could be a handful
thank you mister president I
especially that in rural small
communities that are really
struggling financially and i'm
really proud of the work that
we've done and then executives
don't really prior recognizing
last long lasting positive
impact across new mexico since
we have.
So much of our state and a raw
community and it's a lifeline
Thank you center could I him
hill cinema's other thing was
present echo senator muniosis a
very bright sidely colored words
earlier um
of state and the or the contract
rale state providers so I really
do occurage that as you move for
with the senator and uh
secretary that you put some
myself but it is important this
is a lot of money a lot of money
that could potentially be going
out of state if we're not
careful so if we can keep it
here in new mexico to help
recruit new mexico providers
some guidance on that because my
experience is often without
these hospitals that they go out
in the contract out of state
they don't keep their money in
state and it would really help
so I miss president center
munich I agree with you and I
hope that the agencies and as
this move forward we do in fact
keep this money in new mexico
and help build new mexico's
president thank you senator
morris center
thank you mister president I
also understand and support this
bill and with my knowledge of
sponsors for putting it forward
there's one thing i'd like to.
Point out
that only about many going out
of state but
most of these hospitals employ
more personal income through
that employment than they would
be able to receive if they
were to go out of state the
hope that the hospitals who
receiving this money will use
that money also to provide the
specially care that otherwise is
See no further debate centers
the vanix to close on the bill
thank you mr president the
department did indicate that up
to twenty five percent of the
net could go out of state
you now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the senate that the
record showed that the role has
been called and all those
present voting the affirmative
except those voting in the
By vote of forty in the
affirmative zero the negative
senate bill seventeen as passed
the senate centers to find your
president members of the senate
We're gonna continue on the
calendar we're going to go on to
the next item on the calendar
that's going to be item number
eight senate bill one await as
amended i'll yield to send them
yours
substitution
the maid amendment or
substitution thank you send him
a new say no objection if you'll
explain the bill you know mister
president the secretary states
down we fill it up again
election comes and then they got
to ask for bar authority or
transfer authority and they're
running short the election
cost to they heard in my head
was about thirteen million
dollars election cycle when
there's a state and an local
election or a county election to
state election so
Said let's keep this at a level
that you can sustain so what we
do is take the tax
administration transfer act
place twenty million in the
phone when the election costs
and specials and supplementals
in in that with that i'll stand
for questions thank you senator
is our debate in senate
as amended center
thank you mister president fully
center during a situation
saying no further debate said
i'm when you ask to clause on
the bill mister president I move
that senate bill one o eight is
amended do not pass an assembles
consider the soon the record
said is where voting to your
seats please have you wished
about now please raise your
hand.
mister president think you had
to have to clean up my trucks my
local uniform is in the bed in
my truck
so they can maybe get me another
one
business thank you very much
mister president and you know
it's concerned to go to that
next door to our business
announcements in misleading no
objection where that are to
business announcements listening
of the bill senator diamond
brantley I need to move to it I
moved to expinge finance
committee report
the finance committee report
In the last finance consent say
no debate in our discussion.
There has been a request for
your name I can send all those
in favor of significant by
saying I
suppose
I guess I don't have to do that
a point of personal privilege I
have some guess with me today
that have been running all over
the round house and
they are here with us on the
floor or sitting to your right
mister president I want to ah
retired at this point and does a
number of other things in the
community so I appreciate him
for being here mr michael see
the back i'm and asked him to
stand as well as a great and
body this first time in a
recognized now you might have
heard me use the term at the
beginning of the session the
foruming
and one of the amigos passed at
today and we're taking a pretty
hard mister president this was a
real good body of ours and
this this body this immegal here
has been my migo for about
city counselor in the city of
albuquerque great father if you
see him with his children he is
a remarkable father and I just
want to recognize him as one of
my good buddies and one of our
Thank you center for the air.
Similar comes on is like to
senator morris followed by
senator pardon center morris
thank you mister president
center the last emotion if we
could take remove center
municipal jacket and burn it I
will agree to it
and that's senators you are in
our office call plex and so the
laws and the rules on apply to
you so we figured out as fast
about us but can do some for you
that is unless you agree to play
in the baskball game
and if you do
our records are going to be
to say it's long gone mister
president laws thank you catch
me at a and of awkward spot
right there not knowing what is
under that jersey it's hard for
me to commit whether I want to
president mister president I
think it's a bowing ball
thank you center member states
and while I bought on there's
much incentive to want to make
sure that I can do that but
there may be the instead of
that's under there that would
Ah I see so all my eggies were
on my egg is that in here.
I love the senate lowers so I
will play tonight and will join
you and thank you for the
opportunity to do that
I can't guarantee a victory but
we have unanimous considered
that the president be allowed to
speak is do you still have your
yellow shoes mister president.
Senator part of that that's a
color they I love that so I
would play with those every year
I retired those shoes when I
became lieutenant governor I
still have those shoes but
unfortunately I didn't
anticipate to play so those
shooting aware.
I wear a size ten cents a birdle
well mister I have an extra set
there ten and a half but if if
how they fits in a part of I
look forward to being there with
everyone tonight and i'm really
grateful that senator morris is
right here to return my
rightfully owned
you very much mister president
believe i've seen that in your
office before.
Senator that was the reason why
they made sure to keep them
we go to that order of business
messages from the house of
representatives you have other
members who like speed and
announcement specilities and go
to senator hotel meal mister
president as the all the sheer
vintage basketball shorts these
are from nineteen ninety five so
I think they're calling me
vintage and so last year I got
to represent especially valley
high school in the senate game
vintage is going to be looking
good tonight mister president
and I had to make we're grateful
for that new leaders and that
share that is your so famous and
mister president that cheer for
those of you that don't know is
block that but the block that
marked combined against just
south like if you're church
given to me little louder block
that vote though
block that but though
thank you mister president i'm
wondering if the good senator
had a meal i'm sorry yes how to
meals can be demonstrating as
terror way pants later I guess
we'll just have to see that
later.
Mr president i'm directed to
informed the senate that the
house is passed house bill one
thirty four as amended by the
house and requests the congress
of the senate respect
set next order business thank
you very much mister president
unions can send that we go to
that next order of business
report committee reports.
See no objection when that order
as amended has had it
unconsideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted joseph's advantage
the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually hearing
no objection
the rate all read us bill night
one ninety three as amended has
had it under consideration
adopt community report all those
in favor significant I
was a posnay
the eyes have it the community
port has been adopted and the
journal was show they were acted
legislation or objection we are
in that order of business
introduction legislation the
reader will read
related to prescription drugs
and acting their prescription
drug price transparency act to
increase transparency across the
prescription drug supply change
prescription drug price trends
to this superintendent of
insurance requiring the
superintendent of insurance to
collect and publicly report.
Aggregated information on
hours about thirty three haven't
been read twice by title is
referred to the senate health
and public affairs committee
that's house bill thirty three
brackets and rates husband to
fifty two bill two fifty two
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the senate tax
by representative line to an act
relating to general obligate
obligation bonds authorizing the
issues and sale of capital
projects general obligation
bonds to make capital
expenditures for senior citizen
facility improvements
schools and for public safety
rate radio communication
improvements statewide providing
for a property tax levy for
payment of principle of interest
election of the state declaring
an emergency husband three o
eight house bill three o eight
haven't been read twice by title
is.
Referred to the senate finance
committee that's house build
clerk okay thank you mister
president so with that are you
not consent to go to that order
business announcements in
miscellaneous and I will yield
to the.
The.
center on thank you mister
president yes the day has
arrived it has arrived look at
that trophy okay see how
beautiful it is up there and we
need quality minutes from
senator pedea in and senator or
teasing peanut with that
legislative floaters shot thing
and maybe even senator servantes
can help us with this with our
amiva defense that legendary
zone that we play so so at the
indian school tonight
thank you center on all
sender branded you wish to make
an announcement.
So senator soles
mister president just
announcement for the senate
education committee tomorrow we
have nothing on our docket and
mister president that your
senate tax business
transportation committee will
meet thirty minutes after the
floor session room three twenty
one sender.
to that order business messages
from the house objection
february eighth twenty twenty
four message from the house of
representatives mister president
office of the officers of the
house in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the senate respect
leasubmittedly site m or tease
my cutting chief car.
signed in open session house
bill one seventy one as amended
said a majority which michael
but there to take us a next
order of business
thank you very much mister
president that you know it's
members of the body at eleven am
right here where you are right
now and so if there are any
other committee chairs and need
to make any other announcements
mister president.
Senator hambling thank you
from senator to tall man senator
hickey canzalistein born myself
and then tomorrow will finish us
off for the afternoon so again
text business and transportation
five fifteen minutes or so after
the session two forty five I
meant sorry about that.
See no further
eleven am tomorrow morning no
objection to senator standard
