Santa be so though that sent her
her meal
senator low best
center my s s here.
senator manus
senator nevel
santer neighbor
senator one ill
center period
senator pope.
Santa rotary guess.
The.
center shandow.
Center solves
center stephanics
Send her worth and center words
you do have a core mister
president thank you i've asked
at all members and those guests
in the gallery please rise the
in albert in your mexico i'd ask
that you remain standing for the
pledge of legions to be led
today by senator
legillegians and spanish with
that today by center masters and
good morning to mexico
i'm deeply on it to the
government once again to be here
especially
To drive around the mexical end
and and see used and other forms
so thank you kids
I also want to think of.
Bishop.
I see you for his work here in
the house but chapter work
senators thank you for doing
your work pundit or prayer or
less
and convenience but where he
stands at times of challenging
the account to person
let us pre
are the buying master
god of the most high creative of
both even in earth and all it
was within thank you for this
ways and create for given this
in a hearts for those who have
been on garden towards us thank
you for calling in a danny each
member of this diverse body of
with a strong more compass
as they labor is legislators
working on various committees as
authors collaborators
to mind a feel with the strength
to labor with love in respect to
it one another world focusing
the political echo aings goals
put new mexico three dimension
integrity and determination
within this round house in this
road city of only faith was st
francis of size same center fee
state budget that is physically
and positively
positively impact doors.
In the mexico and the mexico's
And others who are called a
labor in this world house in it
labor legislators respective
community while assisting and
supporting these legislators in
father dressed in mexico and
united states
and chris cheeses name a premium
payment.
Members of the senate
united states of america.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the united states of america
and to the republic for which is
Prometally are there a lot on
data the loss is status who need
those damage yellow rapulica
career pleasant unanimous
antennas in the receiver
You may be seen him
everyone upstairs unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and miscellaneous
hearing no objection we are on
that order business announces
misleading senator peter
particularly appropriate to
focus on uh unity respects
integrity uh those are things
that are also super important on
good way to start off our
session by keeping this all in
perspective and realizing why
we're doing what we're doing so
thank you
ladies and gentlemen of the
mister lieutenant governor are
going to introduce jennifer
garner and mark schriver who are
here from save the children
foundation she's a board member
will will well move things
around to make sure that that
works when they come today it's
steam day at the legislature
it's also city of santa fe day
move things around to make that
work
senator compost has a
certificate of recognition for.
Christine accomplish that's not
going to be read but he's going
going to be read and you've got
three guests to introduce so if
the folks on the city art here
will do that one first suggest
will play that by here and see
where we are we have a number of
state senate and many of them
were going to get introduced in
terms of events uh your rankout
US a legislative dinner is
tonight of lefonda at five
invitation and I don't have a
location but will track that
down and forget it will let
everyone know uh cvec fec lco
tomorrow the blue cross bruce
shield van will be parked and
the east side of the parking lot
and dispensing flu shots from
nineteen so certainly encourage
anyone who has not done that to
senator padia first and then two
other members to introduce their
guests and just a reminder at
eleven thirty seven about five
minutes I think we'll take a
send to a two allow cameras on
the senate floor and in the
senate gallery here in no
objections order center by the
thank you mister president you
don't consent to excuse
things i'll just get off of my
desk also and I am very honoured
to have
kyle conway from new mexico
highlands university i'm gonna
ask him to stand here mister
president he is a double
mexico that community loves him
and and he loves them back
charles motivation comes from
understanding the importance of
having a well present
representative district for
highlands university and mister
president I just want to let
senator schendo know who is the
best gulfer in the senate in my
opinion that
this is the other best goal for
turns out so can we give a cow
conway a hand and welcome him to
the senate.
vibrant programs and when it ask
at the following to stand when I
introduce them a seven madrid
mosion silent walker no a king
cora kickin ambrial mcquarry if
I can ask the body to please
welcome my guess from public
american diabetes day and we are
celebrating eighty eight day
here in the legislature the
american diabetes association
along with its supporters and
advocates have helped with
policies through this
difficult disease and it is
expensive to manage in recent
years new mexico has come
together to pass safe school
protections for children with
which can also help to curb type
two diabetes mister president
which has become an epidemic
across the united states more
than five hundred and eighty
seven thousand people in new
children are not immune either
in nondashmetro areas of the
state of the city rose from
twenty three point two percent
in two thousand and nineteen to
twenty eight percent in two
dollars a year to treat so we
need to make sure that we make a
medicines and treatments
affordable so thank you very
much mister president can we
just recognize some of the folks
that maybe in the gallery for
Thank you center billion center
michael by the thank you very
much mister president.
We do have others who have
yesterday start with senator
brandly thank you lieutenant
taken over the new mexico senate
and the new mexico round house
today I went to begin by
reminding senators that ffa is
say members many of them are in
the building today we have
ninety chapters across the state
students enrolled in these high
school programs are learning a
variety of skills including
today it is clear that say is no
longer just about cows in plous
I want to welcome you guys offer
being here I am a proud product
those of us who have been in for
they could probably recite the
fa creed at least the first
first for the rest of our lives
I believe in the future of
agriculture with the faith born
power in bargaining and the life
abundant and enough honest
wealth to help make it so for
others as well as myself and
special guests in the chamber
that I would like to introduce
from my chapters.
I'd like to begin with the hot
springs effort saying my two
favorite students my daughters
daughter and the teachers they
text both of us quite regularly
on that message we have caden
reese carlos ameria president
elena ava brily castio if you
jesse are hot springs advisors
are julie and marta and ah jinny
burner and our members here
today arsea brennan jaden and
christopher thank you guys for
all you do for your community
Thank you center brown they we
do have others with center
disappearance followed by
senator period center how to me
up singer pope senator bucker
and senator hiki
center of this is you know
house sharing representative
linte today he's here shadowing
me and finding out how the
senate is so much better than
the house in the way we operate
working on a dual master's
degree in social work and
business
he's he's
he says he's a military
a time but he got his bachelor's
degree in science best for the
science degree from the hassle
indian nation university in
will work in new mexico we're
going to do everything we can to
keep him here although if the
dual degree it's going to be
very hard for him to pass up the
temptation to accept some of the
Center period thank you mister
president I just wanted to
welcome some guests that came in
vivian and collect maverick the
real maverick louis and panalopi
robot matti indulten eastless
trevor hailey and railey hendrix
if the body will please help me
Thank you mister president today
I have with me some
distinguished gas from that
gets preferential treatment
today that a jays jaren mcbride
about sophie scope her dad on I
have had had a lot of cattle
trade in our life and it's all
Senator hunter meal
thank you mister president and
first I have I have a few
introductions the first one is
standing to my the left behind
single vision to make a positive
impact the personal personal
personal ball and personal
events and so she is an event
planner right here new mexico
small business woman who I am
the gallery students are exposed
to different cultures cities and
people building professional
networks now mess of easter
students mister president
benefit from exposure to career
and attention and so in
conclusion mister president I
want to urge every senator to
consider the men's impact that
supporting f f a can have on the
future of agriculture right here
along with my friend she lives
the weekend welcome them to the
new mexico senate.
have and i'd asset a standard
nature do some person I have von
torres who's a freshman at
saying john's college double
majoring in philosophy and
comparative literature with
minors and history of science
demand action new mexico next we
have jack bingham he's a student
saint john's college as well and
a member of the account use
youth organizing committee
majoring in philosophy but then
philosophy and comparative
literature with minors and
history of science in the
history of mathematics and as a
member of aclus youth organizing
committee and finally we have
mister president i'd also like
to make an announcement
acknowledging black history
today
it is a time to recognize the
indomiral spirit resilience and
invaluable contributions of
block americans through although
nation's history yet in
commemorating the rich tapitary
black history particularly in
certain states and local
communities
black history month serves as a
point of reminder of the end
white washing that is
marginalized minimized or even a
race significant aspects of
black history
we must be honest and speak the
truth
crimes inflicted on humanity
the three fifth compromise was
not a good thing as it further
to human eyes and slate people
and gave slower slave holding
ensure these atrocities never
happen again
i'd also like to say that as an
african american issues do not
make us victims
contributions are knowledge
celebrated and integrated into
our collective narrative
and various things in various
states including our beloved new
highlights only certain aspects
of our shared history
as we honour black history month
let us collectively challenge
and dispanel the barriers that
perpetrate this white washington
In an in new mexico state renown
for its cultural diversity we
are privileged to celebrate the
remarkable accomplishments of
rights activist in the first
african american elected to the
new mexico state legislature his
tireless efforts advocating for
equality justice and education
now acknowledge the remarkable
conflictions but also commit
ourselves to dismantling the
structures that perpetrate the
white washing of history
this requires a collective
and conclusion may this black
history month serve as a
catalyst for change a change
that dismantles a barriers of
white washing applications the
together let us build a future
where the two diversity of our
history is embraced and the
contributions of every
individual regardless of the
changed but nothing can be
changed until it is faced
thank you it may this buy
history much inspires all to
Thank you
senator bucker they give mister
president and I I am so happy to
members of f f a and what is f
afa it's a focuses on farming
ranch and build's leaders for
the community all across the
state in there they focus on
of these components results in a
strong program that produces
well rounded individuals who are
appropriate prepared to be
leaders in ag business and
industry and I can attest to
and as I call your name please
rise i'd like to introduce rain
a silver she's the advisor
lucas montoya katy richards
sophia silver please join me and
welcome me my guess.
introduce today one and
recognition of diabetes day but
before that uh the much more
important one I would like to
introduce the individual sitting
senior and elderado he's been
two years of our city bus
baseball player unfortunately is
going to new mexico state so
watch out you and m baseball
in his voice as presentation I
mean he is the essence of
perfect marketing marketing for
politics
take those lessons the second
know was a uh assistant and
associated professor at the
university of new mexico and I
got promoted in ten year but it
looked at the use of insulin
therapy but I want to commend
the ada for having done an
incredible job having stuck in
there all these years with
diabetes control officer and the
diabetes association was always
there to support the native
americans so really it's in
recognition of them that I do
Thank you center hitley center
doing.
representative linda here but
this is oliverly he is eleven
years old and he's in six grade
and he really enjoys drawing and
has two younger brothers and two
older sisters although being a
big brother is a big
responsibility but so a lot of
fun and very silly he likes
participating in his community
and learning to stand strong and
and community and he is excited
to be here into serve today so
please join me and welcoming
oliverly.
were several of us trying to get
in shape for next week's
activity then we were joined by
one of the young man that
senator diamond interdues carlos
Mr president
center burden introduced some of
the young
gallery we need to recognize
themselves they'd stand up and
the senate give them a round of
applause we certainly welcome
them to the senate chambers
today.
of f a a particularly please to
see the blue jackets running
around the round house today and
I hope that their day is filled
with many fire activities and
president thank you center
nightmare
we have centers the finance
followed by center gagas and
several nailing for a second
time sender bucker
around the senate chambers and
wandering the capital and I have
some wonderful f f a groups that
I just want to let everybody
know about from lincoln county
error of that day is have in may
and in the summer compete with
each other and they're about an
hour hour and a half apart from
each other but they are great
as you think about a funds in
the future for junior for a
growl let's keep in mind ag
education for each and faith
thank you mister president
body also unhorizon sport of fb
i'd have not seen them yet and I
don't know if they're in the
gallery yet or still but uh I
got notes from both lead county
here we've started our school
board training here and satified
we do every year they are coming
to you looking for help and also
please stand so we can welcome.
thank you mister president
mister president you know it's
consent interests guess to the
senate hearing objection proceed
senator thank you mister
president mister president
diplomatic and so forth so may
since decided to come back and
hang out with the rough and
tumble whirlover in the senate
judiciary committee today so ma-
mason group of sack you all
remember from yesterday is
was one of my best friends you
member a john yasher was
introduced with his interest in
political science or is double
majoring and a double minor in
philosophy and entrepreneurship
for the democratic part in this
year's election
ultimately may some plans to
work in real estate and the
commit canada's industry before
pursuing a korean politics so
thank you centers about this
center neal
one of our newest editions there
are citizens.
in that trophy that gleaming
trophy that's in our lounge you
know that we look at every day
in our so I have to admit we are
in so I would just need
everybody while i'm looking at
our roster you know we need up
antonio my estimates to show up
need a point and of course you
know pardon our guy I mean are
hero from last year hopefully he
won't break his hand this this
year in the first player the
game
were really counting on joshua
sanchez and steven mccutting by
to really like pretend like
we're tall underneath cause
arm anymore so um you know I
know sh- uh senator pinto's
legendary point guard from back
in the day but she's that she's
in rehab i'm and we have so we
that nothing is more important
in this game and of course it's
a great great uh cause and so we
got to keep that trophy over
here okay so those are my words
of.
thousand five thousand six or
seven it's a public safety issue
you know we talk a lot about
public safety on that here so
anyway we'll work on that and uh
touch our emebit defense it's
just so confusing to the lower
chamber over there they don't
know what to do when when they
know when they feel are when
they see are american defense
in the country and then center
back a center we could mister
president unanimous consent to
make an announcement here in
objection proceed center thank
you mister president so we are
really good I will take all the
credit so all of these should
have been passed out if you
haven't got him please go to one
oh nine but there's there's
tickets here in the event will
be at elder auto at seven pm
group of friends here and they
may have left they were in the
gallery but I still think it's
important to recognize that they
did make the trip out here to
twenty five students here from
balance in a fitty high school
please help me and welcoming
them.
association apparent educators
in cape was established in the
mid nineties by home a group of
home schooling families and they
support and
entires macintoshes kennesten's
greens decanos and the brags and
the beautiful children so we
welcome them and and you will
see and you probably have seen a
really a beautiful part of our
of our our community my
constituency and we're very
excited to have them here so if
you could join me and welcoming
them to the chamber please.
Cinemars
thank mister president would
senator mccartin yield please
catch in.
Yes mister president.
president yes they did thank you
and i'm senator tell him to look
at you not me please
he is correct center my catch
and you got always face
both sides of these tickets is
like to there's a redding green
chilly and has some dashes on
their these to be meant to be
pulled a park for some reason
mister president.
some of the members here that is
actually where I was going
senator that that was very smart
and I appreciate that i'm i'm
sure some of your colleagues in
thank you mister president thank
you center morning
we do have others who would like
to make an announcement we have
senator schmedies.
oh yeah now to senator maybe
stewart
center stewart
thank you mister president uh
members of the senate of my
great honor to introduce to you
introduction for mark kennedy
shriver so if you're both will
just stand up so growing up in a
family deeply committed to
public service mark kennedy
county in new mexico
i'm gonna go to chin of her
necks and then we'll just clap
forever at the end right
renound actress jennifer garner
piston entrepreneur miss garner
has been a champion for save the
children for nearly fifteen
years and it's served on the
board of trustees since twenty
fourteen she is that true
nutrition and early education
efforts as platforms for
children to thrive as learners
and in life she is here today in
her role as he saved the
we welcome both of them to the
chamber and note just on their
collaboration together marks
driver and jennifer garner
attention and resources to rural
america let's stand to give a
warm welcome to our save the
children advocate.
Center stewart mister president
I ask unanimous consent that we
See no objection or guess to
address the senate.
Good morning thank you so much
for having us and my name is
getting here that reminds me of
them and makes me very happy
so we mark and I had the good
four ten to be able to visit our
has been changing the community
in the short time that it's been
there it makes the kids and and
the teachers and family speel
like they matter like somebody
sees them that somebody cares
grade level and they felt like
see if the children has been
that that bullet so a since
we're out there working non stop
it's so gratifying to see our
programs here at work in new
some state funding and so you
may hear about that
and I would go ahead more thank
you very much uh center for
having us as well it really is
an honor to be here in mexico is
the the grand trust in there
those investments the
constitutional amendment first
in the country the work did that
you all are doing in the support
five years of life or in so much
brain matter is actually
developed ninety percent of
brain growth as you all know
better than i.
Happens in those first five
years of life and the investment
that you all are making with
years on a long time ago so I
know this is very unusual sold
we're going to stop talking and
you can go back to doing your
work but thank you so much for
having us and thank you so much
for your great investment in
they're you can say we won't
forward
all the call.
thank miss president and if
senator stewart were yield
center still deal i'm happy deal
mister president center sir you
forgotten especially after you
left and you're talking about
this picture and how much you
appreciate it at the other day
and may comments about it's
talking steps our store in that
this chamber so you can not you
will not forget me in our
service together senator so
thank you president of mister
president to he was his idea
senator stewart umm and he
little fuzzy I guess that's what
happens when you take a old old
old picture try to put it into
enjoy that that picture for many
years to come and settle mores
will keep you here in the
chamber one way or another thank
you we do have other members who
remembered last year that helped
senator sanchez pass his first
bill and so he brought his
little sister along and now
they've been telling me mr
where you could make a donation
to game and fish for educational
opportunities for youth and
there was a similar program put
twenty five hundred to go twenty
five hundred dollars to go to
education hunting education for
you so I think that's a a big
deal so I wanted to give brayden
macintosh and as sister add a
Thank you center principle any
further announcement senators
yes we have senator pinto thank
you mister president you know
tomorrow's american indian day
at the legislature which will be
taking place at the return to
down there so instead of leading
tell tomorrow gave it to us
today so you can make your plans
for a minddashfry bread recipe
but there is a friend bread mix
and all you have to do is add
water and pop corn beans some
going to be bring up blue corn
cookies and if I would sponsor
it and then yes and into my
surprise we have this whole bank
here and you know that was
but they give mister president
and thank you to our council are
now about nation counter.
word yield so you ignored me but
I applied to never one ignore
you center share
the floor III did want to talk
about
now the whole pride never hold
this farm which I think is a
hundred and seventy thousand
acres of land
but they have a million acre
feet of water so all of sending
corn beans but they also do hay
in pumpkins I know those things
are out there too and it's an
amazing place it's huge they
half the world if we had a train
and could get everything out of
their mispresident so if you
just want to help me with
hundred million dollars we can
make that happen but I do want
to make sure that we appreciate
what they've done for the state
center minister
mister president as unanimous
consent to introduce my guess
for the day and no objection
proceed center
so I have my wonderful sister
owner of a new discovery tours
and sound of fay he spent since
they making up tours and then
putting him in place he's got a
chocolate tour he's got a
mystery tour.
mexico eighteen eighty seven of
say and eighteen eighty and the
at the end of the
helped me usually cook for me
because she knows how to close
good and free but this year she
had two near replacements so
she's walking around the world
very happy about it and i'm
Thank you center store.
See no further announcements
we do have another announcement
rogers it that her district
encompasses the southeast tites
unam not hill and my
international district she is
and aggressively working on
homelessness and updating our
parks and green spaces were so
happy to have our new counts so
please help me welcome nicole
Thank you senator stewart see no
further announcements to send
their peterworth thank you
mister president let me just
give everyone a roadmap and I
can understand why uh center
day certificate first that'll be
senator rodriguez and then she
also has a second certificate
for world rear disease day both
of those will be read and then
we all the center accomplish who
accomplish has done and i'm sure
continues to do and then once
we're done with that we are
going to go to third reading and
do the three items on the
counter so just a heads up will
do him in the order that they're
consent to present a certificate
for a big day that we have
today's city of santa fe day and
that the reader proceed to read
it.
acknowledgment to declaring
february first twenty twenty
four city of santa fe day in the
senate whereas on january twenty
first nineteen eleven the
across the state to greatly to
create the laws that support
state government and the people
of new mexico and whereas from
the early neighbor american
to be the seat of new mexico's
government and such a
historically rich city and
whereas the city of south affair
continues to welcome a diverse
new mexico celebrate diversity
value the environment treasure
respective cultures in honor
southwest history and whereas
the residence culture and
economy of the city of south
this beautiful city and whereas
the residents and elected
officials of the city of south
afraid solute the dedicated
efforts of governor michel the
hungrishm and the state
each legislator's experience in
santa fe an enjoyable one by
offering access to various city
facilities and services and
where as the city of south
afraid.
historic sanity deeper
restoration and through the
built for zero movement to end
chronic homelessness thirty
percent of the homeless
residents of conswell as please
home sales to provide
sustainable dedicated funding
for affordable and workplace
housing the public works team
filled nine thousand four
of litter and trash and secured
fifty million dollars in grand
funding for road and trail
repair repairs the city of south
afraid was selected as one of
next the ground reopening of the
new remote the south the fair
regional airport terminal and
whereas the residents of the
city of something in the state
of new mexico are blessed to
extended to the serious south
affair for being the great
capital city it is and that
february first twenty twenty
affairs senator nancy rodriguez
mimi stewart president protem
sherry de luhan chief clerk new
mexico's state senate.
The.
Thank you.
the roundabout plus center thank
you mister president city of
santa fe day i'm so excited to
be here with all the local great
that it's wonderful today mister
president I am so honored and
proud to recognize their santa
fe city administrative leaders
and are santa fe said he
counselors the mayor and staff
in general that you're here
welcome in the most special
place in our state santa fe new
mexico I am proud to be resident
in a senator of this city
seek to experience our culture
our food our art and our people
in are incredible location in
live and gather in santa fe new
mexico here we are today and so
today we recognize the city of
santa fe and we express or
gratitude and appreciation for
And mr president before I
granted that the city are mayor
staff counselors who were so
hard every day truly that they
do I couldn't believe the many
projects that you have worked on
and your your loyalty and and
many times for your perseverance
through difficult times and
challenges were so grateful for
you and I will defer mr
reagas for bringing this
memorial also just want all the
members to know
that the city really does open
disappeared for a little while
but it's back and just as there
we go we've got a few
so that's that's very much
the floor about all the
different economic drivers in
this state and arts tourism and
culture
are right at the top of the list
and we're in the app center of
performance by senator
accomplish but again we just
appreciate everything the city
does for all of us.
And certainly appreciate all the
work each one of you does for
Thank you senator.
See no other comment center
are I would proceed to introduce
those in our rostram here and
and my list I have
somewhere ok and we've got
bernie tune special adviser to
the mayor okay alma cost throw
michael garcia said a counselor
district two high michael good
thank you carol romero worth
city counselor district two
city council right there
straight through right
right jamie kousette city
counselor district for a jamie
break
had on my list so welcome thank
you we appreciate you for all
your work that many of these
things as we said we never knew
until we heard it today and it
was like while we are so proud
I have some certificates here
come back to senator rodriguez
but she's going to deliver the
significance.
Thank you senator comples and
thank you very much mister
president members of the senate
few days ago of course
ties in if you will to health
care well
we just really thought and
there's going to be a lot of
people that are behind this one
effort so christina as we go
through it it's not just me it's
they're going to be
congratulating you in a few
minutes after we go through this
but in essence we have a
certificate for christian
accompos who are in june the
she's held at position since two
thousand and four and christina
started as a volunteer there at
the hospital which is the
smallest acute care facility in
time since then she is widely
regarded as an expert in rural
and frontier health care and
she's been chair of so many of
a new hospital in uh senate rose
and want to look at county which
opened in twenty eleven and in
twenty twenty three what look at
county hospital became the
three homecoming queen and
that's where she matter has been
there at UNM.
And they've been together now
for thirty eight years and that
is the former state
representative
community of santa ros and we
really appreciate that
again christina is preparing for
that retirement but we know
is not only an expert but an
individual who continues to care
about the well being of each and
every one of the individuals
here in new mexico she
definitely has been an asset in
doors open and provide the basic
services in the area of health
care so christina is a tireless
worker on behalf of each and
every one of us so with that
introduce the students that are
here to support this particular
recognition today and it won't
take very long but i'd like to
do that so with your permission
So mister president
with at a courier so senator
join us as well any other family
and friends of christina will be
out there in a few minutes in
the hallway but with us today we
have missus west is the
they can be recognized and we do
have a christopher particle who
is the one of the teachers we
have frank madrid I was and was
a welding and structure we have
as chico sharon story of a
healier as the benefit we have
salamundress we have elizabeth
higgins uh uh vacacity
ryant and audio and kc by the if
I missed anyone I really
apologize but christina fee will
please accept the applies of the
mister president we're going to
do one final certificate for
world rare disease day that's
going to be read by and in
senator rodriguez and then just
a heads up we are going to go
straight to third reading and do
consent to personally
certificate for a world where
disease day and the reader read
it then you guess in objection
to reader to read
day in the seller whereas there
are more than ten thousand
different types of rare diseases
and disorders with more being
discovered each day and whereas
there are more than thirty
three hundred seventy nine rare
diseases reach nearly one
trillion dollars in the united
states in twenty nineteen and
whereas it is estimated that
people combined in a particular
rare disease group and whereas
eighty percent of rare diseases
are generic in origin in our
present throughout a person's
percent of children with rare
diseases do not live to see
their fiftieth their fifth
birthday and whereas according
whereas road disease patients
wait an average of six to three
six and three tenth years after
symptoms present before
process for approval of a red
disease drug can take an average
of fifteen years and whereas all
the rare and genetic diseases
therefore be it resolved by the
senate of the state of new
mexico that february.
Twenty ninth
february twenty ninth twenty
sound affair senator nancy
rodriguez mimi stewart president
protem sherry deluvan chief
clerk new mexico's date senate.
that suffer with rare diseases
and go through so much just to
get diagnosed if it ever happens
and many times you know we
forget we get up every day and
if you do for a rare disease
like this and so I want it just
to bring attention to this
matter to see how we can
continue to collaboratively do a
rare disease that cannot be
diagnosed and they are three
hundred million people world
wide suffering from what's
called the rare disease that is
the does the only diagnosis and
of rare diseases are genetic in
origin and are present
throughout a person's wife and
does mentioned even worse mister
president members of the
sandwich as a child many
attention of all of us in the
hopefully we can continue to
work together to find a cure and
we did a certificate like this
in two thousand seventeen mister
Thank you senator
center
thank you mister president and I
think this is a a standard
support of the certificate and
i'm gonna make it a little bit
dudes for many years and every
time we go on a cruise that are
the company that we used as a
big fund raiser for saint judes
and so we always get to that and
yeah it's just the wonderful the
work that they're doing and this
children and I think that's one
of the things that just crushes
me the most is the children that
get these diseases and don't
live past five years old so so
shame was plug for the day if if
Thank you center rent.
Senator or the thank you mister
president and thank you to the
senate for listening to the
concerns and in
would like to introduce margaret
duran are you here margaret
that see if more good is here
and debra deran and immediately
that we are a team with them to
help them continue to find a
thank you mister president
members of the center.
Thank you very much center or
know if they just never made it
after all but I do have some
certificates for them and they
were not here unable to join us
we will mail the certificates to
them thank you very much center
of rigars how about a round of
Thank you very much center
ordering is going to say that
repeater worth for the next
daughter business thank you
mister president so we are going
to go to third reading just
before we do though I note
there's a number of guests that
guests up front I would yield
the senator soles to introduce
the guests.
Thank you very much we're going
to senator sold senator soles
school boards association uhm we
have with those christine
looting the nmsb president from
west las vegas
we have pauline army hole and
we have kevin mitchell m SB a
secretary treasure from gallup
demori maker and it must be a
past president from lovington
the n m SB a executive director
he was in the n SB a leadership
there was the is the past
president from the new mexico
will help us recognizing the
leadership of your schools and
your school boards
we're on that order business of
course miscellaneous business
and of course announcements so
we're going now to send it or
leave me on center however thank
you mister president I just want
especial value mr jogian thank
you for your years of leadership
general limit I appreciate you
and all of you for what you do
for our students in new mexico.
Thank you mister president thank
sunchess please thank you mister
president I have two guests that
I would like to welcome here
today I have a
foreign exchange shooting from
vietnam and i'm not going to try
from vietnam to see us here
today
so i'd like to welcome him and I
have one other guest tom whalin
and he is with the siebel a
hospitals which we've been
talking about today so thank you
mister president i'll ask the
body to help me welcome my guess
announce that you're captail
outway for that you have your
sheets for the your sheets were
given to you today and it is due
by tomorrow at five o'clock and
gives you the guidelines that we
have for capital outlay it is
always encouraged that you find
projects of a minimum of a
hundred one hundred thousand
complete a first phase you can
actually allocate a smaller
amounts so just wanted to make
sure you all got that
information thank you very much
thank you very much in the road
rigorous next.
is there any objections no
objection it is so ordered
ladies and gentlemen you may
remove your jackets going next
and was the vice president of
the board I also was on the
executive committee for the new
mexico school board association
they do some great work they
they really help with getting
little thing that we exclude
ourselves from the really focus
on the training for that to make
sure school words don't buy like
that it's very important for the
public to know what's going on
in the local school so I
can do what's best.
For their districts thank you
mister president thank you very
much sender brand any other
miscellaneous business any other
announcements.
legislation just to give
everyone heads up whose perhaps
listening outside of the chamber
again we're going to do items
one two and three in that order
senator stewart santa koria
no objection it is so ordered
we're going out to the senate
present proterm
senator stewart thank you mister
president I ask in another
consider the senate that the
objection is ordered senator
please proceed and explain
mr president members of the body
this bill started I believe in
this bill improves a governance
of our school boards uh so it
makes some changes
number of hours as ten hours
your first year and five hours
each year after that and it puts
public school finance budgetary
and the dutier responsibilities
a legal concepts pertaining to
school boards and school
districts including open
meetings inspection of public
records.
training seems to be accepted
and liked by the school boards
that we've heard from this puts
in place that you are must also
training and who hasn't as well
the school board that each
school districts web uh
It does several other things
right now if you're running for
school board
and you don't spend more than
five hundred dollars and you
don't live in santa fe firming
turn our bucker key or less
crucials uh you don't have to
pay attention to any school
dollars but everyone who's
running for school board a must
file a campaign reporting act uh
documents if you spend more than
cards it doesn't require them to
file because they are not really
spending any money this is for
those competitive seats that
happen all over the state
unless they're caused within
their first sixty days so it
gives a little waiting period in
between brand new school board
very much per temporary story
senator soles do you yield I do
yield please proceed thank you
mister president center store
reading for it and also the so
kind of a cooling off period
after uh new board takes pe-
their position to not change
leadership within the schools we
know one of the main.
trained and understand their
roles and responsibilities
having transparency in campaigns
for school boards and ensuring
that they know the new
believe happy the answer any
questions but believe that this
is really good governance for
our public schools thank you
thank you very much center souls
were now on discussion and
course these thank you mister
president protem- um to sis bill
include boards of regions of
universities for a required
training.
the body into pro term I mean
maybe this bill deals with
mostly all school boards and
there's a lot of issues our
university regions do not offer
our our higher education
institutions of huge import to
the state I ask the higher
education secretary this end
finance do we require training
of regions and she said no we
make it available and then I
asked for how many how many
number one and I think we need
to improve our quality of
regions and how we're picking
them so we're not just picking a
political class but number two
we need to give them fiduciary
training so they understand that
thing I try to talk in amending
your bill but maybe an accession
we can look at training for
university regions and this
session let's look at nominating
I I raise an opposition to this
measure I i've met with my
school boards over the past year
and repeatedly what I was told
is is we would like local
districts of within the
districts are or well able to
make a decision to spare who is
a capable.
All of operating the school
I think this would be run
counter to what they've asked me
to do and run counter to what
they stand for which is local
control on one of the part I
that that's an issue that should
be decided within the district
and higher infiring issues let's
face it that's what the school
board is for they are to a
professional that that runs all
the schools and and that's just
sanity pulling the pulling the
power out of the people's hands
once again thank you mister
thank you very much senator
proceed i'm as presents and
centers and just want to tell
you this is my twenty first year
in the capital I know i've only
been a shorter time as eight
years in the house three years
a new idea on the education
in twenty this being my twenty
first year my first year here
was to be educated by school
board sociation now the
i've been in in twenty one years
is a long time to be coming to
the capital but it I just wanted
to clarify that this isn't.
A new idea I know
miss president center set uh
this can also be done be assume
the only problem I have with
that is if you go to a football
the less reliable it is so i'm
interested in using the zoo
method for the education piece
but I just wanted to let the
body know that this has been in
conference they've got new
elected
members this this go around now
here in santa fe they were
getting the basics so they do
thank you miss president thank
you very much center
he goes next we go to senator
had a meal sinerator meal please
thank you mister president I
want to tell the two sponsors
that I rise and support this
time and committee and so they
asked that they bring this to
you they said if they're going
to be requiring their teachers
that they help oversee to have
training to teach in the
classroom that they believed
joined us and the cuba
independent school board member
who joined their listening and
now and i'm keeping my word they
then said that they liked the
online option being rural new
mexicans that can be far
removed.
you sponsors.
Thank you very much center how
to meal next we go to senator
concern is senator sellers
please.
The.
Thank you mister president
with always so retalian and read
just in you know our
professional training and the
mister president members some
you know in my part of
training and it's a matter of
just being a updated it's a
matter of file working more and
also with them I would see this
so it is needed very very much
and you know we do this with
every profession you know has to
do some retraining and work in
percentage of our budget you
know and it is only
a rid and it's only
you know in the best interest to
keen you know to the decisions
that need to be made so I stand
in a very strong support of
their mister president and
congratulations also to our two
you in that chair I appreciate
that thank you very much sir
thank you I
I rise an opposition of the.
department the pretty much one
of the only order certainly the
biggest function of this
department I believe should be
professional development and I
administrators okay
so it's a good spirit of the
bill however where were
mandating it and I I want to see
but this is the reverse I don't
see any funding in this bill but
rather I say you're you are
going to do it
we are telling you you have to
do this instead of a more
instead of you know forcefully
doing it we're going to say hey
we're going to work with you
even if we have our
disagreements
we are going to offer you these
resources and they're funded if
school board administrators and
so I would like to see a policy
that it's like that no mandates
but a free offer to say hey
carrier instead of the stick and
I I just think we have so much
we have such a huge partisan
divide we have a rural urban
divide if we can start shaping
our policies that will be more
peaceful.
just idea to throw out that if
we could just tweak this bill a
little bit in that regard I
would vote for it
your community and tell you what
you must do
lastly mister president
this bill you know my my son has
he's thirteen mister president
and he's learning bill analysis
already it's really cool is in
eighth grade and in that bill
analysis it asks it has like
shift power in between some of
the branches of government does
it shift power from the
executive to the judiciary does
it shift power from the
legislative branch to this
in case you missed it
it is one
of those two sentences but you
can see it on page eleven lines
six and seven.
learning environment academic
achievement but there's a catch
all at the end
or for other matters deemed
relevant by the department
relevant by the department in
the executive branch
so we have legislated items one
two three four five and six
absolving ourselves
from statutory authority like we
should be doing mister president
legislating and we are shifting
regressive policy where we are
now shifting more and more power
into the executive branch
I can think of an executive
and we are continuing to regress
to the place where we came from
more and more in more power the
protemp wine is please get rid
of that lines that line six and
seven do not give a blank check
to the executive branch
boards let's reach out and say
we're here to help you if you so
choose thank you mister
president thank you very much
center's meetings next we go to
senator brantley center brantley
please
state governments limiting
powers on locally elected
officials specifically we target
local control by limiting a
newly elected legislator from
voting differently then their
predecessor because the people
had spoken
political office we see it all
the time in the lower chamber
don't we but it's still the
voters right
we could argue that the voters
canada is qualified or not
I would say that I actually
encourage training for school
board members and in fact when I
served on the school board it
to educate themselves and
provide the best form of service
to the constituents it's
frustrating but they elected
that person the same people that
elected that person to represent
carry their voice this is an
infringement on voters right
whoever they send forward with
one exception I heard earlier in
because the people have not
spoken one person gets to speak
and the influence of that border
regions will have influence over
all of us and so for that
provide for us but to come in
and mandate that we are going to
have intelligent locally elected
officials who put in the time to
campaign reporting active I
totally agree if you're going to
run for public office then it
should be the public's right to
see where you're getting your
money from and I absolutely
archives but for the rest just
keep state government we cannot
regulate and mandate that people
elect the right people and by
doing things like this you can't
mister president thank you very
much center rantally next big
orders senator share senator
insurer please.
I think mister president
what was the genesis of this
bill where did it come from
mr president I am so glad you
asked that this is not my bill
this did not come from me this
this together and there has been
so much misinformation yes
senator giacos is right on spot
we've been doing this training
i'll just give you some some
numbers about why we're doing
this we've got a lot of people
who don't do the training now we
don't in education community
public is notified on the school
district's website and on new
mexico this does I did learn
though yesterday from uh paul
then that's an added finding so
we haven't heard of this exact
language or the hours and
statute that's the purpose most
it's online it happens all year
round all the school board
association they're doing it
right now they're having their
annual conference right now and
been done for years we're trying
to update it so that we can get
to those folks who don't think
they should go to any training
them to so this is this came
from a lot of sources and it's
really just to help the school
boards with this training and
there are the ones that do it
Thank you very much center
centers here please thought
mister president and senator
what I I know we talk about open
meetings act like a what other
that's why we worked on this
language with the school board
association that came out of lec
um they really need to
but they really I want him to
look at student achievement I
want them to look at what
programs do you have that are
working that we can replicate
elsewhere about student
just trying to make it more uh
transparent to everyone by
requiring them to put on their
websites whose who's had the
training and who has not
idea that's isn't from me this
isn't from santa fe this is to
upgrade the governance
structures around school boards
to ensure that we will get
everybody trained.
idea of training obviously
haven't had enough coffee since
I think it dd the thing that
i've looked at with school
boards isn't the open meetings
act it's that they don't
understand what a school board
does and certainly as it was
pointed out
one of the main things is of the
board of directors is to hire
more bored of what to support of
directors do
to make the the corporation
successful but that's the kind
of training I think that we need
more of
but then when you window
senator brantley's talking about
we'll wait a minute the board of
directors job is to make sure
that they have the right cell
a very efficient great ceo when
the
wind when they were using pencil
and paper and all of that it's
Senator is that a question to
yes yes mister
please proceed how senator
mister president this bill does
happened and and the school
board president brought this to
me and in fact I worked with him
on amending this so that it
yet and so these are robe boards
there's not many um but they ask
for just have a pause so they
can learn who the
superintendence and what the
they can do that but they just
can't hire or fire a **** nelly
but they certainly do I mean
they're in charge they're the
So miss president intended right
I actually
saw a school board member she
was running for school board
because there was different
color carpet
in the school.
and I was this completely mind
boggled that that that
discompopulated me more than
anything else a different color
carpet was going to you were
going to make a change in the
school board and fire the
most of the voters said you know
the carpet's just not at
important we can get there and
you know maybe you can say you
know we would like everything to
look better but but in that case
there was certainly budget
but but the voters in that case
it know that's not a good reason
to to change the school board
and change the superintendent I
mean she she clearly said she
was going to change the
if if three of the five members
of the school border changed all
at once
because they're all upset with
the carpet.
Then that means the voters were
senator brantley here that's
what the board of directors is
supposed to do and it would be
the same board of directors of
any corporation so we have
the
and so there's also a a
markevillion thing that
when you take over you need to
particularly want for school
boards but um
but I think the thing that is
different here and in in the
real thing that discomfort I
like to training I think that's
The mandatory you can't
do your job at least part of
your job for at least sixty days
we've been at the bottom of the
education stack
the whole time i've been here.
Maybe not fifty but we're pretty
close to bottom
bottom
more mandates so for for decades
we've been adding mandates
before I got here we've been
adding mandates and it's not
improved anything
and that brings me to senator
smeathes
somehow go down that past
instead of more mandates because
that's what that's really what's
concerning me i'm just looking
at this stuff and i've talked to
senator soul to better.
get the situation no matter
what.
Because that I think.
Allows them to do what they need
to do what they think they need
so
i'm looking at it at complete
reversal of more mandates
aren't raising the the scores in
and that's my only problem I
like the idea of more training I
think we should I like the idea
of the open meetings in the
But I don't think the mandate is
gonna it's not going to fix it
and that's really my only
so it's not even being mandated
from here
so so that's the those those are
my thoughts mister president and
i'm torn because I like the bill
but I hate the mandate so thank
you.
center gricks please.
Thank you mister president with
the sponsor yield senators don't
do you hear I will yield for
questions yeah.
a mandatory course and ped would
develop the courageous way I I
read it and then now what we're
doing is we're trying to expand
the things that either the
there there is no mandate right
now there is not one course
there's really nothing in statue
doing it so as you heard from
center guy I guess this training
has been going on for twenty
years it's done by the school
boards association they bring an
i'll they get it from the school
board members at this training
is going on right now as we
speak in at the convention
center so what does does is
let's make sure we cover all
these topics the school border
association supports the spill
because it helps them get the
school board members to come and
take the training.
uh on online five it talks about
the department shell develop
mandatory training and that's in
the law I etc
ten will what that training
should intail to at least some
extension which president and
and sponsors that is that right
training on this list already.
It ending president and sponsor
want you know
i'm one of the i'm one of the
few
commissioners or even though if
there is for county
commissioners and show you kind
of wander in there and you
you don't know what you're
you're getting into truly and
you have a lot of people get it
worked up and concerned about
what's going on with their
schools and they feel like they
need to run whether or not
they've been engaged much at all
know what it is if they need to
be trained on
but I guess when I read it as
A mister president so
they are all sore now required
to be transparent about who has
taken the training so the
who's done the training and who
has that's really the only the
only thing we have except for
the article when schoolboard
stand to the to the voters
obviously every every four years
whether or not they're doing it
uh a good job or not show that
border city commission
right after I was elected we had
a executive session right off
the bat
bath and part of the reason to
deciding vote on on removing the
city manager and would I told
them which it I did not have the
background in what was why with
that they want to get rid of the
shoot for intended or they want
to get rid of them the city
manager in my case you'd know
detection out of the blue thing
where were guy she if you got
elected it's all over seven
going to be a surprise that he
votes to get rid of the
may give a a superintendent more
of a cause of action if they
fire em within the sixty days
when we say they can but other
narrow I don't see that it uh
would like to have that in there
III can show up which present
sponsors thank you for
responding to my question and I
listen look forward to listening
what I wanted to bring up there
are no summary executions
planned if I don't take this
training as the school word
members that correct senator
mister president that's correct
needed to bring up and I would
just want to re emphasize what
sender degree should brought up
there is no penalty they're not
going to kick you out office
they're not gonna sort of deny
you being sworn in none of those
kind of things are going to
waiting for senator pertali
don't see center period in the
room I don't see any other hands
that are raised i'm going to
i'll close and then i'll
yield to send your soul so
that's
time and they're still doing it
so all we're trying to do now is
insured that we've got a good
set of criteria for their
mound data trainings that there
are most of all of them are
doing now and most of them do
more than that I have had people
say ten hours i've already done
twenty why don't you increase
that no
training issue that they have I
believe we need well trained
school board members to make the
decisions that we want them to
do I want them to look at
Many of them that run have no
background in education
it's great to get all
superintendents teachers
principles on a school board
cause they understand the
mister president i'd like to
yield to send your soul thank
you very much and her pro
temporary stewart you linked to
center soul center souls please
proceed thank you mister
by school board members they're
the ones who have been around
for a while they know what's
needed they know how to help new
board members being come good
effective board members the
down to where is it what do we
need to do to leverage better
results and so this really is
just helping to professionalize
there are no penalties for not
really are not overly held
accountable other than we really
think that you ought to be
getting the training to
effectively represent the
children in your district with
and puts children first thank
you thank you senator cells
senator protemporary store to
close mister president I moved
per senate bill one thirty seven
Thank you very much center
center is revolting to your
Senator pertal boats now
senator brand boats know seventy
centuries votes now
send it a bucker boats now
senator moore's boats now
senator birth votes now
senators meetings both now
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Hello
okay thank you.
seven as one cement it has duly
passed the senate center
protemporary store please thank
you mister president thank you
members of the senate thank you
very much president per
thank you very much senator I
was afraid of that we're not
going to do anything else thank
you very much centers here we're
going to continue with two days
handful please thank you mr
president I ask unanimous
consent the senate that the
records show that all action for
placing senate bill when fifty
three on final passage has been
one fifty three is an alive sea
and door spell it increases the
distribution from a hundred and
fifty five million to two
hundred and fifty million to be
transferred from the early
dollars and the increase will
allow for additional investment
in more early childhood policies
by increasing the distribution
disbursement these funds will
health services do la and like
tation support home visiting ray
increases and incentives to
encourage people to participate
in the home visiting program as
have an expert witness would you
please introduce your witness
please mr president unanimous
consent to have my expert
witness with me kelly clanked
from lfc is there any objection
concerns and communication we're
going to senate my center money
else please
thank you mister president
release sponsoring so now
handful do you ill mister
the balances today and how much
is it increasing across the
board.
And right now it's up to five
point five billion
five point five billion dollars.
Mister president center how much
is that from oil and gas that's
transferring into the education.
So mr president and senator
mineos currently it's about four
port four point five billion
dollars.
how much money in the transfers.
Is present center or so and i'm
just bringing an attention glide
senator hamper
mr president and senator minos I
would say like ninety percent.
guess it aren't this is a
situation where we took three
hundred and fifty million
dilited version out of moving it
to the permanent phone and
conversation is is whose next
where do we divert the money
next right five billion dollars
correct me if i'm wrong center
generates two hundred and fifty
So we generate two hundred and
fifty million dollars in revenue
and so what do we move that
diversion next to to remove it
a lot of people don't know this
but we are in the path to fund
capital outlet completely in
cash over the next couple of
years never to have bond capital
who is the next already to get
their funds set up I think that
we need to start thinking about
that new mexico I will give you
another scenario a reserves are
capital accounts three billion
dollars sitting in reserves in
cash accounts
we could actually earn some
bonds we can truly set new
mexico up to not ever be
dependent on oil and gas we did
point is new mexico you have
more money than you know what to
do with but invest it wisely
like we didn't early childhood
See known them are going to send
her to him voda clothes center
handful please thank you mr
president I moved that senate
bill one fifty three do now pass
thank you very much senator
senators were voting to your
chairs if you vote now please
raise your hands
sanchez words no senator in my
kitchen would know.
Yeah.
thank you mr president thank you
members of the body thank you
very much for moving along going
to item number three
senate rules committee
substitute for senate joint
consent at the senate that the
record show that all action for
placing senate rules committee
substitute first senate joint
resolution one as once amended
on final passage has been taken
resolution thank you mister
president so the dean of un law
school is the chair of the
judicial nominating commission
meetings it designate would be
an associate dean a faculty
member retired faculty member or
a former dean of the law score
any conversation I don't see any
so i'm going to center to head
to close center do hate please
thank you mr president I move
that senate rules committee
substitute for senate joint
a short hand thank you very much
and her do exemitors were voting
two year chairs if you vote now
please raise your hands
senator brand well snow.
boats now center pertal worts
now senator woods boats now
centers means words now
The.
I.
My root of twenty seven in the
affirmative ten in the negative
senate rules committee
substitute for senate joint
we're going to their majority
florida leaders senator peter
worth center peter worth please
thank you mister president
unanimous consent we got it out
our business messages from the
house see no objection it is
has passed house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for house bills due and three as
amended by the house and
requests the concurrence of the
received please proceed the
reader or read mister president
I am directed to informed the
senate that the house has passed
house to this area committee
substitute for house bill eight
Senator peter worth the next
data business please
thank you mister president you
know because that we go that are
business messages from the
governor see no objection is
the honourable mimi stewart
president pro temporary
president protemporary store and
members of the senate pursuant
to article for section five b
seventy four a bill creating the
compliance bureau in the office
of the superintendent of
regulation and licensing
providing powers and duties and
fraudulently misbranded canabas
respect leora's michelle to
hungarian governor thank you
very much reader the record rule
reflect that the message from
of the senate were on that order
of business committee reports
the reader or read
this president your judiciary
committee to whom has been
referred said a bill thirty
seven has added under
pass and dense referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted joseph servant this
chair sends around this please
The reader will read.
Senate bills sixty nine as
amended recommendation that I do
bill one sixty seven do pass and
dense referred to the finance
committee respectively submitted
joseph survived this interest
advantage please move it up to
the community report there's
you're finance committee to whom
has been referred senate bill
seventy six has had it under
consideration and reports same
with the recommendation that it
committee there there's going to
be more some I was listening for
that but I only sold.
Okay there it is a s u n was
consent with the senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
the senate health and public
affairs committee substitute for
senate bill eighty seven do pass
senate bill one twenty six
Center or riggest emotion for
adoption the committee report
thank you mister president I
move the adoption of the
community report thank you very
much senator there is a motion
your committees committee to
whom has been referred senate
bill two forty eight has had it
under consideration and fine
same to be germane pursuant to
the senate executive message
animals consider the senate
threader be allowed to read all
the committee reports we vote on
them one motion and the churtle
reflect their act upon
individual thank you very much
the reader will read
senator belt two sixty seven
fine seemed to be german and
that's referred to the
conservation committee.
Senate bill two seventy five
seemed to be german that's
referred to the education
committee.
Senate bill two seventy eight
fine seemed to be germane and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee
respectfully submitted me me
stewart chair what temporary
thank you very much going under
the next order of business and
it repeated worth
thank you mister president you
know it's consent we go that our
business
has been referred senate bill
one sixteen has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and that's referred to the
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we go on them with one
motion and that the journal
reflect they were acted upon
individually thank you senators
then referred to the judiciary
committee.
The.
The senate bill one thirty five
that it do not pass but that
senate health and public affairs
Senate bill one forty five
recommendation that it do pass
Senate bill one seventy six
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and then's referred
recommendation that it do pass
and dense referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill two o three that it
committee respectfully submitted
senator gerald or these eppino
chairs and are a tc penalty
please I move the adoption of
the committee reporters move to
go in and out the committee
mister president you know must
have said we go that our
business introduction of
legislation see no objection it
is sold or on that order of
business in reduction of
public works in capital
improvements committee
as move for a house build three
Yeah.
Mispresident house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
That's good
having been read twice by title
committee house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for house bills two and three
the reader will read
the hospital
current informer legislators and
public officers and employees
terrifying and currifying
provisions of the governmental
conduct act for sky bring
ordered referred to the
judiciary committee then to the
finance committee house bill
eight
please thank you mister
president unanimous because that
we go there business
announcements and miscellaneous
see no objection to disorder
ladies and gentlemen we're on
that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
o'clock tomorrow and then we
will be on the floor on saturday
at one o'clock but not on sunday
so just for chairs to make
announcements with those time
Nine thirty so pay attention at
nine thirty tomorrow morning due
to the school board association
breakfast.
confirmation sector designate
shrier for asian long term
services and we will have bills
from senator steinborne as
you mister president your senate
tax business and transportation
committee will meet thirty
minutes after the floor session
so about two thirty thank you
very much and her shin to the
next we go to center order
minutes after the floor sessions
and it finance when I understand
it a retiping or so north dc
penalty please thank you mister
president just a heads up about
the senate health and public
had urge earlier we we've had to
move some bills around so
tomorrow we hope to get to the
senator pazie's bill synergy
monos bill
and then uh three bills for
senator masters
so all of these things serve
will be to more afternoon it's a
little different schedules that
make sure you double check it uh
and then will meet on saturday
Thank you mister president and
throughout the course of the day
we've talked about things that
territorial new mexico which
held in nineteen oh one
that particular trial
was for the murder of an eight
it had some of the biggest names
in new mexico history at the
time involved in that trial two
of those names if you go over to
two gentlemen were the opposing
council in this trial
again there's trial irish
seventeen days it was held in
the little community of
new york chicago and san
francisco
remember when we are were
nineteen oh one and we have
pressure coverage from those
the bodies still to this day
have never been found.
Seventeen days the trial ended
about ten o'clock at night
the judge wanted to send the
jury home.
the jury went out on research to
a valuation determined whether
or not the the defendants were
guilty or not.
being justice for their eight
year old boy or his father.
But that particular trial showed
that new mexico was able
not these guys were guilty or
innocent and we showed the world
that we weren't the lawish
territory that may be the world
we world believe down.
twelve he was finally successful
with helping branch state who
two new mexico but without this
trial missed president members
gregs were still on under
announcements in miscellaneous
business going to the april
temporary senator mimi store
center store please thank mister
president we're going to move
three twenty six thank you thank
you very much for that
announcement any other
announcements seen and then
going to our majority leaders
center peter worth center worth
one fifty nine and two twenty
seven was amended so we need to
expand those and then we'll go
back to the committee report and
get him introduced the right way
so mister president unanimous
objection and then we're under
that
order a business the expandment
senator peter worth please
mister president so next step
referred senate bill one fifty
nine has had it on a
consideration of reports same
the recommendation that it do
pass as amended and then's
that the reader be allowed to
read both of the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
record reflect that they were
acted on the individually
objection it is ordered all read
senators sold please a move
adoption of the committee
reports there's a motion to
adopt the community reports all
those in favor signified by
saying I pose the as have it
announcements and miscellaneous
business senator worth please
thank you mister president two
things before we adjourn for the
day the american indian day
reception that I announced this
outlay just a reminder those
spreadsheets have all been
distributed they were emailed to
members and aids this morning
total amount available to each
member's four million one
hundred seventy thousand dollars
called council if you have any
questions
with that mister president
unanimous consent the senate
stand in recess until eleven
o'clock tomorrow morning no
objection to disorder the senate
