Santa hamlin
center hampile
center hecky.
Senator ivy sought down
centre mechanic
central mechanic.
Senator morris
senator many us.
Senator pidea
center panto
center period.
Centrist the deal of s.
The.
Senator share.
Center shandow.
center stewart.
Center thomas.
Senator worth.
Senator words.
we do now have a core on mr
president.
Soon as we do have a quarter
might ask that everybody please
rise
host of k u n m's sunday worship
program training chain trained
to glory and ask that you remain
standing for the pledge of
leaders to be that today by
senator bill on the the pledge
assembly as we know how turn in
answer us or lord are god for we
trust in your unfailing learnt
that seek to destroy freedom
give our lawmakers the wisdom to
become instruments of europeans
as they strive to honor you with
challenges may be lord and
powered them to work securely in
the path of your wheel represent
blessings upon each legislator
I pledge to legend to the flag
of the united states.
of new mexico and the c a symbol
of perfect friendship among
united cultures.
Once again would like to welcome
each of you to the senate
chamber and to get things
very very moving words this
morning bringing us all together
this way uh we're heading into
our second week here and things
are moving along nicely
senate she is the president of
the national council of negaria
women in albuquerque and is the
minister of music at faith
temple church and albuquerque
thank you so much for being here
announcements with cellaneous
center
thank you very much uh mister
president I do know that uh some
announcement here that you have
an honor a lieutenant governor
legislature and I know that you
were sponsoring the uh teddy
bears on the desk and so that
annual right of passage we have
our teddy bears here and I know
senator morris baby would
probably like to take that teddy
five pm on sunday january twenty
eighth is the deadline for
having bills drafted also
reminder today in wednesday
staff from the mbd motor vehicle
division will be in the house
one thirty p m to five pm please
refer to the memory you received
last week regarding any
necessary documents that you may
need if you have any questions
you can call the at nine eighty
six four seven two seven or
thirty p m giving his wonderful
natural pathic treatments and
mister president all yield to
others that have i'd look
believe we have about quite a
few guests on the floor today
thank you center by the assent
guests today you're no objection
proceed senator k well I just
feel very honored to have my
brother in my sister and my
sister in law here they are have
read here I don't know what
High school athlete played
basketball for cornell in so
he's here he still has got that
jump shot you know I mean so so
john john onio a net on nil and
the color coordination with you
and your brother
welcome to this at a chamber
senator morris
okay are you just getting girl
down how to say your name and I
were strongly apologies up
allery skips and.
There are going to cost enough
i'm sorry my apologies I should
of her she is an incredible
artist if we hear and we're
really happy for you to learn
today and be shadow for
lieutenant governor if you need
anything please as though so if
the body will help our welcome
are honorable lieutenant
Thank you circles seriously the
other offers.
Thank you mr president I really
happy to have a guest with me
the community and and what's
really important right now for
me is she has been consulting
with a group of us who are
working on the alcohol excise
Thank you senators to the lovers
any further announcement
senators
similar burden
occurred in that committee
especially from somebody of a
secretarial level to one of our
colleagues I don't think should
be tolerated then hopefully
moving forward will demand more
to center morris for a second
time center more for a second
time figures presidential wanted
to ask if senator pity hasn't
already done it if cameras be
allowed on the senate floor this
morning thank you senator morris
chamber and upstairs in the
gallery
any further announcement
senators
see no further announcements
send it to my company to take a
sense order business I think you
going to call them out of the we
all know who has a confirmation
coming up please see senator had
a meal to get any documents that
you may need for confirmations
we have center stephanic senator
senator soul senator schendo and
senator rodigas and uh without
mister president we do have some
events today the democrat
democratic a party of new mexico
mexico military institute
legislative reception will be at
the real charm at five thirty pm
today by invitation only and
tomorrow the new mexico
judiciary legislative breakfast
will begin at seven thirty am
aging and long term services
department legislative breakfast
will be at the elder auto hotel
from eight to eleven am tomorrow
morning by invitation only the
blue cross blue shield van will
pm and I think that's about it
there mister president and
unanimous consent to excuse
senators
hickey mechanic
compose and on meal until they
thank you for the third time uh
miss president we're dose center
pity or yield center for the
deal I will yield mister
president or more figures
president thank you senator
people you mention their there
is a dinner at the lumpkin
perfect I promise we're going
that much I appreciate that your
hospitality over there is a lump
cobal roommates here there'll be
a really welcome in reception
thank you mister president thank
you said interpret your thank
you center more sake center for
kenture would he is the chief
operating officer of these two
per evidence face change they
have a program that has active
in three two different states
with the institution of the
college
not what the students with the
institution of the college to
make sure that they are
relational based with the
students of the students kill
welcome on campus
this this is not it is it is
very much an evidence based
program that has been peer
reviewed are and and we're
hoping to bring them up make it
a system wed program within the
Thank you senator everything
any further announcement
senators.
acknowledge that the mayor of
pickles along with some of the
commissioners are visiting the
capital today as well as the
chair of the county commission
See no announcements are yield
to senate senator michael by the
thank you very much mister
president at this time i'll take
us to that order of business
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuant to article four section
five b two of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
bill amending procedures for
determining gross seats tax
increments used to fun
metropolitan development
projects respectfully yours
stewart president pro temporary.
President for temporary stored
and members of the senate
pursuing to article for section
five b two of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
energy conservation and
management division of the
energy minerals and natural
resources department creating
the geo thermal projects
submitted yours michelle luhan
grisham governor the journal
show the message from the
governor has been received.
business
committee reports and I would
just ask that the committee
chairs just be prepared
to make a commotion.
The reader to read
recommendation that it do pass
and then's referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted a senator gerald or
teasipino senator this is you
know mister president asking
individually hearing no
objection the reader to read
xena bill twelve do person
that's referred to the judiciary
committee senate bill twenty
due passengers referred to the
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator gerald or
these people have been
mister president I move the
adoption of the committee
reflect that they were actually
upon individually
center microphone
okay thank you very much mister
president I think we'll go out
to that order of business
credentials of andrew berk be
presented to the full senate for
consideration to the new mexico
finance authority I know yield
to senator salts.
Senator wilson's
hereby confirmed the appointment
of andrew berk to the new mexico
finance authority.
Here are no objections that are
sold to explain
community college new mexico
state university has been a
public servant for many many
years I have known him since we
were in college together years
are debating the reappointments
of andrew merck.
See no debate singer source to
close thank you mister president
asking them as consent of the
re- that the records showed that
also just your seats if you wish
to vote
please raise your hand.
I'll send it as your seats we
are voting.
By vote of twenty two in the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment reappointment of
andrew burke is a member of the
new mexico finance authority for
a chairman commencing on january
with us but he will do a
wonderful job for us on the the
finance authority well give him
senate for consideration to the
new mexico mortgage finance
authority I know yield to send
it or solved center thank you
mister president and i'm doing
this for senator schendo as who
appointment of derek seave all
though to the new mexico more
mortgage finance authority here
in no objection send her source
to explain
in public service and this will
just allow him to continue with
that public service for the
state of new mexico with that
i'd be open for any additional
questions or comments thank you
centers all centers we're
no debate center source to cause
thank you mister president I ask
unanimous consent that the
record showed that the role has
been called and that all those
president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
The.
By a vote of twenty three the
affirmative zero the negative
the reappointment of derek
seabaldo was a member of the new
mexico mortgage finance
authority for a term comments in
on january second twenty twenty
around round of a plus for his
new appointment
sinner had a meal mister
president I asked that the
credentials of berry steven cues
thank you mister president
pursuing to senate executive
message number four dated
february twenty first twenty
twenty three I moved that the
the love is to explain.
Mr president when I look at his
qualifications this is an
exceptionally qualified
individual he was born in santa
missed degree in marine biology
from the scripts institute of
oceanography at use you see
sandiego he got his phd and
department of georgia at unm and
he remained at u and m his
entire career he served a chair
of the department of earth and
planetary sciences from ninety
one to ninety nine and retired
from the regular faculty and
in phd students and served on
faculty senate and numerous
college in university committees
here's appears an author of
three box
has three hundred publications
he's been especially active in
the new mexico geological
society serving his managing and
the edge and a jerk managing
accused with two colleges and
about ten students conducted a
palentologic pailey and
tological resource assessment
onlines in northwestern new
mexico for the US bureau of land
of natural history has a place
to house and steady new
mexico's.
Outstanding palentological
palentological record
questions thank you center city
look at senators we are
debating.
See no debate sentences as to
close on the confirmation thank
of hounds of seats please we are
voting.
If you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
I'll send it just your seats
please we are voting.
the reappointment of very steven
cues as a member
of the board of trustees of the
new mexican museum and natural
history of science for a term
president please join me in
congratulating doctor queues
thank you so before we go center
mister president I asked that
the credentials of rebecca was
burger be presented to the full
senate for consideration to the
new mexico mortgage finance
hereby confirm the appointment
of her back of words burger to
the new maxical mortgage finance
authority thank you center three
is hearing no objection going to
explain thank you mister
economic development plans focus
on cultural arts and tourism and
has continued to do wonderful
work not only in that area but
in her own volunteer work that
senate to continue to appreciate
and support rebecca words burger
thank you center or the rigors
senators we're debating the
reappointment to rebecca works
worker as a member that mexico
present boat and the affirmative
accept those voting in the
negative by show of hence and it
is we're voting to your seats
and expiring january first
twenty twenty six has been
confirmed by the new mexican
senate center or the rigors to
president please help me
congratulate and honor rebecca
mister president I asked that
the credentials of julene
francis green be presented to
the full senate for
consideration to the board of
trustees of the minors hospital
here by confirm the appointment
of jolene france screen to the
board of trustees of the miner's
hospital of new mexico here are
no objections that are pop if
the city of raton but besides
that has extensive experience
working in as a health care
administrator working nursing
appointment with that mister
president i'd open up any
questions or comments about the
comfortable thank you so much
center post centers we are
debating
see no debate senator pope to
close on confirmation
miss president I ask he now sent
that the record show that the
role has been called and that
all those present voted in the
mexico for a term comments in on
june six twenty twenty three and
expiring june twelfth twenty
twenty four has been confirmed
by the new mexico senate center
center mister president I asked
that the credit cards of doctor
and the rhetor and the condo be
presented to the fourth senate
for consideration to the board
of trustees of the minor's
nineteenth twenty twenty three I
moved out the senate do here by
confirming the appointment of
doctor loretta encounter to the
board of trustees of the miners
hospital of new mexico
university of colorado medical
school but she actually did her
internship and residency at the
university of new mexico she
specializes in internal medicine
open it up for any questions or
any comments about the
comfortable thank you center
post centers we're debating.
Center but there thank you
mister president you know it's
consent to excuse senator pinto
until she returns to the
chamber.
My body twenty four in the
inframent is you're on the
negative the appointment of
doctor leretta and counter as a
member of the board of justice
of the miner's hospital new
mister president if we could all
give a round of applause for a
doctor condo
trustees of the miner's hospital
of new mexico I now yield to
senator pope center thank you mr
president pursuant a senate
executive letter number three
day to september nineteen twenty
Here are no objections in her
political explain thank you mr
president
mr fernandez has a lot of
midway call mining company as
well he
went to high school in ratel new
mexico and graduate from rate
tone hospital redone high school
See no debate center pope to
close
thank you mister president I ask
unanimous consent that the
wrecker showed that the role is
being called and that all those
present vote in the affirmator
Right now.
By vote of twenty three in the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment of roy peter
none is as a member of the board
of chestings of the miner's
mister president uh mister
fernandez if you would stand he
is join us today and if you
could all welcome give him a
brian be presented to the full
senate for consideration to the
board of trustees of the new
mexico museum of natural history
and science I know yield to
confirm the appointment of james
mcgummy brian to the board of
trustees of the new mexico
museum of natural history in
science.
Hearing no objections send it a
worth to explain thank you
again has served as a volunteer
and employed the dallas museum
of natural history uh has also
been director of the pembra
museum in grandville new york
senator worth center is we are
debating the reappointment of
jane's montgomery brand.
The.
Rising it to me as senator I saw
it as we appointment to the
board trustees that myself muse
him natural history
I will point out that the actual
name of the institution by vote
of the board trustees of years
institution is not just to
promote the history but to
promote the science behind the
history within new mexico which
I do hope that that that for
future confries we will we will
fix that up on the board
and i'm and i'm most impressed
with the with the credentials
deal at mister president i'll be
happy to yield to my colleague
from the party that sometimes
question sounds fair more is
center you said the new mexico
museum of natural history board
decided to change their name
city mexico museum of natural
history and science is that
agencies and boards have the
power to legislatively change
their names
um
at their own win.
Send her every suitable at
elected member of the plural
executive has the authority to
change the name of of
of that particular agency
the opportunity to take some
action perhaps
mister president senator I
remember an eloquent senator
that are agitive a uh group of
border regions from a northern
new mexico college
are what would they really name
list but this senator ivy soto
renowned for the bading during
committees that this border
regions who had changed their
name of the institution she did
because the senator was very
eloquent in his debate that went
on in on it on in on a committee
and on and on and i'll think
it's start through the last
regions and trustees would be
have the power to change your
name when this other senator or
a senator in the past so that
that's not what happened.
Then they do not have the power
thank you mister president so
again I think this is an issue
that certainly merits discussion
which is what we're doing and
and I do find it interesting to
have a bit of the history of the
last time we had this challenge
brought up on the floor because
I also remember pretty
distinctly that discussion on
was careful to get the science
into the script so we got the
science in the script but it's
not on the board so maybe we've
decided to split the difference
on the floor the senate.
where that eloquently debated
its topic came up or maybe its
ears were closed at that time
mister president senator would
you like to address that issue
center every summer thank you v.
without ever being funded so
i'll be interested in see what
the what the finance committee
decided to do with that new
department of justice are um and
what the attorney generals the
decision might be so I stand
promote natural history and I
think that's very important
thank you mister president he's
enter more is any further
debates
before I close I just want
science term wasn't on there was
because the man a text that
you're limited to on the board
senators we are voting to your
seats please
mister president mister
miss the step sent as we are
voting to your seats please
The other country.
By a vote of twenty eight in the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment the
twenty six has been confirmed by
the new mexico senate center
worth thank you mister president
let's all rise and congratulate
thousand be presented to the
full senate for consideration to
the board of trustees of the new
mexico museum of natural history
and science and I now yield two
dated january twentieth twenty
twenty three I moved that the
senate do here by confirm the
appointment of robert j bladdam
Thank you mr president mr
is a major for length of repeat
with his wife allen he won the
matters art philanthropy award
he's the first fice president of
other things but he is an avid
amateur pale intelligence he
spent seventy three days on a
university of chicago palential
to the country of niger in two
thousand eighteen I stand for
questions or comments thank you
center seven extenders we are
debating
unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present but in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show hands senators
to your seats please
The.
Yeah.
justice and new mexico museum of
natural history and science for
chairman comments in on january
first twenty twenty three and
expiry december thirty first
twenty twenty six has been
Center hundred million.
Mister president I ask that the
credentials of the zoot to
president more hard words coming
pursuing the state executive
message number one dated january
twentieth twenty twenty three I
natural history and science.
You're no objection
center if you'll explain thank
you mister president mr kazabar
school system and received his
early scientific training at the
branch high school of science he
graduated from virginia union
university with the bash loose
technologist for lab corp is
this who is a multiple narrated
artist who has had works
featured in the try state area
genetics in santa fe new mexico
I stand for questions or
comments.
Thank you centers for next
center's we're debating
and all those present virginia
firmware to be accept those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands
to your seats please we are
voting.
My vote of twenty nine the
affirmative zero the negative of
expired in december thirty first
twenty twenty six has been
confirmed by the new mexico
senate since the vanish thank
you mister president could we
on now you all to send it to a
microphone here to take us that
next order of business thank you
very much mister president
they'll take us to the next
order of business announcement
to miscellaneous and i'll yield
to senator a mechanic on that
and colleague he is there with
you mr president it's mister
jake of turhill he works for
representative melanie stansbury
and among the many things he
counties and torrents county and
it's really wonderful mister
president because his brother
works for the legislature this
year he is david show here and
Thank you center mechanic we are
in that order of business
announcements in miscellaneous.
to their next order of business
introduction of legislation we
are that order business
introduction legislation the
reader to read
sections of the health care
authority department act
creating the homelessness the
reduction division establishing
the inner agency homelessness
reduction task force and the
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the senate committees
committee then senate health
public affairs committee that's
senate finance that senate bill
one sixty six
appropriation to purchase the
northeast new mexico
correctional facility located in
union county owned by the town
of clinton senate bill one sixty
senate finance that's senate
bill one sixty seven senate bill
one sixty eight introduced by
senators never and iv so an act
related to district attorneys
providing for covered positions
to be defined by the mexico
district attorney association
personnel and compensation plan
repealing section
nineteen seventy eight being
last nineteen oh nine chapter
twenty two section one laws
eighteen eighty nine chapter
fifty six section eleven and
Those order printed referred to
the senate committee's committee
then send a judiciary then sent
a finance at senate bill one
sixty eight
before we got to the next
Where the head order business
committee reports the reader to
read
mr president your committees
then referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee respectfully submitted
made me stewart chair
to it
mr president I ask unanimous
read senate bill one thirty one
fine seemed to be german that's
referred to the indian rural and
cultural the first committee
senator one thirty four find
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
senable one forty eight fine
seemed to be demand then
referred to the tax business and
Senator bill one fifty one fine
seemed to be demand that's
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee sent a bill one sixty
five seemed to be german then
referred to the conservation
the judiciary committee
senate bill one twenty three
fine seemed to be demand then
referred to the health and
public affairs committee.
Senate bill one twenty eight
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
senate bill one forty four fine
seemed to be domain that's
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee senable
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
senate bill forty fine same to
be german thence referred to the
transportation committee
sent a bill on twenty six fine
seemed to be demand that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted mimi
know suppose
the as have it the community
port has been adopted in the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually
senator michael thank you very
president believe we need either
unanimous consent or a motion to
go to a different order of
business.
Thank you center personal set up
are there ways that that again
We're on that order business the
reader to read
set a bill one sixty nine
introduced by senators stewart
matching requirement removing
the incorporated minute
municipality population cap.
Amending eligible recipients of
funds require in prioritization
citations making an
appropriation senate bill one
sixty nine seven bill one sixty
nine every mid red twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate
introduced by senator or these
peno and act making a an
appropriation to the rural
libraries and domined fund
senate bill one seventy seven
bill one seventy having been
senate bill one seventy senable
one seventy one introduced by
senator brant and act related to
taxation providing an income tax
is referred to
as printed as already pretty
referred to the senate
committees committee then send a
tax business transfer committee
then senate finance committee
timber removing the authority of
the forestry division of the
energy minerals and natural
resources department to acquire
land or interest in land by gift
or purchase in the name of the
committees committee then senate
conservation committee then send
it to this year committee that
senate bill one seventy two.
Senate bill one seventy three
one seventy three introduced by
definitions removing the
authority of the energy minerals
and natural resources department
to acquire conservation or
agricultural easements repealing
three haven't been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
conservation committee then send
deduction for the sale of legal
services to recover compensation
pursuant to the federal hermit
speak canyon fire assistance act
transportation committee then
senate finance committee that
senate bill one seventy four
centered bill one seventy five
introduced by senator had a meal
and act related to law
officer correctional officer and
probation and parole officer
recruitment making an
appropriation senate bill one
seventy five one seventy five
senate bill on seventy six
introduced by senator myesters
and representative they like
cruise.
And act relating to athletic
fees adding away classes
requiring state champions
extending the termination dates
of the professional athlete
competition act and the new
mexico athletic commission
affairs committee then send a
tax business transportation
committee that senate bill one
seventy six
send a bill one seventy seven
bill one seventy seven have you
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate health public affairs
committee then senate finance
ceiling of records does not
apply to crimes related to
firearms for purposes of the
national instant criminal
background check senate bill one
Senate don't want seventy nine
introduced by senator hickey and
act relating to insurance
amending the life and health
insurance guarantee association
act to include health
maintenance organizations as
members of the life and health
insurance guarantee association
section fifteen senate bill one
seventy nine
senate bill one seventy nine
haven't been rant twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the senate committees
committee then senate tax
knacked making an appropriation
to the board of regions of the
university of new mexico for the
health sciences centers student
mentoring program to provide
government training for high
committee then senate education
committee then senate finance
that senate bill one eighty
seven a bill one eighty one
introduced by senator worth and
liability clarifying an amount
of certain intangible income
used to determine that liability
including corporations that have
twenty percent or more of their
one eighty one a bill one eighty
one have you been read twice by
title.
Is ordered printed and referred
to the senate committees
committee then send a tax
introduced by senator gone's
others and act making an
appropriation the department of
finance in administration for
the regional planning districts
to provide grant writing and
health public affairs committee
then sent a finance committee
that senate bill one eighty two.
Senate bill one eighty three
introduced by senator gonzalez
the additional registration fees
be distributed to the state road
fund and the transportation
project fund set a bill one
send a finance that said a bill
one eighty three
senate bill one eighty four
introduced by senator guns alice
and act related to taxation
senate committees committee
events senate tax business
transportation committee then
sent finance that cinnamo one
eighty four
senate bill one eighty five
introduced by senator gonzalez
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee
events senate conservation
committee then send a finance
committee that senate bill one
eighty five senate bill one
eighty six introduced by
roaming is municipalities from
an acting rent control for
privately owned real property
senate bill one eighty six one
eighty six having been read
send a bill one eighty seven
introduced by senator lopez and
act relating to the environment.
Eliminating local authority to
administer the air quality
eight being laws nineteen sixty
seven chapter two seventy seven
section four and last nineteen
ninety two chapter twenty
committees committee then senate
conservation
then senator district committee
that senate bill one eighty
seven
senate bill one eighty eight
introduced by senator gonzalez
from the department of finance
and administration providing
that matching funds shall not be
required for receiving a granted
aid senate bill one eighty eight
senate bill one eighty eight
senate bill one eighty nine
introduced by senator share and
act making an appropriation to
the tourism department to
seven bill one eighty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed
to the senate committee's
committee events senate indian
rule and cultural affairs
committee then senate finance
senator brand representatives
hocken we heal ream and ribe.
An act relating to driving while
sections of the moral motor
vehicle code senate bill one
ninety senate bill one ninety
have you been read twice my
title is ordered printed and
senate memorial five introduced
by
senators lopez
severe lopes and padea
department senate memorial five.
Senate joint memorial too
introduced by senators pinto
located by the mechanic going to
joint memorial too send a joint
memorial to haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
rules committee then senate
indian rule and cultural affairs
committee
and woods a joint resolution
proposing to amend the
constitution of the mexico to
provide for voting requirements
for policy making in advisory
rules committee then send
judiciary committee that senate
joint resolution.
The.
know it's consent to go that
next order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
ad order business seen no
objection we're in that order of
and also specially a senator
when yours
thank you mister president one
everybody make sure that your
build two so you'll see a large
number of so it's important that
you get those done in inter into
a senate finance we're gonna go
up
forty five minutes after the
interesting things in agencies
you know
a doh was testifying today and
said you know what you gave us
too many things to do
and we don't have any staff
out and and they don't have the
staff in the agency and we've
overfunded agencies in doing
their so as we move forward
remember that members are that
money remember we need to look
back and see what they have in
what they haven't spent so thank
you mister president.
Thank you center when we have
next we have senator hamlin
forty five just to give us about
thirty minutes a little bit plus
thirty minutes but tax business
and transportation meeting in
we're hearing bills tomorrow
morning at eight thirty in room
three eleven so at eight thirty
in room three eleven we have him
pill pop him pill hickey store
know we're seeing that the c s g
west people martha and edgar are
here in the building uh this
last year due to some and for
seeing complications the
and though it doesn't affect us
individually for new mexicans
legislators attending there's a
hundred dollars discount each
this year it is held in portland
I believe it's the second week
than NCSL but that means you get
a better chance to ask questions
engage understand and work with
other legislators and
particularly on issues that
affect us in the west so would
july nine to twelve in portland
this summer thank you mister
president.
Thank you thank you center cills
senator brent
increase in antisematic behavior
around the nation
about a six hundred percent
increase in some areas
issue is it just for politics
this is why.
No one in this country
should have to deal
We should take a stand
because when we don't stand up
for our brothers and our sisters
who are being attacked
who will.
when we were attacked by
terrorist
yet
we're gonna ignore it what i'm
not.
But the other side is going to
ignore it.
Of hamas a terrorist
organization who's been listed
as a terrorist organization for
years.
Nothing further.
It's too controversial to stand
against terrorism it's too
controversial to stand against a
terrorist organization.
That crossed the border in
They lost an attack against
civilian slaughtering civilians.
The.
Slaughtering babies.
anything and we're not going to
stand with them
against this kind of
barbarianism no you know what
that is an insult to barbarians.
But hamas did only a monster
could do.
But we won't take a stand
When monsters.
Attack their people.
It would be bad enough for it to
large a surprise attack against
military.
surprise attack against
civilians
a whole group of young people
including a lot of americans
were at a concert.
Though we're not going to bring
it up.
But I will continue to bring it
up.
Because we do need to stand.
With israel.
launching rockets into israel
against the util's duties who
are supported by iran
I compliment the fact that.
He has taken a stand.
To stay tuned on bring more for
you tomorrow.
We do have further
announcements.
We are center doing followed by
center store sir thank you mr
worth steinborn hamphill
gonzalez nevil souls tomorrow
and myself thank you make
senator hick and center store
thank you mister president
Thanks their stewart any further
announcement center pop
thank you mister president I
wanted to
alert the body in the public on
the passing of dexter king he is
he upheld his father's ideals of
love equality and unity working
tirelessly to bridge divides in
our society he also served his
chairman of the king center for
Thank you center pope any
further announcements
seen that are you center my
capital center mike
number so and make a motion
right now that's going to help
us resolve that and that is
moved to explain senate joint
a motion by announcement send to
explain senate joint resolution
twelve for the purpose of
reintroducing it we're going to
go right back to introduction to
give it its proper number
center regions while that's
already been introduced this
will just give the senate
resolution twelve in ever
release should have been sent it
was resolution thirteen I thank
video is at center joint
resolution twelve the local
government firearms and
regulation that's in our book
will stay there the spountain
twelve point two um will rule
sent it was resolution thirteen
the general solution proposing
to amend the constitution of new
mexico to provide for voting
requirements for policy making
see no objection
set up a take aside next sort of
business thank you very much
mister president uh you know
it's consent to go to that next
grigs and woods a joint
resolution proposing to amend
the constitution in mexico to
provide for voting requirements
for policymaking and advisory
The.
Senate joined resolution
thirteen haven't been read twice
by title has ordered printed
referred to the senate rules
that order business
announcements in miscellaneous
that i've seen objection where
that order business
announcements are miscellaneous
thank you very much mister
president just see if there's
will stand a recess until the
eleven am tomorrow morning see
no objection set up a there you
get a wonderful job leading the
floor today by the way
