senator campus center civil
death
center do hick
center guy apples.
The.
Centre consulars present.
center hickey.
Centre hickey's excused santa be
sort of
sent our meal
center mechanic nowhere center
mars
center minister.
Centre buder
center pinto.
Center period.
Center cities.
Center city a lot best now we
present it in here center share
Center stewart
center thomas
here.
we all please rise for the
invocation to be led today by
rabo rabbi barrel liver tough
from the santa fe jewish center
should but i'd ask so you remain
standing for the pledge of
miss a flag to believe today by
similar craig brand
thank you mister president
tenant or to be here especially
with my dear friend chap and
rear could do so much for the
as well it's a arch stands for
acts of random kindness when you
put some charity into here and
ask to ask how to give us some
Almighty god creator of the
universe the members of this
august body
the senate of the beautiful
state of new mexico come here
to ensure that this state and
your world is a better place we
pray to you guard please be
store your blessings upon them
and give them the wisdom
in aspiration to accomplish
thousand seven hundred and
eighty four years ago and then
reissue to know I and her sons
after the great flood the
commandment to govern by just
One to worship you alone and
that to survivals too never to
blast seem your holy name three
not to murder for not to commit
which are based and they
recognition and acknowledgment
of you or guide as a sovereign
ruler of all people and all
nations here are the people who
are fulfilling your commandment
with good health and prosperity
for their hard work them and
their families and a mighty god
at the gathering of these
honourable lawmakers we turn to
you and prayer especially for
part of the world today marks
one hundred and three days since
they have suffered the most
horrific attacks they vicious
terrorists and on my might
regard please send strength and
wisdom to leaders and soldiers
have been suffering in your main
torture for so long please
change the heart of evil to know
they name and give up their
fight to destroy your beautiful
world please fulfil the privacy
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the united states of america.
Once again would like to welcome
interview to today's session and
i'll yell to sen peter worth to
get things started for us
shannon pinto for january seven
two thousand twenty four.
No objection
senator worth thank you mister
president and good morning
tough welcome to the new mexico
senate we appreciate your words
we certainly are working hard
here to make our state a better
a branch I I will say to the
members there was a
a very nice profile of our
senate chaplain in the santa fe
new mexican couple weeks ago and
more about him and uh center
brand I think had comments in
that article as well so couple
of announcements today is
eastern to mexico university
data legislature it's also
finish uh with announcements up
front it also is new mexico
highlands day and senator
compose has a certificate of
recognition and foreguess that
macure part of mary twelve forty
south asbena and las cruces on
monday january twenty second the
rosary is at ten followed by a
funeral mass internet follows at
hill crest memorial garden
association has a reception at
the.
Her wine bar five to seven pm uh
the new mexico counties
legislated reception and dances
by invitation the roswell java's
county economic development
court legislative receptions
at lefonda hotel sixty nine uh
announcements regarding
deadlines
five pm on sunday january twenty
eighth is the deadline for
having bills drafted so keep
on wednesday january thirty
first financial reports are due
to be filed electronically with
the secretary of state's office
with that mister president ideal
to other members and then wall
you mister president I too want
to thank
rabbi liver tough for his words
this morning appreciate your
leadership in the jewish
a good history a simple history
of the state of israel and how
it came about the spot by a know
it is be is a great book I would
today and for the session it is
a.
Really you know honoring our
friendship and relationship with
the israel they have been a long
friendship between them it's a
new mexican flag with the state
israel's flag and you'll know
that i'm praying daily for the
do thank you for your leadership
in that and for meeting with me
and working with me on several
things during the center of
an especially since the or
um yeah you may not know but my
father in law passed away during
the center of
and he was catholic and so I
called our chaplan and he was
at the veterans cemetery and and
I just really thank him for that
and just for being there several
times when i've needed someone
thank miss president I wanted to
bring forth the
you know a a certainly support
center to branch thoughts in
the other thing that i'd like to
bring up.
The president actually came to a
breakfast this morning with me
know that you all of it and uh I
just wanted to make no to uh
that I represent a long with a
senator peter the uh great town
opportunity thank you satellites
we are sent or had a meal
thank you mister president in
front of you you have the new
mexico true bag with a lot of
swag
and so the department of tourism
promotes new mexico nationwide.
beanies some cups so if we can
take our friends from the
department of tourism for the
gift that they've given us and
for the work that they do in
promoting new mexico and also
but he got from texas and m
university and he named that
horse after the senator from
especially where so thank you
chap lenford navigate that horse
after beef thank you mister
holiday just passing on monday
i'd like to reflect a little bit
on his legacy document literally
king junior was a beacon of hope
in a tireless advocate for
equity inclusion and justice
society where every individual
is judged not by the color of
their skin but by the content of
the character but that was not
the only message doctor keen
fought invaliantly against the
pursuit of happiness for every
citizen inclusion another pillar
of doctor king's dream employees
used and braced the richness of
our diversity he believed that
or every voice is heard where
diverse perspectives are not
only welcomed but actively
sought after
justice the final call of doctor
and equity for all legislators
bear the responsibility of
crafting laws that protect the
vulnerable ensuring that skills
have justice are balanced for
every citizen
adjusters into the fabric of our
nation honoring the dream that
echoes to the corridors of time
and doing so we don't only pay
pop we have sender neighbored
thank you mister president on
your desk you'll find some
guests from eastern new mexico
university of the portalous
now and and look forward to
having a good relationship about
going with the university but
with the chamber there and and
with the agricultural basis a
any further announcements
she is a director of of the UNM
center for development and
disability and it's where people
forms of mental problems besides
that so she's here today on your
desk you received AAA bag one of
several bags we received today
disability that can encompass
being compassed by the term
items and spectrum so would the
members please join and
senator morris as i'm assuming
you're talking about the unit
basketball game is correct
mister president I I don't know
the final square but I do you
know that are you in and levels
were successful wise in a row
game uh said it was like the old
days with the pit games the last
two guy game so it's exciting I
see our d a back there should
allow this had he's excited
we're all excited to go lobos
victory who's actually bigger
than that it margin was higher
than the we let him get a little
closer but it was amazing
victory over a very strong rank.
with me amanda van she's here
representing elevate the
spectrum she's an educator and
an artistic self advocate I also
have tommy hernandez with the
two gas i'd appreciate it thank
you mister
thank you mister president thank
you senator any further
mister president so we're going
to go ahead and do the two
certificates so I would yield to
senator lopez for autism day and
I think the reader is going to
read both of those certificates.
Centered offers thank you very
much
majority further
and the inanimates consent mr
president to ask the reader to
read the certificate recognizing
artism
seen objection the reader to
read
logical disorder that affects
the development of communication
and social interaction skills
and whereas in twenty twenty the
federal centers for disease
religions and all educational
and that comma economic levels
end whereas artism is a lifelong
condition that presents
challenges to education
optism and whereas early
intervention evidence based
practices improvement support
systems greatly improve the
outcomes and reduce the lifelong
communities businesses
technologies and cultures made
by people with optism and
whereas the many professionals
families advocates in volunteers
the spectrum incorporated is a
new mexico based grassroots
nonprofit organization dedicated
to empowering individuals on the
optism spectrum and their
families through inclusion
contributions to new mexico and
that elevate the spectrum
incorporated be recognized for
its service and dedication to
the people with optism and their
africa mimi stewart president
protem senator linda lopez
sherry de luhan chief clerk
thank you to a reader and all
you'll to center lovers
Proceed senator thank you very
much mister president
for members
prisons who
are underspectrum each person
stories and from my family with
lot and so over the years and
the journey that I have been on
in learning from him
our chamber but also from the
other chamber and the advocates
who I will introduce shortly
it is a we we've come along way
to artism and some of the
changes that we have made over
the years mister president but
we still have a long ways to go
and I want to commend of course
move forward in a much more
experient way mister president
then what sometimes this body
takes time to move things down
we can't wait for children for
for the children and also to
support community and that's
where elevate the spectrum has
come forward in many different
ways we have a state entities
who work very hard
We talk about an ip individually
individual education plan it's
a federal document and what are
we not doing to make sure that
our students these young persons
words if they so choose is that
when a child graduates from high
school and they move on maybe to
higher education what are we
have so much to give and share
and just because you have a
divergence of different ways of
thinking and processing I think
sometimes mister president that
they are much more in the norm
than the rest of us
senator mimister
thank you mister president
I really wanna thanks in a low
spectrum
but I I rose to speak to thank
her for her long work in her
excellent testimony today but
about artistic children and
seven of the actors seven of the
main actors in the play are
You know I I want to underscore
what center lopez said is that
these children benefit from
education they take more
had a dance in ohio thank you
mister president are you saying
stewart scenario could air
handful thank you mister
president I also want to think
senator lopez for bringing this
with artism um as a fellow mama
for a child with disabilities I
know the sacrifices and I know
the challenges that caretakers
fees some I just want a letter
and also want to give a showed
out to teachers educators who
work with those children as I
know that you have in the past
president and other caretakers
children with artism thank you
mister president thank you
center credit hampile center but
there.
Thank you very much mister
president I also want to rise
alive for us to continue working
and and we've seen tremendous
progress in this area mister
president I will tell you that I
was announcing and talking about
my better half yesterday and you
real struggles and because we
were able to find these very
valuable services that bodies
like this legislature at this
state government cities counties
provide he is flourishing in a
lot of wonderful ways I just
have now just were autism in the
spectrum is concerned we can
look to examples like
representative jessica bendim in
come to the forefront and they
don't advocate just on this
issue they do just like us all
the ninety three things that we
work on and so I just think that
we should stand support of this
and we should support senator
just want to give a shot up
first thank you to senator lopez
for bringing this and continuing
to bring this but I want to give
a shut out to
there my adopted grandkids are
have autism and they went in
there and and you'll just huge
differences between when they
started there and when they
massive effects on their lives
and on their ability to work
through
the disabilities of autism their
cars and young like sir look as
almost normal life and they can
be huge benefits to our society
and so I think uh low best for
bringing this but I also want to
think shining starts preschool
know how to do it right I know
that they'll be glad to share
with you thank you.
Thank you center brand.
Similar to zip you know.
Thank you mister president I
just wanted to add one of the
thing first of all to thank
senator lowest for bringing this
and if the link between autism
and alzheimer's is demonstrable
this does not board well for our
future we need to really start
merry k paper that there's no
also in autism diagnosis in and
and and response and support
service center at new mexico
state university as well so we
the future going to have to
continue expanding these
resources but thank you senator
lopez for bringing this forward
and thank you members for being
uh
Seen no further amount or yield
to center doppers to introduce
or guess and thank you very much
mister president and thank you
to my colleagues for your
let me and i'm trying to digital
thing mister mr president so
bare with me a second i'm still
learning.
Okay mister president I have
with me here and if you could
stand as I introduce you a wise
have christina martinez who
we have terror main who also
serves and works with advertised
with elevator spectrum and she
serves lc
first responders recently it was
in the news I also cannot dream
curious on the board of
directors for elevator spectrum
it is and what we need to be
doing here in the state of
mexico
to support families and
especially our students so
mister president if we could
Thank you
thank you set it up as we do
have certificates that will have
sergeant and arms or will have
back to senator compos for a
certificate on the mexico
highlands center covers and
thank you very much mister
president I ask you that I was
concerned to have the return
here by extended recognition and
acknowledgment to new mexico
highlands university whereas the
mexico highlands university has
been an important educational
each year and has more than five
hundred employees at the
school's main campus and centers
and whereas the vision of new
mexico highlands university is
to be a premium university
accessibility and responsiveness
in whereas the priorities of new
mexico highlands university are
academic excellence academics
integration academic integration
innovation and enhanced
communication and efficiency
across the university and
whereas the mexico islands
university effectively serve
and whereas the mexico is
university educates many first
generation students transforming
their lives and the lives of
nineteen tribes and pueblos and
seeks to affectively reach out
to all of them they through the
established establishment of a
vibrant alumni association board
most diverse regional
universities in the west a top
one hundred best regional
university in the west and one
of the top sixty public
institutional value through a
number of partnerships with
other new mexico higher
education institutions including
work in in tandem with new
mexico state university eastern
support the the mexico rest
reforestation centers seed bank
and seed collection efforts and
new mexico highlands university
american social work studies
institute which includes
programs and initiatives serving
native american people and
continues to achieve success in
launched a new distance
education partnership designed
to increase student romant and
the school success coach student
mentoring program model has
cultural resource management
bachelor of science and wildlife
biology and conservation
bachelor varts and
organizational leadership in
public safety bachelor of arts
where as new mexico highlands
university added new programs in
biology entrepreneurship
cultural resource management and
criminal justice and where asday
work in nursing degree programs
and whereas the new mexico has
university school of education
received ten million dollars to
support a new institute for
one million six hundred thousand
dollars in federal funding
annually through the title for e
earmarked for training social
workers in new mexico to work in
be used to assess the impact of
a new model of care that uses
health and wellness coaching to
assist students in navigating
college experiences and whereas
from the higher education
department to be used to
overcome the stigma related to
food and security and
administered a basic neat survey
in spring twenty twenty three as
mexico highlands university is a
federal fund that federally
funded and designated hispanic
serving institution with more
than fifty percent in rolled
highlands university welcome
students from northern new
mexico all of new mexico the
united states and the world now
therefore be it resolved by the
senate of the state of new
january seventeenth twenty
twenty four be proclaimed new
mexico highlands university day
in the senate signed and sealed
in the capital of the city of
don't know if you have anyone on
the list speak but will go ahead
will take your lead thank you
make a center compass we do have
senator stewart
student legislative group comes
to visit me these are young
students who are interested in
politics they're interested in
what we do they have great ideas
district uh so i'm very proud of
the highland also i'm very glad
to stand up and say that and in
twenty
ten when we did a study of all
of the higher red institutions
reading first teachers and those
few years when we had money for
reading the first was when our
name scores went up so highlight
they're doing thank you
senator michael for there thank
you very much mister president I
do also rise in support I will
be very brief with my comments
severe under employment where
we're social work is concerned
but they produce some of the
world's best social workers and
it's so important to our state
with everything going on there
and uh with that mister
thank you mister president I
rise in support of the
certificate and I think the
sponsor is this always gives me
an opportunity to brag on my
he met my aunt at islands
university and so it was just
you know it is I always treasure
that connection I also attended
girls date at a highlands
university my brother went
workers the bilingual social
workers from highlands program
and they were excellent so I am
very I just think islands is a
senator was on a center out of
your thank you mister president
today also standing rights and
support of this certificate new
mexico highlands university has
played a major role in educating
county I want to think new
mexico highlands university for
the work that they're doing and
we're continuing to teach our
teachers in northern new mexico
thank you thank you so I had a
acknowledge senator accomplished
for having the certificate in
this acknowledgement you know to
the new medical highlands of
staff for contingency that's
here
New medical highlands university
was the pioneers you know with a
bilingual education program as
it started in the late sixty
seven seventies with
president members so
this summer they hosted us with
a legislative finance committee
and we met writing campus and it
again thank you to all of you
and thank you to senator compos
though thank you mister
president thank you services
unless we have senator woods
followed by senators to find
center words
much for being here today
they've always been so good when
they uh we have a legislative
committee meeting and town
they've just been over backards
in and great school some of
those teachers were educated at
new mexico highlands it was the
popular place to go from our
contributor to new mexico
education facility for uh
features
putting out teachers for new
burned down and they are
teaching their students to
actually assist after this large
wildfire and I think that they
have risen to the occasion of
looking to waters needed
immediately the program was in
place but they got some federal
grants to expand it so they are
able to employ individuals
during the summer to also learn
Thank you president and thank
you senator composed for for
bringing this memorial
yesterday you know we introduced
special role in fact that uh
that she would ever out here in
in the first place her
her grandfather in grandmother
that not ever occurred then
there wouldn't have been
other opportunities for cards in
people to me and all of that
stuff show it it's really kind
so I can and can say there's
highlands has always been during
the interim committees when
we've up their highlands is
the state and it sound it's been
just awfully enjoyable to meet
at at highland show uh mister
president senator thank you for
doing all that.
mexico state senate for not only
their words at wisdom and
they're sharing their
experiences but more than that
as we move forward college
from there they go on they build
a careers they take care of
their families but they always
come home and as we talk about
in new mexico and so with that
i'd like to go ahead and
introduce some of the guests
that are here with us today and
the individual that i'm gonna
heart has always been with new
mexico highlands he said that
from day one he continues to
live that we live just a few
doors down from each other and
that's the commitment to our
students regardless of whether
they're and I don't learner they
are a person it's just starting
out if you will but the key is
this all of us continue to
return to visit with us also
here are some other great guests
the coathetic director shannon
accepted if he will the core
director position in twenty
twenty three one of the things
here is that over the last
several years we have started to
build and they say started
student at least are going to be
best prepared in the area of
academics and I want to thank
you very much for accepting the
resources continuing to build a
program and ensuring that our
athletes were going to be
business media and technology
since twenty twenty and has been
in higher it in new mexico for
seventeen years again another
individual who is not only
really makes it work for us
whether it be at home and it
used to be our cheque books but
now it's something to completely
different but to have that
accountability so that will
doctor society about who is dean
of the fact of all their school
of social work and this is his
first year is dean and he came
will a great need for social
workers so we're spread across
if you will the board as we deal
with that the role is immense
the work that is unundertaken
again here at new mexico
highlands we do have that
capability and again doctor
thank you very much for your
work there are doctor in
williamson the associated vice
of academic affairs grants and
contracts and the graduating
again another individual who is
fully committed to not only
education and for his commitment
we really appreciate the work
that you continue to do.
The individual that i'm going to
introduce now is uh the david le
his second year and he is vice
president for marketing
communications and government
relations again and individual
who is serious about education
meticulous but as we move
forward to be a leader in so
many areas when we start talking
about food we start talking
about forestry and incidentally
as we move forward this is the
it were forward thinking and I
again I thank uh david lepre for
his commitment to the students
that are ten new mexico
highlands university so without
thank the new mexico highlands
university.
The.
Thank you sending the campus and
thank you to all your yesterday
here with the today
center computer worth thank you
mister president just for the
members what we're going to do
is read in the committee reports
for the five confirmations that
we're going to do today and
lots of we're going to read in
all the rest of the committee
reports the senate rules
committee was very busy and
interim there are sixty five
confirmations that we need to do
on the floor so we're gonna
president in amazing that we go
that are business committee
reports or in that order of
business committee reports the
reader to read which president
german rules committee has under
consideration senate executive
prevention commission for a term
commencing on march twenty
eighth twenty twenty three
expiring december thirty first
twenty twenty six year committee
Move the committee reports
mister president.
Sorry mr president I forgot with
the script is for this part.
The.
I ask you and is consent of the
senate that the reader be
allowed to read all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
executive letter number eleven
dated october thirteenth twenty
twenty three which the governor
makes the following appointment
jason are booi as a member of
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
appointment
senator executive letter number
leven dated october thirteenth
twenty twenty three in which the
government makes the following
three expiring december thirty
first twenty twenty six your
committee recommends at the ser-
senate confirmed disappointment
senate executive letter number
term commencing on march twenty
eighth twenty twenty three
expiring december thirty first
twenty twenty four year
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
appointment
organized organized crime
prevention commission for a term
comments in on march twenty
eighth twenty twenty three
expire in december thirty first
twenty twenty six year committee
reports centers we have a motion
to adopt community reports all
those in favor signified by
saying I
was a fozney the eyes have been
the community part has been
yield to
that senator who has a horse
named after him senator harmiel.
We're in that order business
confirmations and were yield to
commission I now yield to send
it are worth setting their peter
worth thank you mister president
pursuing to senate executive
letter number eleven date of
to explain thank you mister
president and members I am very
honoured to again present
secretary
that position since august of
twenty twenty one was confirmed
unanimously for reappointment in
february twenty twenty two so
has a good track record in this
for nearly three decades
he's a lifelong member and
proven leader and continues to
provide that kind of leadership
mexico sentencing commission in
mexico high intensity drug
trafficking area a ncja advisory
council member and the organized
here he's put in the time but he
continues to step up and i'm
honored to present him for
confirmation this position happy
to answer any questions thank
you center service where
Thank you mister president I I
rise in support in in the
secretary and in you know he
and what fixes the problem and
he moves in that direction in in
so I appreciate the secretary
for doing that present him
serving on this commission on
top of these other duties I
don't imagine this is a paid
want to solve the crime problem
in new mexico and how you
willingly help out pretty much
everybody in this room when when
dps so there's an emergency so I
think you'll be a great litter
but I I appreciate you as a
person in your responsibilities
in and taking on this other duty
so thank you thank you send them
on us we do have senator vocker
district to speak to many police
officers in the volunteer county
district and frequently
i'll ask how things are and I
least competent individual who
who certainly has been had a
very decorated i'll say a career
in law enforcement and respected
up again into another position
where I know that his experience
and knowledge in this area will
be invaluable to new mexicans
across the state.
and rear answer before he came
up here and we we really
appreciate the leadership and
under that the work that he does
I I thank him for working with
me during the interim also on
those bills but you know we we
work together on on some
recruiting
issues to be able to recruit
officers from other states as
well as that loading officers
have and I just think him for
his leadership on that and
raised in strong support of of
is being on this position thank
you.
and sent the record show the
roles being called in all those
present vote in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by short answer thank
you senators we are voting all
senators tear seats please.
Yeah.
My vote of thirty four the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment of jason are
bowing as a member of the
confirmed by the new mexico
senate senator worth thank you
ladies and gentlemen the senate
let's all rise and give uh
center however
mister president I asked that
the credentials of edward and
flores be presented to the
fourth senate for consideration
as a member of the governor
president pursuant to senate
executive letter number eleven
dated october thirteenth two
thousand twenty three I moved
that the senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
handle the explain thank you
mister president i'm honor to
bring forward edward and
florida's for the appointment of
the governor's organized crime
prevention commission he has an
years of his life in dedication
and professional law enforcement
experience he's managed three
new mexico state police officers
and supervised forty five
structure and a member of the
western new mexico university
threat assessment team and
crisis intervention team he's a
bachelors of a played science
and criminal justice with a
minor in business and then went
back and got his masters and
you center could I hand pile
senators we are debating the
confirmation of edward eddie m
florida.
See no debate center could I
those voting and the negative by
a show of hands senators we are
voting just reminder to all
senators that you have to be at
your seat at the time of wrote
The.
By a vote of thirty four in the
affirmative zero the negative of
the appointments of edward eddie
influence as a member of the
governor's organized crime
him feel thank you mr president
as the body the tip please rise
in honor of edward m florida
says appointment to the
governor's organized crime for
prevention commission.
Senator had a mill mister
president I asked at the
credentials of the honorable
judicial nakamara de presented
to the full senate for
consideration as a member of the
october thirteenth twenty twenty
three and move that to send it
to here by confront the
appointment of the honourable
judice knock a moral to the
governor's organized crime
prevention commission.
judy and death the work that she
is done over the years but i'll
try and fill in some gaps very
quickly
she got her bachelor bars degree
from unium in political science
school she's worked as legal
assistant law clear general
council for the state land
office and john council for many
or attorney for several
wonderful inside into the
operations of the court system
in a new mexico and specifically
the
the supreme court and a public
courts
to two thousand and fifteen she
was judge in the second district
court from fifteen to twenty she
was the new mexico on the new
seventeenth of june of twenty
she is uh I think more than
qualified as a certain this post
and quite frankly personally she
Thank you senator center is
really debating
no debate senator birth to close
on confirmation
thank you mister president I ask
you know who's gives it now that
the record show that all has
Senators where voting tears
seeds.
If you wish to vote on please
raise your hand.
By vote of thirty one in the
affirmative zero on the negative
the appointment of the honorable
negative the appointment of the
honorable judice karen or as a
member of the governor's
organized crime prevention
commission for turn comments in
a march twenty eight twenty
twenty three expiry in december
if the body would not mind I
would really appreciate a
a round of applause to welcome
her to the uh commission thank
you mister president.
david allen be presented to the
full senate for consideration as
a member to the governors
organized crime prevention
commission I now yield to
here by confirming the
appointment of sheriff john
david allen to the governor's
organized crime prevention
commission with that i'd like to
open up the florida questions or
explained first year and then
we'll get to delete my apologies
I would like.
Mr president sheriff john allen
started off his career actually
bernaleo county you know the
sheriff has so much experience
expertise and training and I
just think he was is a great
addition to this commission and
appointment of john david allen
and one wishing to debate center
tissupino.
Thank you very much mister
president and and thank you
efforts in berlio county to deal
with the crime problem there by
sick by sheriff allen's
professionalism by his
the governors organized crime
prevention commission and I
can't think of anyone well there
are several members who are very
well suited to be on that
commission but he certainly is
well suited to be on the
commission and I think very
further debate
seen off further debate
senator pope to close on the
confirmation
thank you mister president I ask
unanimous consent at the wrecker
show that the role has been
called and that all those
please raise your hand.
The.
By a vote of thirty two zero the
negative the appointment of john
confirmed by the new mexico
senate center poke thank you
mister president the sheriff can
be with us today you know he's
he's very busy and I think we
all appreciate that I only
of a plus for his confirmation
thank you so the popular by
saying the gym I do hope it's a
basketball gym we do have
organized crime prevention
commission and our yield to
minority leader senator bucket
senator great bucker thank you
miss your president present to
send the executive letter
commission here in no objection
senator bucker to explain
they give mister president i'm
center moors was going to
originally do this he got called
away on a matter so I have the
district and has stepped up and
filled that role quite
adequately in and competitively
in his position he is a fell
alumni of the university of new
mexico law school and it's
defended and now prosecuted
he started his career in private
practice.
And now his during during his
three hundred employees
including a hundred prosecutors
and what is the largest office
in the state and uh as I sa- as
profile case and and he shared
some of his insight with that
and it was inspiring at the time
to me and I appreciated that and
without I opened the subtle
Ah thank you mister president I
rise and strong support of this
this nominee sam breakmen are
district attorney in the area
where I where I live in work
where I have have a business and
his lives along the way and he
has done a phenomenal job and
every single one of them and and
this is a kind in loving new
mexican everybody here someone
that will write a gigantic check
in addition to that is a great
family man here you might have
heard about one of his sons and
some of his children along the
way and I think when he does
finally retire he's probably
gonna be put right to work on
became our district attorney i'm
not just standing here trying to
tell your boy really you know
support this person and vote for
this person literally took
impressed with that and I can
tell you that you know from my
standpoint anybody that shows up
in my district you know five
times that I personally see five
person who has such a huge
impact on on their livelihood
quality of life and the crime in
their neighborhood and there and
where they live so I just wanted
rise and strong support and tell
him that I support him and I
Terror lockers and thank you
very much mister president
I actually stand across in
support of mr bregman but all of
the others who've also been
appointed
questions that were asked during
testimony
and of the members who were in
front of us that are a serving
on this commission it's not a
new commission has been around
for a while it's just been
I still see justice nakura but
there is no one representing our
tribal communities
on this commission and I did
for an ad a tribal member to be
part of your commission
they are part of our communities
you know they too also have many
issues I think of crime that
and equity on this particular
board that you sit on thank you
mister president.
passion every time they're doing
something they have a passion
rate whether it's in his
criminal career defending
supporting him I think it'll be
a great deal for albequete help
turned statewide crime around
but he has that passion for
everything that he does and
pran that you want to make the
state better that you really
believe in your heart that
things are going to get better
and I think that's what
tremendous sam truly believes I
story so but it's a he's one of
those ones with pash I kept a
can't put a word on everything
else but when you have that fire
in your bally that you want to
night before we probably well
we're eating dinner and then
maybe again while we're in bed
but we see that ever each and
every time and and but he won't
miss an opportunity and friend
of a camera but the reason that
do but I think we should get
there so I am glad that sams
going to be on this commission
make sure we and and the
secretary make sure we give you
enough teeth to to make change
something in gallop they make
pondet nobody
you just never know where that
thing is going to end
but I appreciate you and I
appreciate you taking the time
to do this thank you.
law student and I knew back then
that this is going to be a
leader in our communities and I
actually think that you exceeded
what I what I thought and I
thought you're probably going to
whatever you're going to go
after you're going to give it a
hundred and ten percent and so
mister president I
was not surprised that you
impact and making a difference
for the communities would I want
to also say mister president is
one of the issues that I don't
think it's explored enough with
papers taken away from them
there are people who have been
traffic for for sexual services
and it is a problem in new
is being reorganized because
it's an angle of organized crime
in our community that tends to
exploit people from other
countries who don't speak the
language who get their test uh
nomination but with a strong
encouragement to really look at
that issue and see what is
needed I also have understood
that our crime are uh status.
we we don't prosecute so it's
actually uh a state that people
acting and so I am am thrilled
anything like that about me when
I was her student and I don't
know whether you know when I
think about that you exceeded
her expectations I don't know
where their expectations if you
were low and you've therefore
something that I want to share
which is you've always taken my
calls and we've done a lot of
work together in the last few
years on the issue public safety
and there's something that that
I think is really important that
hear other elected officials all
saying the problem with crime in
alba kirky is the legislature
the legislature won't pass this
law the legislation won't pass
state two and when sam became
the day that ended in my
experience working with him is I
didn't hear a lot of blame
shifting and I didn't hear
outcomes of the agency in the
the the part of the government
that i'm responsible for so
that's the word really that I I
leave for you mister bregman
which is accountability new to
me have been accountable from
somebody says i'm responsible
for these outcomes i'm
accountable and and hold me to
that standard and so to your
great credit i've enjoyed
working with you and.
And I hope you'll never lose
that I hope you'll never get
thank you mister president I
just want to stand a strong
support of d a bringing enjoying
this commission we've had some
never gonna happen but you know
he gave a good attempt and so I
I want to give him credit for
that but I think I want to echo
with center servant as was
talking about
talking with folks in what I see
on the streets of burning or
county
the communication with their lot
has been improved so much so I
think it's only fitting that he
serves on this commission and
you know the governor has picked
the right person thank you miss
for a while and seen various
folks come through the position
you're in I just wanna echo kind
of what's been said and how it
translates to what we're doing
that's done with integrity
that's taking the laws on the
books and understanding your
obligation to enforce those laws
what it means is that when you
come and when the days come in
the public defenders in the
three legs of the criminal just
to stool the resources to do the
job we've asked you to do and
for too long you know you're
putting a position where it's a
resource question and then the
it's a difference feeling and I
just wanted to say I echo what's
been said by my colleagues about
the job you've done and I want
to translate it into the job we
thank you for step up
thank you center worth we do
have further debate center
revisal thank you very much
mister president and I thank you
mister minority leader for brain
year and I was allowed to are
doing my
might.
Time in the days office as a
mister bragman has always been
somebody who
i've been able to look to as a a
bell weather of where things are
going and our community and
who have really appreciated the
voice that he's had in our
community um get a one of the
things also.
Sense he's taken over it's a
the the district court in berlio
county be it from the
berlie county or other partners
And and and people communicate.
Is that you could communicate
with folks you could be
reasonable as folks and you can
be hard as prosecutor all at the
same time.
And you don't have to blame
continue to work with other
partners
and we're gonna continue to have
dialogue and be effective.
And in fact be even more
effective because you're doing
organized crime a prevention
commission you really bring that
that careers worth of experience
to the table on that and so
thank you so much
but you choose to be in service.
You choose to be engaged through
the community.
And so thank you for what you
have done and thank you for what
Thank you center every sort of
say no further debate center
market it closed on the
confirmation thank you mister
president and we've all heard
position and coming forward to
serve yet again and I appreciate
it for a senator ive sought
those said um he doesn't have to
i'm proud of the people that
were come here confirm me here
today especially the current
nominee without a move that the
senate do here by confirm
affirmative except those voting
in the negative show that.
Thank you center back the center
is we are voting tear seeds
please.
The.
If you wish to vote no please
the appointment of sam breakman
as a member of the governor's
organized crime prevention
commission for term comments in
a march twenty eighth twenty
twenty three expiring december
thirty first twenty twenty six
confirmation centre.
announcements in miscellaneous
round that order business
announces was lane is senator
worth so just to give everyone a
sense we're going to go ahead
and read in and a number of
messages from the governor
fifty or so bills
I do know the democrats are
going to caucus after the floor
session and center pope will
announce that and then judiciary
is going to meet after the
caucus so we'll announce all of
that order business we did have
center brand you want to wait on
that
or in that order business
messages from the government of
the rediterate
the senate pursuing to article
four section five b two other
mess for constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
reorganizing certain aspects of
the health care authority and
rick recompiling sections of
animal say nineteen seventy
eight to conform laws to the
functions powers and duties of
authority access to all payers
database at the department of
health respectfully yours
michelle of hungrish and
governor
general show the message from
the governor has been received
pro temporary and members of the
senate pursuant to article for
section five b two other thing
mexico constitution I am
authorities authorizing for your
four five a bill enacting the
health care delivery and access
act imposing and assessment on
certain hospitals and providing
the revenue from the assessment
shall be used to provide
the reditreed senate executives
message number four the
honorable mimi stewart president
pro temporary president
prodashtemporary stewart and
members of the senate preser-
session submission of a bill
bearing legislative council
service drafting number point
two two six seven four six a
bill creating the office of
housing providing powers and
authority respectfully yours
michelle to hungrish governor is
you know show the message from
the governor has been received
the senate pursuant to article
four section five b two of the
mexican constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
distribute funds appropriate to
the department of statewide and
local firefighter and emergency
medical technician recruitment
respectful yours michelle who
president protemporary president
pro temporary stewart and
members of the senate pursuant
to article for section five be
due of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
two two seven two six one a bill
require in the department of
finance and administration to
establish a program to
distribute funds appropriated to
the department for statewide and
message from the governor has
been received
senate executive message number
seven the honorable meaning
stewart president pro temporary
president pro temporary restored
the fifty sixth legislature
second session submission of a
bill bearing legislative council
service drafting number point
two two seven two six zero a
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community and confirming the
prosecution's burden of proof in
pre trial detention hearings
message number eight the outable
stewart president pro temporary
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuing to article for section
five b two of the mexico
two two six nine four nine a
bill amending the public
employees retirement doctor to
allow members who are employed
or as certified or otherwise
purchase up to five years of
service credit respectfully or
is misselle luhan grisham
governor journal show the
message from the governor has
been received
pursuing to article four section
five b two of the mexican
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of a bill
definition of racket dearing
defying criminal gang create
additional crimes related
relating to racketeering and
prescribed penalties
senate executive message number
ten the animal honourable mimi
stewart president pro temporary
president pro temporary store
and members of the senate
legislative council service
drafted number point two two six
six eight seven a bill
prohibiting the carrying of a
firearm within one hundred feet
senate executive message number
eleven the honourable name is
stewart president pro temporary.
President pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
session submission of a bill
bearing legislative council
service drafty number point two
two six six zero seven a bill
Senate executive message number
twelve the honorable mimi
stewart president pro temporary
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
percent to article for section
employers to provide paid family
medical leap respectfully or
michelle who hungry governor the
journal show the message from
the governor has been received.
pursuant to article for a
section five b two of the new
mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill
acting the utility eastman for
broadband act and authorizing
the use and sharing the utility
for the presi- provision of
communication service throughout
fourteen the honourable mimi
stewart president protemporary
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuant to article for section
service drafting number point to
do six for five two a bill
amending the tax administration
act to provide for the issue and
within the exceptions to the
four year limitation on most
multi-term professional service
contracts and acting a new
section of chapter sixty two m m
state of new mexico within the
definition of authority amending
the broadband access and
expension act adding definitions
creating the education
connect new mexico expansion new
mexico fund pursuant to vote or
signed by the director of office
of brat broadband access and
broadband access and expansion
and transferring broadband
infrastructure from the
department of information
technology to the office of
Senate executive message number
fifteen the honourable meaning
store president protemporary
president protemporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuant to article for section
service drafting number point
two two six nine nine two a bill
allowing the taxation and
revenue department to issue
electronic credentials for
driver's licenses and
hungrish governor.
The journal show the message
from the governor has been
received senate executive
message number sixteen the
honorable meaning stored
president protemporary president
provided the definition for a
state firemember change the
number of state of state police
member correctional office
member and probation and propol-
parole officer member coverage
plan
one and provide for an election
pertaining to the adoption of
state public safety membered
coverage plan one respectively
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuant to article for section
five b two of the mexican
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
bill requiring certain receipts
for services provided by health
care practitioner that are the
deductible from gross receipts
to be within the scope of the
Senate executive message number
eighteen the honorable mimi
store president protemporary
president pro temporary store
and members of the senate
session submission of a bill
bearing legislative council
service drafting number point
two two six six seven zero a
bill providing an exception to
the regulation and licenses
department during
a and enforcement investigation
amending definitions of the
owning both a canada's license
and a license under the look of
control act prohibiting collect
call location of canada's
investigatory confidentiality
providing for seizure and
destruction of illegal
adulterated or misbranded
canada's products allowing for a
licenser with registration of
canada and education programs
including violations of the
canabas regulation act in the
reckon racketerinact the
And repealing a delayed repeal
related to canabas respectfully
or michelle luhangrisham
governor the journal show the
That was the last message from
the governor will well yell to
senator peter words take a sim
next order business thank you
mister president in m sent we go
to that our business letters
from the legislative council
when that order business letter
some legislative council the
reader to read
temporary stewart and members of
the senate pursue intersection
six dash eight dash two animals
say nineteen seventy eight the
new mexico legislative council
remainder of the term expiring
march thirty first twenty twenty
eight sincerely rowell e
berseaga the general show the
temporary store and members of
the senate pursuing to section
six dash eight dash two animal
say nineteen seventy eight the
new mexico legislative council
the term expiry in march thirty
first twenty twenty eight
sincerely row e bersey
there will show that the letter
of the senate pursuant to the
buyer science development act
the new michael let's they've
council has reappointed and
submits to the senate for
remainder of the term expiry in
june eighteenth twenty twenty
seven sincerely roll e bersiera
the journal show the letter from
just before we get to the
committee reports I just want to
just notify chairs if you'll be
prepared
as a reports are read out
retreat
accordance with the
constitutional constitutional
provisions and dents referred to
the conservation committee
respectfully submitted mamy
on them with one motion and the
journal reflect that they were
acted upon individually there in
objection the rediterate
senate bill seven fines seem to
germane and then referred to the
tax business and transportation
committee
said a bill name found to be
the judiciary committee.
Senate bill eleven fines seemed
to be german and then referred
to the judiciary committee.
Senate bill twenty three fine
seemed to be german and then
referred to the health and
public affairs committee.
Senate bill twenty six fine
seemed to be german and then
referred to the conservation
committee.
Senator bill twenty seven fine
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
senator bill thirty one fine
seemed to be domain and then
referred to the health and
chair.
Center store
mr president I moved adoption
the community report centers we
have emotions adopted community
they were acted upon
individually.
The renew treat mister president
your rules committee has had it
appointment alexes shannon's
dedel check s as quieter as a
member of the children's trust
one board of trustees for a term
comments in on september first
submitted senator katy m do hig
chairwoman.
trying to find that page I
should have found it earlier
today
thank you I asking and was
content of the senate that the
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports and that
we vote on them with one motion
one data january twenty twenty
twenty three in which the
governor makes the following
appointment reappointment is a
two macara case case gabar as a
twenty six.
There are committee recommends
at the senate confirm this
reappointment
senate executive letter number
commission for a term commencing
on me fifteenth twenty twenty
three through december thirty
first twenty twenty four
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
following reappointment chris
buyers as a member of the public
safety advisory commission for a
term comments in january second
one twenty two and expire in
january first twenty twenty five
appointment joan francis green
as a member of the borough
trustees of the miners hospital
of new mexico for return
comments in on june first june
Senate executive letter number
three dated september nineteenth
twenty twenty three which the
government makes following
appointment roy p fernunders as
committee recommends an approved
approved
appointment.
number fourteen dated december
eleventh twenty twenty three in
which the governor makes the
following reappointment margaret
elliston as a member of the
child's trust fund board of
that senate confirmed this
reappointment.
Senate executive letter number
one dated march twenty seven
twenty twenty three and expiring
december thirty first twenty
twenty eight committee
recommends a senate confirm this
reappointment
authority for term commencing on
january second twenty twenty
three expiry and january first
twenty twenty seven committee
recommends the senate confirmed
this reappointment.
been also shinoth as a member of
the state transportation
commission for term commencing
on january first twenty three
three dated september nineteenth
twenty twenty three which the
governor makes the foreign
appointment doctor letter and
concunder as a member of the
borders trustees of the miners
senate confirmed this
appointment.
Senate executive letter number
three day that february twenty
second twenty twentieth which
the governor makes the following
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
appointment.
Senate executive letter number
five dated september nineteenth
twenty twenty three in which the
governor makes the fallen
july first twenty twenty five
committee recommends the that
the senate confirmed this
appointment
senate executive letter number
and ranch heritage museum for a
term commencing on june twenty
ninth twenty twenty three expiry
in june twenty eighth twenty
twenty seven your committee
reappointment then bill ups as a
member of the gaming control
board for a term commencing on
may twenty first twenty twenty
two expiry in april thirtieth
twenty twenty seven years
which the governor makes the
following reappointment margaret
branch as a member of the state
racing commission for a term
commencing on january fourth
twenty twenty three expire in
Senate executive letter number
five dated september nineteenth
twenty twenty three and with the
governor makes the following
appointment some will sam
holiday bregman
july first twenty twenty seven a
committee recommends that senate
confirmed this appointment
senate executive letter number
five data september nineteen
twenty twenty three in which a
twenty three and expiring july
first twenty twenty four
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
appointment
senate executive message number
one data january twentieth
twenty twenty three in which the
january first twenty twenty
three and expire in december
thirty first twenty twenty six
year committee recommends at the
senate confirm this
reappointment
senate executive letter number
mexico hospital equipment long
council for a term commencing on
july eleventh twenties when you
do expiring january first twenty
twenty five year committee
recommends it that senate
reappointment paul j cassidy as
a member of the state board of
finance for a term comment scene
on march eighteenth twenty
twenty three expiry in march
six dated september nineteen
twenty twenty three in which the
governor makes the following
appointment matthew peter conras
as a member of the board of the
farm and heritage retz museum
senate confirmed this
appointment.
The.
The.
The.
Send it executive letter number
law enforcement standards and
training council for a term
commenting under like twenty
first point twenty three and
expiry in july first twenty
twenty five your committee
recommends that the senate
appointment mizzel garcia as a
member of the mexican line
forcement standards and training
council for a term commencing on
july first twenty twenty three
expiring july first twenty
dated february second twenty
twenty three in which the
governor makes the fallen
reappointment deborah garcia
grego as a secretary of the
department of cultural affairs
senate confirm this
reappointment.
Senate executive letter number
ten dated october thirteenth
twenty twenty three in which the
twenty twenty three expiring
december thirty first twenty
twenty eight your committee
recommends at the senate
confirmed this appointment
for a term commencing on january
second twenty twenty three
expiring january twenty first
twenty twenty six committee
reappointment stacy renete king
as a member of the children's
trust fundboard of board of
trustees for a term commencing
on october thirtieth twenty
twenty twenty three in which the
governor makes the fallen
reappointment barry stephen
queues
phd as a member of the board of
trustees that are mexican museum
and natural history and science
senate executive letter number
nine dated march twenty fourth
twenty twenty two which the
governor makes the fallen
appointment william edward lee
confirmed this appointment
senate executive letter number
seventeenth date of july.
Twenty eighth twenty twenty two
which a governor makes the
eleventh twenty twenty two
explain january first twenty
twenty five committee recommends
and it confirmed this
reappointment
senate executive letter number
eleven dated april twenty fifth
twenty two expiry in january
first twenty twenty six
committee recommends that senate
port authority for a term
commencing on february twenty
third twenty twenty two expiry
in june seventeenth point twenty
as a member of the board of the
farm enrance heritage museum for
a term commencing on june twenty
ninth twenty way three expire in
june twenty eighth twenty twenty
appointment richard hunt
matthews as a met member of the
mexican law enforcement
standards and training council
for term commencing on july
first twenty twenty three and
bob even maybe as a member of
the board of the farm and ranch
here judge museum for term
commencing on june twenty ninth
twenty twenty three and expire
in june twenty eighth twenty
twenty seven committee
nineteenth twenty twenty three
in which the government makes
the fallen appointment roberto
mackenzie as a member of the
board of the farm and ranch
heritage museum for term
commencing on june twenty ninth
senate executive letter number
thirty three dated january
thirteenth twenty twenty three
which the government makes the
fallen repointment james paul
miller junior phd as a member of
the senate confirm this
appointment
senate executive letter number
five dated september nineteen
twenty twenty three which the
governor makes the following
twenty three and expiring july
first twenty twenty six
committee recommends the senate
confirm disappointment.
twenty twenty three and which
the governor makes the following
reappointment
carry sue mitchell as a member
the mexico hospital equipment
long council for term commencing
on january second twenty twenty
twenty eight day january
thirteen twenty twenty three in
with the governor makes the
foreign appointment raymond
monday on as a member of the
military based planning
commission for a term commencing
letter number ten day to april
fifteenth twenty twenty two
which the governor makes the
following appointment tracy
michelle neff as a member of the
children's trust fund board of
trustees for a term commencing
senator executive letter number
thirteenth data april twenty
fifth twenty twenty in which the
governor makes the following
appointment fred call reduce of
as a member of the personnel
recommends that the senate
confirmed this appointment
senate executive letter number
twelve dated october thirteenth
twenty twenty three which the
government makes the fall in
committee recommends the senate
confirmed this reappointment
senate executive letter number
twenty one dated august tenth
twenty twenty two in which the
expiring on june seventeenth
twenty twenty six committee
recommends that the senate
confirmed this appointment
senate executive letter number
Expiring july first twenty
twenty four committee recommends
at the senate confirmed this
reappointment
senate executive messages and
commencing on july sixteenth
twenty two twenty twenty two and
expiry july fifteenth twenty
alice sikes as a member of the
military based planet commission
for a term commencing on june
ninth twenty twenty three to be
served at the pleasure of the
appointment.
Senate executive letter number
seventeenth they did july twenty
eighth twenty twenty two which
the governor makes the following
appointment jamie silver steel
as a member of the mexico
that the senate confirm
disappointment
senate executive message number
twenty nine dated january twenty
be served at the pleasure of the
governor committee recommends
the senate confirm
disappointment
senate executive letter number
five dated september nineteenth
twenty three and expiring july
first twenty eight six committee
recommends that the senate
confirmed this appointment
transportation commission for a
term commencing on march
seventeenth twenty twenty two
expire in december thirty first
twenty twenty six
committee recommends that the
falling reappointment lock see
drunk as a member of the
unemployment compensation review
board for a term commencing of
august twenty sixth twenty
twenty one expiry in august
Senate executive message number
one dated january twenty twenty
twenty three in which the
governor makes the following
reappointment derek c valdo as a
senate confirmed this
reappointment
senate executive message number
one dated january twenty twenty
and science for term commencing
on january first twenty twenty
three expire in december thirty
first twenty twenty six
appointment derent patrick quite
the second as a member of the
gaming control board for a term
commencing on june eleventh
twenty twenty one expiry in
april thirty twenty twenty five
governor makes the fallen
reappointment rebecca worse
burger as a member of the new
mexico mortgage finance
authority for a term commencing
on january second twenty twenty
Senate executive message number
four dated february twenty first
twenty twenty three in which the
governor makes the following
twenty twenty to be served at
the pleasure of the governor
your committee recommends that
the senate confirmed this
appointment respectfully
submitted senator katy and do
was a posenay the eyes have been
the committee report has been
adopted as journal reflect that
they were all voted on in one
motion
would like to thank a reader for
Where that order business
message from the house the
reader to read mister president
I am directed to in front of the
senate that the house is passed
house bill one with emergency
clause and requests the
senator peter worth for the next
order of business thank you
mister president in m said we go
that are business introduction
of legislation.
Or and that order business
The reader to read this.
The.
The senate bill thirteen
introduced by senator until near
centralized public safety
recruitment website that
provides a one stop portal for
state and local law enforcement
and safety agencies to advertise
requiring law enforcement
agencies to have plans to
recruit more women into law
enforcement and to provide
membership and peer assistance
programs for newly trained and
and training council to develop
new curricular for
teletelecommunicators
making up an appropriations
senate bill thirteen.
committee center bill thirteen
senate bill forty one introduced
by center courier hampile and
act making appropriations to
title is ordered printed
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
education committee then senate
finance committee said a bill
forty one senate bill forty two
safety communications system in
the definition of building
system in the public school
capital outlay act senate bill
forty two set of bill forty two
introduced by center by the up
and act related to public
utilities and acting the utility
easements for broadband act
authorizing the use in character
of utility is meant for the
referred to the senate
committees committee then sent
its tax business and
transportation then send it to
the shorty committee that senate
bill forty three senate bill
professional license allowing
the regulation and licensing
department to compensate members
of health care professional
licensing boards that are
administratively attached to the
certain health care professions
senate bill forty four senate
bill forty four haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate concert committee's
center by the up and act related
to broadband many the tax
administration act to provide
for the issue and of
supplemental severance tax bonds
for education technology
multiturn professional service
contracts and acting a new
section of chapter sixty two
NMSA nineteen seventy eight to
provide for the regulation of
definition of authority amending
the broadband access and
expansion act adding definitions
creating the education
technology infrastructure fund
pursuant to vouchers signed by
the director of the office of
broadband
of broadband access and
expansion transferring the
the department of information
technology to the office of
broadband access and expansion
senate bill forty five senate
bill forty five having been read
senate bill forty six interdues
by senators defanics rodriguez
thomas and pope
and act making appropriation to
been read twice by title's order
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then send a
health and public reverse
committee then sent a finance
company senate bill forty six
personnel retrovent fund to
provide for programs that
recruit and retain healthcare
personnel in healthcare
ununderserved areas making an
finance committee sent a bill
forty seven senate bill forty
eight introduced by a senator or
these peno and act related to
educational scholarships
income tax credit and the
education scholarship corporate
income tax credit providing a
delayed repeal senate bill forty
business and transportation
committee
thence senate finance committee
senate bill forty eight
senate bill forty nine
introduced by a senator
fund establishing eligibility
requirement requirements for
financial assistance creating
the bureau overall
infrastructure crisis response
crisis response fund for
projects owned or operated by
indian nations tribes and
published making an
appropriation senator bill forty
nine
first committee then senate
finance committee that senate
bill forty nine
senate bill fifty introduced by
senators steinborn in rodriguez
fifty senate bell fifty having
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the senate committees committee
then send a health and public
affairs committee then senate
authorizing the creation of a
state meat inspection program to
ensure the safety and quality of
meat for human and consumption
declaring an emergency senate
senate finance committee that
senate bill fifty one senate
bill fifty two introduced by
senator woods and representative
peter group and act making an
appropriation that department
senate bill fifty two senate
bill fifty two haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate indian rule and cultural
care amending the medical
malpractice act to change the
limitation of recovery for
certain claims acts claims
against hospitals and outpatient
and healthcare facilities that
tax visitors transportation
committee then senate judiciary
committee that senate bill fifty
three
the senate bill fifty four
introduced by senator pope and
limits by fifty percent senate
bill fifty four senate bill
fifty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
act related relating to hazing
creating the anti hissing act
requirement code of conduct and
hazing prevention committee at a
education providing penalties
senator bill fifty five senate
bill fifty five having been read
twice by title as order printed
a referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
introduced by senator pope and
act related to taxation removing
the sense that date of an income
tax exemption for our services
retirement pay extending the tax
exemption to the surviving
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the senate
committees committee then sent a
tax business and transportation
committee then senate finance
committee senate bill fifty six
solution's department for local
news fellowship program senator
bill fifty seven senate bill
fifty seven.
I haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate
generation income taxed credit
the dual thermal electricity
generation corporate income tax
credit and gross receipts tax in
compensating tax deductions for
tax revenue a trip attributable
to the deductions to local
governments senate bill fifty
eight senate bill fifty eight
eight senate bill fifty nine
introduced by senator disea pino
and representative road by robot
collator and act relating to
geothermold resources amending
authorizing grants creating the
duo thermal projects revolving
loan fund authorizing loans
making appropriations senate
senate finance committee that
senate bill fifty nine
senate bill sixty
introduced by senator korea
hemphill and act of making an
appropriation to the higher
education department.
bill sixty seven bill sixty
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the senate committees committee
then send education committee
events senate finance committee
branch of government making an
appropriations for the expenses
of the fifty sixth legislator's
second session twenty twenty
four and for other legislative
committee the house chief clerks
office the senate chief clerk's
office and other expenses of the
legislature declaring an
emergency house bill one.
committee that hospital one.
There was the final piece of
legislation that had to be
introduced.
They they can send a worth
the senate bell sixty one
introduced by senators gaggles
and compose and act relating to
procurement increase in the
total mount limit on contracts
purchase orders under those
contracts senator sixty one
senate bill sixty one have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
to health care required the
healthcare authority department
to create a military
reimbursement rate for ambulance
environmental modification
service and durable medical
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
health and public affairs
committee then senate finance
committee that senate bill sixty
and I must say seventy eight
being laws twenty twenty chapter
eleven section sixty one
relating to cost of living
adjustment provisions for
adjustments making an
appropriation senator bill sixty
three senate bill sixty three
having been read twice by
title's order printed referred
to the senate committees
committee then send it health
providing an oil and gas
severance tax tax exemption for
the severance of oil and natural
gas from a production compliance
project completed to comply with
sent a tax business
transportation committee then
sent it finance committee that
senate bill sixty four
bill sixty five introduced by
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then sent a
tax business and transportation
committee then senate finance
committee that senate bill sixty
five
threat to a fourth degree felony
creating the crime of swatting
prescribed prescribing penalties
senate bill sixty six senate
senate finance committee that
senate bill sixty six senate
bill sixty seven introduced by
senator brand
for the legislative late
legislative education study
twice by title's order printed
and referred to the senate
committees committee then send
education committee thence said
it finance committee senate bill
appropriate design code act
providing civil penalties senate
bill sixty eight seven sixty
eight haven't been read twice by
eight senate bill sixty nine
introduced by senator servant is
for the court's corrections in
justice committee and act
related crime created the crime
of unlawful sale of a firearm
penalties senator sixty nine
required
set a bill six and I had haven't
been read twice by title is
seventy introduced by senator
servant is an act relating to
judicial salaries providing the
justices of the state supreme
court receive an annual salary
equal to the annual cell
by title is order printed and
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
judiciary committee then senate
finance committee that senate
bill seventy
providing for the development
and updating of the state
housing plan adding the director
of the office of housing to the
new mexico mortgage finance
affairs committee then sent a
finance committee that senate
bill seventy one
senate bill seventy two
introduced by senator hickeen
and act related to taxation
the tobacco products tax act
distribution revenue from the
tax to a new new negative use
prevention and control fund
senate bill seventy two senate
bill seventy two haven't been
that senate bill seventy two
senate bill seventy three
introduced by senator brant and
actor dating to capital felony
sentencing reinstating the death
public affairs committee then
senate judiciary committee
dense senate finance committee
senate bill seventy three
senate bill seventy four
senate bill seventy four senate
bill seventy four haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
required members of the mexico
state police to be the highest
paid law enforcement officers in
the state making an
appropriation senator bill
seventy five senate bill seventy
Senate bill seventy five senate
bill seventy six introduced by
senator stewart for the
legislative education study
committee and act relating to
public school capital outlay
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
education committee then senate
finance committee that sent a
bill seventy six
treatment center operated by
some miguel county
senate bill seventy seven senate
bill seventy seven haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
introduced by senator compos and
act making an appropriation to
support integrated substance use
disorder programs for
northeastern new mexico senate
bill seventy eight senate bill
seventy eight senate bill
seventy nine introduced by
senator compos and act making
appropriations in domestic
department of agriculture to
convenient working group to
develop findings and
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
conservation committee then
senate finance committee center
The finding terms conforming
certain notice requirements sent
a bill eighty senate valati
haven't been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
introduced by senator pope and
act making an appropriation to
the local government division of
department of finance and
administration to widen pasal
that north in northwest
committees committee then senate
tax visits strategic committee
then senate finance committee
that senate bill eighty one
senate bill eighty two
general service that department
to maintain an insurance policy
that covers search and rescue
volunteers senator bill eighty
two senate bill eighty two
haven't been read twice by title
three introduced by senator
bradley and act relating to
children required the children
youth and family's department to
conduct assessments and provide
senate committees committee then
senate health and public affairs
committee then send a judiciary
committee that senate bill
eighty three
senate bill eighty four
Senate bill eighty four senate
bill eighty four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed a referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
act related to schools and
acting the seizure safe schools
act to provide for seizure
disorder management and care by
school personnel provided for
committees committee then senate
education committee then senate
judiciary senate bill eighty
five center bill eighty six
introduced by senator pope and
awards making an appropriation
senate bill eighty six
senate r eighty six having been
read twice by title is ordered
senator bill eighty seven
introduced by senator brant and
act related to public employees
retirement amending the public
employees retirement tack to
by an affiliated public employer
to purchase up to five years of
service credit allowing certain
public safety employees to
return to work under certain
senate health and public affairs
committee then senate finance
committee that senate bill
eighty seven
senate bill eighty eight
introduced by senator gonzalez
licenses and identification
cards and to create a
verification system senate bill
eighty eight
senate bell eighty eight having
senate judiciary committee that
senate bill eighty eight
senate bill eighty nine
introduced by senator or these
penon and act making
appropriations to expand the
committees committee then senate
health and public affairs
committee then senate finance
committee senate bill eighty
nine
cent a bill ninety introduced by
and ammunition distributing the
revenue from the tax to the
crime victims reparation fund
and a new family representation
and advocacy fund creating the
the senate committees committee
then senate tax businesses
transportation committee senate
finance senate bill ninety.
president and many thanks to our
reader
for a long run is getting warmed
up for session but that's a
announcement just a heads up on
tomorrow will come in we're
going to do a split session
tomorrow we'll come in right at
eleven
that window we do have a house
bill one has been read in and I
think center money else is going
to hear that in finance and
we'll hear that on the floor
tomorrow
do some more internet
thank you mister president and
and serve the staff about about
getting these pens if you would
like to have one please come by
my office I have twenty to share
with you at least just one for
twice tomorrow at first will be
at nine thirty in the morning
morning room three twenty six
and then two o'clock in the
afternoon right before our floor
immediately after the floor
session thank you mister chair.
Today i'm sorry it'll be today
immediately after this floor
long that **** is going to last
since we have committees coming
up are we gonna be sitting here
forever and ever like you
somebody sometimes do to us
thank you and is out to r clocks
or majority leaders clock side
of time piece that that one I
was going to have it's going to
be iphone okay perfect thank you
mister president.
and about changing the time
but that was pertal's bill and
see when he does with it this
year no senate finance we're
going to go in we have the feet
bill we're going to go in right
after the caucus
shoes and some tires on his way
home to carl's bed in that long
john
you know that's always a great
use of low reimbursement money
because it's a little bit low if
we're gonna want to start
talking to members and will
start compoling bills and senate
financial make sure you're in
touch if we have something
coming to finance so we can
list for deficiency within your
agency.
Yeah that that is correct center
may also look forward to
discussing that directly with
any that should speed up the
process that way you can we'll
put your charging station so
where would you like that
charging station located in your
you may have to now park outside
and and use the public charging
station but I just want to check
that supplemental make sure you
were really looking forward to
he missed president looks like
we're gonna be out of here about
two thirty with an hour for the
caucus the senate judiciary
committee will meet at three
thirty please understand we have
the attorney general and the
into how the electoral process
works in new mexico and what
happened at the last
presidential election with
regard to the fake electors and
the entire process by which that
occurred this being a
may exist in the existing law
that interfere with the
prosecution of fake electors in
this coming presidential
election so we'll hear from them
and will take that to maybe
committee will meet at nine
thirty tomorrow morning and
room.
I i'd like to do that senator
but
eleven tomorrow morning for our
orientation and if any bills get
on the module today we will hear
two bills but if not those will
if it's not a question about
time center morning ever
slipping away but sure president
senator munios if you confer
with your ranking member who
here on the floor so all forty
two of us can have that
conversation about that
supplemental for the arms bugs
men's office
on budgets office what are the
many I do it is of the
commissions um so if he would
love if we can have in that
conversation about that office
if we make that the next order
of business and we can get that
off your plate as a finance
committee get you on to more
that has a married ability
that's on budget
center more is I am done
senate to standard recess until
eleven am tomorrow.
