Centre do hick.
Center guy at hos
santa drivie saw the.
Center armio
center low best
sentence my **** test.
Sent him in yours
sent your never
center neighbor
center pope
center pinto
sent a roddery guess center sand
Center souls
center step by next
centers time born
president thank you i'd ask that
everyone please rise
for the indication to be led
today by chaplain devastation
i'll spiritual care department
flag to be that today by centers
of the olos.
Good morning everyone thank you
so much
thank you rick for inviting me
it's a privilege in the honor to
be here and to be a part of the
best state of new union new
mexico right
love prouter blessings your pc
mercy on each other senator
scathered here on our lieutenant
governor on our governor and all
the senate staff.
strength to lead our state with
compassion and integrity may
they always seek your guidance
in their decisions and be a
unifying force that brings peace
non essentials liberty and all
things charity and your holy
name I pray amount.
Will you join me in the pledge I
pledge eligions.
You may be seated once again i'd
like to welcome everybody to
today senate chamber meaning and
i'll look to senator peter words
take us that next order business
thank you mister president good
thank you mister president and
thank you chaplain channel for
being here for your words
navigate through this final
stretch and so again appreciate
your word this morning
ladies and gentlemen the senate
today is aviation and aerospace
awareness day at the legislature
and senator hamlin has a
certificate it's not going to be
read but she's going to talk
about disability rights
awareness day and she's got some
guest introduce
and i'll introduce them in a
minute it's it's youth power
advocacy day at the capital and
they said there's fifty members
I think there's a few more than
that but will get to them and
napropathic treatments so make
note of that
before we go to other members to
introduce guests a couple of
advance the hispanic round table
in new mexico legislative dinner
From six to nine by invitation
only
I think all members should have
received an invitation from
martin charles senior advisor to
thursday on the west side of the
cable from nine am to four pm uh
that emails got a code you do
need to register if you want to
participate it participate and
if you've missed
talk some more about that just a
minute tomorrow courtesy of
lincoln county for each council
and mse cooperative extension
service
is celebrating lincoln county
aerospace carcass legislator's
breakfast room three fifteen at
the capital and mister president
before I yield to other members
event it's a center of change
and transformation focused on
leadership development and
capacity building for use
through identity culture
wellness and land based living
for a day of learning about
cassie and action around
equitable well being fairness
opportunity for people of color
on issues of immigration
environmental justice education
As individuals their families
and communities so let's give a
huge a senate welcome to all the
folks here from the semi a
project thank you all for being
here.
good morning mister president
uhm I have a couple items he
needs consent to allow cameras
on the senate florida in the
senate gallery.
Seen objection cameras are
allowed to both in the gallery
and on the center floor center
west sides have you even had an
opportunity to drive into an
electric vehicle yet they are
really a lot of fun I had to
rent one recently mister
president I couldn't I didn't
want to stop driving it so were
mister president and all your
officers have this going to your
office today thank you very much
there.
And mister president also wanted
to just call out a report that
what's in the very first page I
hope folks will open up this
when they have an opportunity
mister president but essentially
if you look at new mexico's
transportation landscape here in
they need to be an up to car and
that's from that congestion to
safety to just a number of
occupants were per vehicle etc
and the weight of vehicles as
well the report also mister
bring out a focus to the roads
in your area without mister
president have a couple of
guests i'd like to introduce
that are standing our cities
seated behind me i'm gonna ask
them to a stand up they got to
participate in a lot of
that I was that I was whipping
mr president so it's very
helpful in my job getting that
done
the first air from the enlassive
program and they are both from
and she grew up in farmington
since the age of one in middle
school in high school she is a
volleyball and track star very
very competitive mister
president at least so long with
girls in this band they play
multiple instruments mister
president and travel various
places to perform.
After graduation she plans to
attend san one college and is
And mister president one of her
very close associates and
friends darline for and on this
is behind me as well she's
seventeen she's a senior at
farmington high school she's a
native of farmington and she
has had to take a break for now
but plans to get right back into
it she placed several
instruments mister president
guitar piano base in violin and
college to become a veteran area
can we please welcome her to the
state senate as well
and mister president have a
twenty one counties who are now
being prepared to fulfil their
commitment to teach in new
mexico schools for at least five
years so if they participate in
this program they do teach for
soon be joined by many others
and i'm gonna ask them to stand
mister president.
county over in russial melissa
onstead from sacro in the
megaline area lucia gaygos from
valencia los lunas salem guards
brian crap crown out for crown
over and lauren from the
university of new mexico and
lauren order now from the
university of new mexico and the
new mexico golden apple mister
And thank you very much mister
money send a brant then follow
my center brand new center city
lopus
center pulp senator birth.
Cinemas thank you mister
president yet you know as we
wrap up the budget there's a
state road
that needs to be in my office
today by three o'clock.
A state road on the list for
need to keep ahead and in build
roads but number one in new
mexico in the santa fe new mex
can three quarters in new
mexicans or more so their
priorities are roads in new
by three o'clock today mister
president
and then I would would have to
get senator from elbow curtigal
center tomorrow deal.
You're going to use your makes
sender.
Sorry I was
Mr president
can you list the top ten reasons
why I should go test drive an
eve tomorrow.
hundred and fifty dollars in the
last month but it could cause
ever after tells me how much
i've saved like for last month
it's acceleration
is terrific is number four
and I get a lot of compliments I
have a model less than a lot of
complements on the looks
number six.
And
have a bill that requires you in
the governor and all the cabinet
sectors to try to ev's so I
expect them to be over there
senator from albert you please
yield center
to the senate
thank you mister chair there's
just one really great reason
have the state police now watch
center hiki in his speeding and
fun driving that's going to
happen thank you
again one real quick thing is
would you have others that would
like to make an announcement
senator brand thank you mister
president and I have a couple
announcements i'd like to make
and
recognition of the four months
from the hamos attack and really
talking about the hostages that
are still being held
lot of people don't understand
the history
the history of um
israel and and so I took a few
century sea that the hebrews
came in and divided the land
into areas governed by the
twelve jewish tribes who started
to form one jewish nation then
and twenty two b c that first
jewish kingdom came to an end
the land that used to be israel
passed from the kingdom of
israel to the persians then the
muslims the crusaders the
Un resolution one eighty one for
the creation of the state of
after two thousand years of
exile however while the jews
agreed to the u n plan the
entire air world rejected it
flat out
map israel became a state on may
fourteenth nineteen forty eight
when the breads announced the
help of saudi arabian sudan
certain of their victory called
for the arab residents of israel
to to vacate their towns and
villages until the fighting had
right after the holocaust
but israel's ragtade army beat
the invading arab nation and
goes on to this day until twenty
twenty only egypt and jordan
recognize israel's right to
exist
what's bird pamos to attack
israel because saudi arabia was
in talks with israel.
On signing the abraham courts
attacked his role
exactly four months ago tomorrow
massacring murdering raping
I hope you'll join us in the
return the as we talk about
those hostages who are still
being held
and I hope everyone on both
and never was intended to be the
fact that the matter is we
should be able to stand in a non
partisan way against terrorism
in our world thank you mister
president.
colleagues i'm exciting to
remind you guys that today is
aviation in aerospace day today
at the round house and encourage
you to visit the rotenda there's
a bunch of fine boots up there
morning in room three fifteen
starting at eight o'clock and
i'd like to recognize some
special guests that are in the
the senate today and celebration
rich history in aerospace from
white sands all the way up to
los alamos and our state is
really the leading edge of
innovation in this field or new
advance technologies one of
those tenants is virtually
collactic the company had a very
big year or last year launching
six space flights in six months
pretty estation and i've ever
seen she is a new mexico native
also a graduate of last cruise's
high school new mexico state
aerospace industry and thank you
guys both for being here.
Thank you center brownie senator
several offers
are also participants in and
last year and I always try to
distinguish in last the
communitarial which is a
domestic violence agency that
serves all um but of course it's
targeted out reaches in the
and if you could stand when I
call your name and reaviar she
is a senior attitude a trusted
academy eighteen years old and
Next is michelle m m
m your negotiator was from a
christopher academy and her
interest is healthcare or
the united states she moved here
from uh got the mileage just a
year ago and it and her english
is absolutely amazing
the stem field and perhaps and
biology so please join it me and
welcoming all these three young
women from address or getting.
like to introduce my guess uh
first I have gab if you would
please stand and she's a student
espinola valley high school or a
records music and wants to be an
inspiration to the blind and
visually impaired persons to
show that they can do anything
they put their minds to next we
solicitor overcoming her trauma
as a therapyutic recreation
leader with the city of
albuquerque she continued for
twenty three years as a
community center manager for
family and community services
and the department of senior
buddies and inclusive friendship
walk promoting inclusive living
for people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities and
her dream is to have a space
student lost cruises high where
she is the president of an
inclusive club called best
buddies she is a lot premier
here of chicago padre and the
to prove those who have doubted
her capabilities wrong and used
their negativity as motivation
to succeed
and finally we have emma
martinez she's a junior gats in
become an advocate for research
and accessibility for better
health care in our community
she'd also like to become a
doctor and serve in the air
force and eventually translate
national and national honor
society president and
participates in both varsity
softball and basketball and I
want to also say my is also a
member of in loss as well so if
thank you
center my instance.
The.
Thank you mister president thank
you members I just want to
introduce my unless it guess for
mr twenty ten she attends may
feel high school uh she's on the
tennis club but she also runs
our own bible club study on on
friday's is a member of the
please please welcome memory
around chat she goes to last
minute he those charter school
there increases she's a survivor
mister president a motivator of
fighter she will overcome all
welcome by two and less the
leaders.
Thank you center master
find a travel coffee mug perfect
for keeping you energized while
working on behalf of new mexico
students and saying that their
future so bright mister
president there's also a
baseball cap to protect your
all each and finally you are all
coordinately invited to the
higher education date next
tuesday in the return over
twenty four new mexico colleges
universities adult education
you know forty two thousand
students are pursuing their
college and career dreams thanks
to the opportunity scholarship
the nation's boast accessible
tuition free college program.
was born to robert and salina
ever done this and resides in
champagne or new mexico he is in
his junior year against in high
school and plans and attending
new mexico state university to
his opportunity arnold she's the
remote control individual who
has left her mark both
academically and athletically
with an impressive four point
well being able to linguistic
capability came to the four when
she secured the third position
in the city spanish spelling be
from kindergarten to fifth grade
she excelled in the dual
passion for the game has only
drown with their actively
participating in competitive
club ball and high school soccer
notably she earned the title of
love for sports so if you can
help me welcome and last the
students before I introduced my
next guest.
latina and a proud of lumius of
new mexico state university
where she earned a bachelor's
degree and environmental science
her passion for science and her
desire to work at los alamos
unity and restore humanity
through her initiative has take
harvesting help for humanity
which emphasises bringing people
together through nature beyond
and ladies and gentlemen of the
senate if you can help me
welcome my good friend miss new
mexico beyond right to the
chamber.
it is your turn yes internet
when you have the floor thank
you mister president night I
think I might have to arm
russell senator how to meo about
how much longer i've known miss
to mexico state university I am
so proud of us crucials being in
the house here in the senate
chambers because we've got miss
bianca right we've got jimila
that we continue to have and
then with our in less a students
I just want to say how proud I
am of you that you were down
that you are up here in santa fe
and that you are representing
southern new mexico and last
wanted to say was just to give
them props cause there they're
they're the best thank you
center handling
desk this little bag of health
aids with vitamin sea and other
items in there we've all been
battly nailments it seems that
this session and so hopefully
through prayer action and
informed uh an informed meeting
say the pray for us and I think
that's commendable and they're
sent that gift for us and I
and seller was a thoughtful gift
thank you mister president thank
you certain.
For a second time we have sent a
brand new.
Thank you mister president you
would acknowledge that today is
reasons to celebrate today in
addition to being my friend and
be barely's birthday we have
aerospace day
catching county sacoral day so I
encourage you guys all to join
introduce a good friend of mine
is visiting today here at the
capital he is a gentleman who is
independent business man and
we've known each other for a
long time
border new mexico he is and by
the way she was missed new
mexico twenty eleven so he's a
lucky guy to be married to a
beautiful mistake mexico
commissioners to come up to
santa fe especially during the
session to get to know people
appear to understand the
processes and better their work
in our individual communities
Thank you senator.
The.
barso alba kirk international
balloon fiesta museum sorry that
put passes are provided by the
museum and the museums
foundation board of directors in
boy I I know i've been there a
couple times and have just been
really impressed so anyway so
that's a wanted to acknowledge
Sarah is run that order business
announcements in mislanes any
further announcements.
for a I believe that center
hamlin disability rights
awareness day did she do that
yet senator worth we have not
done that yet so we need senator
five in that order but we got a
couple of certificates here we
need to do selling to stand in
place for senator hambling
and senator ivy sotto.
Senator worthwhile we're waiting
in place so who comes in driving
so.
Thank you mister president I
Senator daniel I saw them.
Senator I saw the proceed
thank you very much mister
president uh mister president I
Fifty six legislate legislature
second session twenty twenty
four.
The new mexico state senate does
hereby extend its recognition
and it's currently the senate's
longest serving member and where
s senator compass was born in
santa rosa and july twentieth
nineteen fifty three to idential
badges degree in economics and
philosophy and where I said it
accompanies received as messages
degree and counseling from new
mexico highlands university in
nineteen ninety three and we're
rosa from nineteen eighty six to
nineteen ninety and or as it
accompanies was superintendent
of the las vegas city public
schools from two thousand four
significant legislation that
center accomplishes recently
sponsored include senator sex in
twenty twenty three which
secured relief and recovery
funds for victims of the hermits
debt infrastructure fund senate
joined resolution one in twenty
twenty one the constitutional
amendment to allow additional
disp- distributions for
businesses and private equity
funds.
And senate bill three and twenty
twenty one the small business
ate projects including the aid
montoya recreational center in
las vegas the well luper county
correctional facility the boss
center accomplishes with mary to
lorry loudy compos for thirty
one years and they live in las
vegas and whereas in a compose
still lives in center or some
with most of the complex family
including center accomplishes
brother tommy and his wife
barbara sister ledy in her
a couples service as a deacon at
immaculate concepts in catholic
jerks in las vegas and whereas
lori compos says her husband's
most enjoyable time is helping
for his many years of service to
the people of senate district
date in the state of new mexico
signed and sealed at the capital
senate thank you to our reader
for reading center I saw them.
I am not going to do this at all
justice but ladies and gentlemen
boys and girls I give you our
pete compos
senator sender every set of
proceed we do have other members
He didn't do it fully justice
but you did a good job with it
senator peter worth thank you
mister president all center ive
saw the was missing was the
zober's growth and he would have
what a uh privilege is been to
serve was senator compose uh
back in the day I got to stay up
in his part of the chamber and
are is a much better place
because of senator coppers who's
seen it for over thirty years I
mean for the newer members this
was a very different place when
honored to stand up stand up and
recognize our senior senator
peacockles thank you mister
president you said worth we do
about eight years ago or so I I
went through a particularly
difficult and challenging
election
and after coming through that
senator peak complex welcome me
me into the senate and and since
since then i've always felt
welcome here and so I had never
set foot in this building until
and made me feel good about
being here and I was happy to
attend my first training with
him where he showed me where
process and procedure were
within a committee setting and
decorum within the senate he was
one of those people that
before politics say I didn't pay
listening to his convoice over
the course of these past few
years and the way he treats
people and his intellectual when
he has served so well for many
years have been a continuing
lesson for me and i'll continue
to absorb what I can from him in
any way one is thank him for
Thank you very much mister
president a
fist rise to to say thank you to
senator compos a needed a mentor
walk off with my little clip
board and he gives me feedback
about my little clipboard
and he says hey so sometimes I I
leave it on my dad's mister
clipboard mister president but
but I have to say that he is
generally the first member of
the senate in the building
almost every single day and he's
back there just fiddling through
people and and then he starts
talking to all of us slowly in
and he gets his point across in
a very kind and loving way
mister president not not a
harmful or a political way
if he does or not but I was run
around like a half craze I don't
know what you know green around
the years looking for the
bathrooms trying to figure out
what I was doing here and
I don't know how I left without
and gave it to me and I still
have that time mr president
every time I have a special
occasion I have something
special going on in my life I
put that tie
needed to know and whenever i'm
kind of not doing things the way
I should be doing them he does.
And have a problem starting and
helping me that way and I think
that's what a senior member of
about senator accompos because
he has a whole other life
outside of here and I will tell
you that whenever he talks about
his family and his grand babies
and his children and is honey
if you're hungry he'll give you
food
if you need guidance you'll give
you their gains mister president
if you need a tie who'll give
you his tie and over in the
mister president the first time
I saw the good senator peak
composing and action I was on
the school board there at
grading mexico and we came up
senator stick up for the small
schools of the state and he so
impressed me with that action
then it made my life a lot
easier after that day
to the big city of roy new
mexico and the northern mexico
call growth were having a
meeting there and
president i've had a lot more
experience praying in public
sense they
i.
with me here down in a trying to
to eat become unnoticed because
I was so embarrassed and he came
over duman he said no no no no
and from that point on he's been
so grocious to me
we share a district line as as
you know we represent a lot of
landmarks.
Lill over hundred thousand
people but a lot of landmarks in
wagon mount to a school board
gathering a school board super
ten gathering
in I was in.
wagon mount to school there and
when you had a meeting with
those super candidates in you
know he's always just been told
kind to to pick up the slack now
good center gets open explains
it all to everybody so they know
what's going on
as he should and it's so nice
and refreshing to be able to
work with someone like you said
Thank you very much mister
president
senator
sitter can't possibly set to
next to each other where
senators say the old opposite
sitting I used to sit there for
long mister president but he
also endeared having not answers
sitting there with us and also
enduring a lot of conversations
with children and about children
him senator peak campus but we
also talked about peter and that
was the apple you are the apple
of your father's eye
and of course talking about your
each one of you have been
special for as long as I have
known the good senator.
Family is so important and I
appreciate that each of you are
heap.
Cause we honored the senator but
um but senator in I still look
forward to a lot of other work
that we're going to do in this
chamber there is always
something more for us to do but
we've been through carcasses we
those who have brought this
forward for us to honour you and
thank you for the work that you
have done but you're still going
to get done thank you mister
president make your senator
lovers senator manus.
committee in a young guy there.
Pulled me aside instead center
minor salaries my son last
night.
Amen a faith.
Who helped that man today.
I really truly believe we paid
today says the world you an
immediate prayer an immediate
reaction about god in love in
the spirit
things that I think you emilate.
but I mean
it's hard to talk about my
friend.
And in how
I should emulate the way he acts
To his family.
You gave up a lot
you gave up
sorry but that you have one of
the best fathers.
That was here for other people
they may not be the one they get
the state thank you people in
need help thank you.
His concerns were first for his
family first regard
then for his family and when
held to the higher standard then
than anybody else.
It went through a health scare
with him he still hear with us
That says something about out
the family is and I read
something the other day that
really rang true
Thank you senator.
Center had a meal.
Thank you mister president in
nineteen ninety eight I served
as an internet in the senate
teaching me what the senate was
doing alongside senator dart
them so I watched senator
composed as a young north ten
year going through college and
were plexiclass that divided us
no one in the chamber really and
center compus always leaned over
because they sat close to
senator pope to ask me senator
script for me when it was time
for confirmations he then again
asked senator do you know what
you're doing of course I said I
and because you guided me so
much of the senate my mom knew
about what you did and every day
she resides a rosary for you
because you looked after her son
tell each other how proud we are
of each other and last night as
I knew he was driving home late
I said senator please text me
when you get home as they can
make sure you made it home safe
the chamber and I want to read
the rest of the quote he said
thank you for being concerned
about my safety.
I love the new mexico senate and
oliver people senator
accomplished and we love you
house as you know have a strong
affection for biggest as well my
parents are from and so the
senator you know senders don't
have to really know how speed
there have to really reach out
to house folks but was in her
couple serve took the time took
a time to get an interest in to
who I was what I was about how
we could work together
fails he's pure class and pure
pure joy pure decoram and and
even though that the bill might
be dwindling at the when the
votes taken at some our passes
because he's so persuasive and
the greater for for your service
and your commitment you're
loving so we love your center
companies thank you.
Thank you senator masters
sinnershire.
Thank you mister president
calendar toward the end of
sessions and that's really when
I first met him and started
talking to him things like that.
The.
But we weren't really friends we
And certainly we share catholic
faith together and as a deacon
he's always tried to make sure
that I wasn't messing up too bad
continues to surprise me that
that he could do that and he
cared.
But I also want to share with
you mister president and
certainly with the floor leader
And so he knows when i'm getting
ready to go off on something so
he'll wander over and just
politely have a cash will
in that of course it's a benefit
to you so you really owe him a
great deal of thanks
after word who'll come over and
Helps you all again so
III truly consider him a real
friend today and and now we do
no more about each other's
family and we know more about
Thank you center share we are
sent her guy goes felt by center
griggs santa bert in center on
you.
Center gagas present body I also
came over when I came into the
house
and later he would be our
florida branden I was talking to
him about a bill that needed
come over to the upper chamber
represent branton head none
there as from northern liberties
and so the call running so he'd
ask me just you know that
probably good place to start and
I remember come in and kneeling
questions about myself my family
and in battle but one thing i'll
tell you in it continues on
today is the statementship
senate it was almost just like a
bond that was already created
there again it's just one of
those things to come to the
upper chamber and I know things
vegas and other areas round that
area in maybe and republican
them being democrat we'd be
round the table and they'd start
talking about their senator and
i'd chime in that I liked it.
guard and we haven't
differences.
In his sort of shopped a full
that you know that I could speak
really well about their state
senator.
he's always been grateful
gracious to me and in I
appreciate that and it goes back
to his speed soft spoken.
Instead he come in the meaner
have a yet to see you upset in
the lasting only be with is it
sort of like you get term
I sent a greg santa bert center
winning my election came from
from senator compose and i've
never i've never forgotten that
uh.
A shannoner
and the way a senator should be
and i've i'm I am ever had to
And if all ovish could model our
shelves or and show peak compose
we would all be better people
Thank you mister president and
the was pleasure to stay in
apple.
And just say a few words I know
there's a lot that has already
there was the balance and that
was senator precarbos which
would kind of even you out and
he he expressed that through his
beautiful
composed and mister president of
the the guy who
calls the fights.
And we had a long conversation
about a stay introduced the
and I think that's the reasoning
theme is is is the spirit the
peters and finally you know
everybody talked about he gets
no is book as already there is I
don't know what he's going on to
the bathroom or is he doing
doing something over there maybe
looking for a little breakfast
is always here first guy here
but I know he leaves because the
other day I saw i'm getting to a
beautiful black car and drive
out and
so
spirit that coming spirit is not
just the tonight of his voice
the timber in what he has to say
the carming spirit
And the way he expresses himself
and everything that he does.
And this body.
thank you center birth and we
have sent our neighborhood
center hickey then senator
center servant is
thank you mister president
couple years you know terms in
the house it's just i'm just
feel so blessed
you know he carries the
institutional memory of this
chamber
is a real inspiration to me
but we have fun back here in the
background k in the end uh we'll
just we want talk for days but
always and i'll just look at me
sheriff's always it did that we
have this thing anyway
distressed me there's these
ongoing like banters that that
everyone and and just just to be
a part of this legislature but
he embodies that him bodies that
and so bottom line is some of us
scripts as I try to remember you
mean i'm sixteen years in a
displace and I still don't know
how to do a committee report and
so hi- hell write it out in his
Okay already you take it anyway
that's enough case thank you
thank you
center hiki center during center
surround to since in center city
love is.
around to say this when I first
started in the senate was pretty
overwhelming awesome and even
though I tried not to show it I
and so forth and making me feel
comfortable and I think it's
senator predier said he while
it's not quite the shirt off his
point out is that well four of
us
sponsored as a school of public
health and a bill and so on it
are wings or whatever that they
need to think about the senator
pete compos weng because he
really helped make it a reality
i've just been felt so blessed
experienced senator compasses
kindness there is in every
out about something and he sees
it and comes over to me and
offers kindness and help and
notices it in the first place
so thank you so much senator
mister president thank you
center day
service in a sale obvious
have the o g with a sovereign
heart of my left
and I first met center composed
even before I was sworn into
office he drove down to last
a man at our composes
I want to expand a little bit
for those of you who are non
catholics to understand a little
bit about his role as a deacon
beyond really what most of us
could imagine to to really
become a decade any anywhere is
that role for us catholics very
humbly.
May I I grew up catholic of
course all my family
grandparents and parents all of
our daughters were baptized
first communities all the
catholics northern talk offers
communions and and
Banished me.
For my position on women's
reproductive rates for my
position on marriage equity.
and for me to be shanned.
In my home church.
And it was a crisis for me
Pete council me
help me see
the greater good and and help me
to see true christianity.
that faith and that belief in
guide because he's helped be
seen the bigger issue.
The.
I try and keep it pretty quiet
here I suffered some poor health
Give me the sandwich.
The rosaries did all those pros
to help me through another term
of crisis my way.
around after were exhausted of
months of
fighting and acrimony and
sleepless nights we stick around
an extra hour after the end of
awarding both democrats and
republicans to recognize that
we're a family and we're an
institution and we have a
history together i'll tell you
somebody as I can say at the
him feel that I had demonstrated
what we all try to example the
payer in the senate meant the
most to me of really anything I
can remember doing here.
So join with you center
companies thank you for getting
Thank you senators around this.
Senators real offers.
Thank you mr president that was
I made senator composed leve or
well he made first he made me
laugh by introducing a
composting bill so it was
I was in the bathroom and he
scared the
house like and so I came back
what what what was that and he
senator compos he when I came
here in those of you who have
been here no
I was appointed the day before
the legislator started and I
enjoyed shall I say my fair
worry about it and he was just
so kind and always offered he
said if you have any questions
to each other it's carrying
about each other and on each
other and I am so grateful to to
meet his family and to thank you
um so I join in this certificate
and i'm really thrilled that the
senate is doing this because it
is very very well deserved.
in so I I just want to say your
fund to be around.
But you're also very very much
loved in very much respected
thank you mister president
of sale offers we have sent
article penalty followed by
senator poke the center of the
rigors in center council.
Thank you mister president
a couple of years after I go
into the senate I was put on
senate finance committee
and I just been and see to get
on the finance committee because
ninety one and ten to one votes
on motions that I made in the
committee I was getting
increasingly upset and I would
stop around and and it was
you're your your opportunities
will come we just have to keep
working really hard but don't
don't get so i've said about
some of these events
since they made a huge
difference
it's it's great that we're doing
here the calling wise always
aware presents in this body that
keeps us functioning so well.
here and you haven't made
arrangements like it the last
we're having midnight sessions
in all
senator completes deep in campus
all you've done for all of us
but also especially for which
you've done for me.
Thank you center disappointment
with center political of a
center of the rigors and senator
gonzalez and sender very ampul.
sentiments to the good senator
you know the love he shows her
one how he loves this chamber
and how you really looks out.
For everyone.
You know kind of lean over and
check on us.
And really just not just be a
mentor but really be a teacher
and make sure we understood what
because sometimes people wanna
hold on that information as
power.
And that's not him
I really have a great
relationship with him.
And that's something that.
I don't usually do with people
I have a really close.
And I just want to tell you
senator I trust you and we've
had some conversations and we've
talked about things.
And I appreciate you I
appreciate that we're doing
this.
And he needs to know while he's
here that we give them his
flowers and we give him
his praise in respect now.
had enough I want to continue
that friendship and it is great
to see your family and I want to
tell your family he loves you
talks about you all the time and
Thank you mister president I too
stand in
strong support of this
certificate truly and under
statement senator
I remember in nineteen ninety
me here and I remember sending
it rather the same less got a
lunch with me and senator campus
and they didn't know senator
something else sanity larger
something I had to remember but
anyway and we went we had lunch
there and I set there really
quiet I had just come into the
senate little bit inhabited and
was five commissioners but it
was much easier to get things
done than it was when I stood
here and come in and we saw
forty forty two senators and I
thought well this is going to be
I see senator how to me or not
in because he knows him even
better than that and up senator
compos always very serious so I
used to work on a lot but that
it was actually something the
senators could do to to enhance
her communities so I asked us
here to complete to tell me a
And when I came back here back
into the cap door I started
looking into the capped all that
leap process and so on and I
thought no this doesn't seem
right we went into the senate
I asked the question you know
senator why why did you get more
capital outlay than I did this
isn't right do you remember that
and I was hoping he had
senator can't both and it turned
out that it wasn't that way the
process was just different and I
just wasn't fully understanding
the whole thing and so I learned
because you were only here one
more term ahead of me so what
this how to during that anyway
so so much for that but um
let me let me just say that an
that senator you were here to
the right in the isle and he was
presenting and we like a reward
and yet giving to someone else
and touching somebody else's
and is beautiful wife here's
sitting right next to him and I
mention that I thank them and I
I mentioned how moved it was by
Um but that just shows that
senator compos regardless of the
challenges in his own life he's
always thinking about someone
else and how he can move someone
don't understand because we go
through tremendous ups and downs
and you know lots of stress as
we know and so on in our in our
is in our trials in our
adversities that we show who we
truly are that's when we're
called a pant to really show
what we're made of what
senator you are always strong
inconsistent always you know one
day we talked briefly about just
up you know I just religious
remember senator I said we are
like missed we disappear in an
incident so we're really tiny
when you think about it and his
word stayed with me he said
um those words to be stayed with
me and down and his right you
know and and in this senator
comples I have learned an
that most of us if not all have
heard you and it shows that it's
not those of us that have the
most words and are louder that
better people because of you
thank you senator thank you
mister president members of the
sand thank you senator where the
biggest we have senator
Thank you are mister president
and thank you well to our
members though
there's been some very very
eloquent very beautiful choice
of words that have been a
portion of tales county so we
are the two senators there are
percent of that area
in the area that he has system
can that whole area is some it's
like if you are in australia
images to gorgeous place
thing that he always does talks
about his wife even how
important that is going back and
forth to last vegas every night
And I don't know how he did that
but he arranged the boxing event
in towers
though the people just loved it
in the still ask me when I see
coming back with another one
they said well as in this I
guess I can convince him to do
presenting that so master of
ceremonies and an event like
this and the annoy was just very
very beautiful just very well
groups you know are if you know
math a hundred percent is the
highest better senator complex
gets a hundred and twenty or a
hundred and forty
and so what happened he said
what he ran over something on
the highway and he got recorded
by the animal group and you know
they just really brought him
also that law sixty so you know
those are just a very very small
things that are that we share
you know that we have and though
time that sort of he does is
because one time when he said
the prayer.
You know I still don't
understand what he said you know
if that's what it is in or so
we do enjoy that kind of phone
friendship comma you know in
very close in our thoughts and
we're always trying to discuss
some things better maybe I just
we are with senator compos being
the longest serving member now
and then next to that is senator
stewart and myself
thank you and thank you for your
family then thank you for the
many many hours that you have
provided to the state of new
mexico in serving people of new
Thank you mister president so
many amazing words have been sad
about my colleague and i'm so
honor to serve with him on the
overwhelming being a freshman on
the finance committee and really
appreciated senator compasses
leadership there but work truly
challenges and the challenges
that senator compose has
overcome in his life like
there's nothing more impressive
than people who overcome
handwritten notes that he's
given me to give to nicholas and
gives over the years I just want
him to know that i've saved them
I keep them hold close to my
heart in i'm so grateful for
your generous city and and
you're compassion that you
demonstrate as part of the
thank you mister president okay
him field center stewart.
Thank you mister president thank
you senator composed for
for letting us tell stories
same things such a gentleman so
kind and carrying so open and
corchall and welcoming to
everyone I really like what
center rodrigue gets said of you
what's been really important to
me is the conversation she and I
have heard about finding peace
thing i'll have to talk to you
about his bollow ties everything
about ballot ties going up and
looking at which one you're
wearing that day
mark here so we still are are
talking about having a joint
picture where we're each showing
of these years.
Thank you center stereotype at
this time I we do have others
under less who would like to
speak with us like to ask an end
to consent to the senate but i'd
be allowed to see a few hours on
I want to say thank you has been
recorded in and conversed
through the members.
The true admiration that we have
for you is really a symbol of
who we all strive to be as do
mexicans.
next senator my age and I sat
right there was center my assist
sits right there with senator
janes had been sit right next to
him.
And having the opportunity to
learn from the leadership who
was there a senate john art
And send it a repeat companies.
Really was the best experience
that I could have ever had
coming into this body because
would this body represents all
And we look and see as senator
sarvantas had mentioned the o g
the person who was your serving
the longest but consider serve
every single day.
Instead of a composite shone as
that and during this time is
we're here you know I I looked
to a lot of the members in this
chamber as how we can best run
the senate how we can best to
more than much experience in
this portion of the body center
accomplished in center look as
the center of the rigors who
understand who been here a lot
longer than us to help to make
suggestions how we can improve
this.
around any nailed and he gave me
a thai cylinder by the so I
believe that's a switch
connection that we have but we
also throughout the thirty day
session which is very hectic.
And our characters.
Or a times object sometimes
depending on the issue your
superhero villain instead of a
companies really tough me there
So i'm extremely proud to have
had the opportunity to discern
with you senator compensate to
have the opportunity to be here
with all of us that you're able
to be in the chamber with us to
His reflective of the way that
you've lead.
So thank you for teaching us
about peace but kindness about
senator compus is a master of
the finances sender compos is a
person of faith.
But what I truly admire the most
and have learned from you said
eyes as a reminder why we do the
things that we do.
Thank you.
For being a matter to each of
us.
Center more.
both ditto you have been a great
friend in a mentor I mentioned
on this floor and not to long go
about I made a commitment my
freshman year I would never take
another vote ever regretted i'm
by later ship models famous
midnight one o'clock in the
morning votes pete knows what
the vote was and there was only
one person and the entire
he was right he was right and I
was wrong and now it's the
moment I decided I was never
going to learn when I left this
chamber that was the only vote I
regretted and that thank you for
times but i've lived up to it
and I just want to think and
tell the body.
What that meant to me as a
senator for last twelve years
that leadership in that role he
years later and I thank you guy
bless you and go blast in my
friend.
Thank you.
it my brother in broadcasting
you know that much to add with
what everybody has said but I
think we all share the same
sentiment especially my
colleagues in the freshman
class.
Because you were so kind
and so patient.
And so encouraging and actually
one of our biggest cheerleaders
says we tried to navigate a
really unusual first session for
us
and you are example of what of
that all of us want to emulate
will take care of you and so I
always encourage people you know
we always think is like what
would peak do and that's because
it's the honorable way of what
peak does in terms of how he
from center stephanics.
Thank you man and president and
first of all welcome to your
family senator composite center
there but the one thing I want
to tell people about is he
initiated the one hundred
percent sand me gal county
and what that means is we've all
the sheriff the police the
schools the city the county all
the health and human services
that nonprofits that are in that
behavioral house facility and
substance of use facility and
services that's getting started
there and this would not be
happening without senator
toys and other bags and other s
you know things for the
community but he's always there
helping the community and I
think i'm very much for that.
Madame president in so glad to
consider standard examples that
are dear friend now once heard
of have any funny stories or
Also
an elected speaker I did have a
list of ten things but
posters is work down careful out
there reform for twenty twenty
five years i've only worked with
him at it for four or five years
after twenty five years I think
I would have given up but I
Wish I kind of abandoned thing I
guess he I was teasing about he
backs his car in I don't uh tell
them that he's a matter of
some infinity to him because of
that is that a warn thirty forty
year seven public service in I
also have head thirty forty
years of public service so I
So professional is is we've all
said it in the thing I really is
outstanding is is already been
mentioned in so calm never
impatient with people never
really really admire that and
what and the final thing I just
like to share with you a text I
sent on the text a couple days
ago and I said to a great job
presiding he was presiding.
texted me so we only have one
life to live I am glad you are
in mind.
Thank you senator the really why
are you considering you a friend
it would exceptional guy thank
you madame chair.
Thank you madame president her
man president colleagues only
have three amendments i'd like
to add to this certificate
i've just getting man president
colleagues
I want to just share my feelings
about senator compass.
A senator that there are several
things I really appreciate about
things get done that most of us
combined but he is a master at
the game and being very
effective for his constituents
masterfully effective
Uhm to send there's a couple
things I want a highway that I
appreciate about you number one
I love how you truly charity
institution and you truly
You know it's funny someone said
the mass I think the lieutenant
governor said master of.
particular thing but I don't if
you know but if you're in the
versu- the senate of center
composition you don't know how
to prepare a bill he will
literally and has hand written
I think in all these ways you're
really a a great role model for
everybody senator about you know
how to
care for other people how to arm
were serving to do this job and
I think you show that senator
and finally for those who don't
know the senate and I have our
own caucus.
As called the last carcass
thing that truly combined the
united states we both love the
film industry and promote the
film industry and he has such a
fighter for the film initially
so humble about it he'll always
man this guy he's angry he makes
it happen but we shared in
office for one session as well
which was really cool and in
fact he brought a sherry luhan
care in doing an incredible job
for us he is really a serving
servants and.
You know no matter who's at the
top of who's at the bottom of
really happy to honor you
senator thank you very much
madame president thank you
center next fall here from
center cindo.
senate I had the opportunity to
come in to insure an office with
him so we call ourselves we meet
er sherry was
and the carrier has for all of
us I think we've heard at all
the world in on the compassion
the phase
and the importance of this
spent almost twenty years in her
education.
Uh for man who served as not
only mayor of senate rules but
president of the community
college a very educated man very
email a lot to me
I I just want to share you know
thank peak for for be there with
me for eight years we were
seven o'clock
becoming early pete already at
his desk so nobody ever came to
the office to look for pete so
your office you know for eight
years in my constitution because
it was a small place and and
getting through all of that was
you know what you've meant to to
all of us I want thank you your
wife and in kids allow you to do
what you do.
How you to clear off the road to
pinto
And that's really who you are
paid
thank you for doing that for him
thank you that's thank you
noble.
Think you managed president.
I think it would be a misabuse
too and shouldn't my
grandfather.
The.
especially about two gentlemen
I really wondered if they were
actually talking to each other
sometimes because you didn't
hear them but they were they
were there.
M.
there was a few people that
asked me.
If I was considering in are you
are you going to do this.
And I would look look at my
grandpa
Composed strategy guess slope
else others chandel.
Well don't step.
So with him.
And there was a time
when it was questionable he
would return here and I think it
paying to broke his heart.
It's a.
It's it is a challenge.
Especially if you've been here
for so long
to the certain districts because
it's it's so beautiful.
And when beautiful people
represent those areas it's
really big cities and special
They id it's just uh
wonder those things that
very honored to to serve with
him
area with senatoring will after
me
they represent presented center
ingle with the flag to represent
so thank you certain I didn't
compare thank you for all that
you do thank you that to your
family
should not only.
something that it's very
respectful and honorable to be
called in front of my people so
like you had.
think about a present you the
heard
but an hour to them great
present about the dedication and
sincerity in the honesty in the
integrity of senator composed
communities and senator compass
is always if they all have sea
meetings he sits in the in chair
always the same place no matter
where we're out and he is quiet
almost is except for one thing
and i've got the paperwork to
take care of that if your
government thank you madame
president private joke.
The.
Thank you so center brown.
support this certificate and you
know sir call post you know the
only thing that I have against
sir compos
So I want to thank you for that
you know it's in his district
but it's a great little like
that it's pretty close and i'd
sir complete is just you know
always been able to go to his
office and talk to him and in
almost about anything sometimes
about issues that we are dealing
the work he's done here and and
then I hope this doesn't sound
too much like you'll do today
because we want to keep them
around for a while but down you
is great man and we appreciate
the most senior member cast I
think is still younger than me
so our late looks like years
thank you sir god boost for
everything you do.
The q center senator sanchez
Mr compos has been so great to
me everybody in this chamber has
but I have the same story as you
know he came in niel beside me I
vegas area they told me when you
meet him you'll know exactly who
is and and from that day on he
has been that man so has to
understand its support today
thank you senator compassman of
president.
Center of isodo for what purpose
do you rise just to close okay
you can do that thank you very
much madame president madame
president center companies
chief clerk I would ask in and
was consent to the summit that
she would be allowed to say a
few words.
If she can work her way through
the tears.
The.
What can I say that anybody else
hasn't said.
Other than.
The meantime law leaders office
can and test to that
but he never turned down a
constituent at all.
I made sure I brought my tiny
shoes.
On a minute and day.
Our house bill to because I ran
back and forth and probably had
ten miles on my feet.
I'm not going to say much more
other than I would not be here
today.
Without the intership.
And you drilling into me the
process.
I remember going to the other
chamber many times.
Saying center composed me to.
I remember new members coming in
and I would lean downtown and
say center companies asked me
to.
And me lobbying you before I
became your assistant I learned
a lot too.
I probably went out a lot more
stuff into that certificate for
For our conversations too and it
is a huge sacrifice to our
families.
Anyways thank you for allowing
me to speak.
what would be set at our funeral
but are it is it is.
And and someone for whom when
when when I moved into that
sweet.
Cetera campus came to me and
said
he listen let's.
policy staff for people to be
able to share human at least
called me up and said since for
the same sweet together let's
let's collaborate on that.
i've been the beneficiary of not
only during my twelve years in
this chamber but but more
recently because the proximity
that i've had with you.
That is ments so much so much to
me.
your time that you've shared
your ties with
both way I I really like the car
that you dropped I just want to
mention that are
granddaughter healy campus also
up in the up in the gallery
albert and russell campus joanne
and her possentious jennifer
well as none of this would have
been possible without his
assistant coordinating all of
this are more in martinez which
was no small feet to be able to
do this without him knowing that
I think well deserved a the one
last thing that I would ask
madame president as we finish
the certificate are given that
certificate and center couples
are our senator pental can give
you the the flag please made a
present
Center peter wrote
thank you madame president and
thank you to all the members for
that
that's not going to be read just
a couple of comments from center
handling and then we're going to
jump into third reading again
item is one through five and a
deal to sender pedea first
before we do certainly
thank you very much madame
madame president madame
president i'd like to think the
body for this opportunity to
briefly talk about disability
rights awareness day I am
honored to sponsor the
certificate for this i'd like to
disabilities that may be
physical century developmental
intellectual or behavioral we
have to understand that
disability is a natural part of
the human condition and maybe
and participate in the
activities of their community
rather than being forced on to
sidewalks accessibility to
buildings and mobility issues or
mentally to have access to the
tools to navigate their day to
day lives with this certificate
program and medicaid vocation
reabilitation and independent
living services amongst many
others I feel that is a body we
need to stand or set beside the
disability community and help
disability community support as
we look forward to continuing to
advocate for their support for
support for them as well as
resources and funding thank you
madame president and senate body
for this opportunity I don't
at a later time thank you madame
president thank you senate body.
Thank you senator hambling
a center peter worth
The.
Thank you madame president the
the time is fast approaching
those are up there adrian has
them in his hand I know i've
delivered a few that were to me
on the floor but three clock is
the dead cut off banking man
president.
legislation I yield first to
senator soles item number one
senate bill one twenty seven as
amended seeing no objection were
on third reading of legislation
on binal passage has been taken
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
There's no objection center to
explain the bill thank you
psychologist who are highly
trained professionals uhm and
are requesting to be able to
supervise their own but did they
would be under the medical board
Is there debate on the bill.
The.
senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
We are voding on senate bill one
souls thank you madame
president.
Thank you we'll go to
thank you madame president I
asked you an animals concerned
of the senate that the record
shows that all action for
replacing senate
Senators were debating senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for senate
bill eighty eight is there a new
debate.
more president I move that
senate
senator bill eighty eight
community subs committee
substitute do now pass and I ask
senators we are voting on senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for senator
eighty eight if you wish to folk
no please raise your hand you
must be out your seats.
The.
eighty eight have still passed
the senate center consellers.
Thank you madame president and
thank you members.
asked unanimous consent of the
senate that the record shows
that all action for placing a
center judiciary committee
substitute percentage bill
thirty seven on final passage
president this bill has more
than twenty one sponsors it is a
bipartisan bill I have several
sponsors who are on the floor
bill creates some meat
inspection act and authorizes
the new mexico lifestock board
to ensure me to immediate
products offered for sale are
paltry inspection services at
every committee meeting I went
to center words cope resented
with me so i'd like to turn it
over to senator woods.
Senator woods thank you matter
how many years have been trying
to do this in a want to think my
two sponsors over here soon
senators to found its internet
he took my ten page billion
brought it down to page and a
half so
even I can understand it now so
restaurants sale new mexico bath
and mexico
supermarkets it's a big deal
madame president thank you thank
man of present I apologize I I
miss someone a late hand
senator perl thank you madame
the lead on it and came out with
a piece of legislation that I
think will be proud of and I
think it's just a test of meet
toward this body supposed to be
a balance that have passing
willing to take the suggestions
from the legislature to ensure
that it doesn't fail then so I
think it's just a an important
lesson for for many in the body
agency wants it that it's our
job to get something right to
ensure that we don't have to
come back and fix it now that
it's even three paragraphs
longer than my meat inspection
bill I think i'll still vote for
for selling meat I don't think
that's the intent the desire of
anybody in this chamber
we don't really need a lot of
the the language that was in the
original bill and so I was just
be a great thing for economic
development in in rural areas in
chavis county has a meat
inspection plant it's a US d a
know gmo free antibiotic free
meat and and coming from new
mexico and some to be proud of
it's not coming from oklahoma
and so I think that's a very
important point you know this
president I see when I think the
sponsor for taking the lead on
this and getting it done finally
I think it should have already
start always started in the
senate of course I want to think
senator packwords whose been
instrumental and making it
happen this year senator george
many of us and senators survived
as for their work in making sure
that the language and the
Thank you senator senator brown
is to point a personal privilege
madam president I would request
unanimous consent that some
romunios and others be allowed
to remove their jackets.
it
marks very manner my president
and also I think you and some of
the other folks in senate
judiciary we worked with the
we're working with you senator
on that so there are every so I
worked on that bill also hence I
just wanted to tell the body
that we were able to get that
done also in a bipartisan manner
president i'd like to thank an
acknowledge all large senate
sponsors center brantley senator
gonzalez center carry hamlin
senator pinto center just was
sanchez
and myself and senator woods a
big thank you to everybody so
man impresident
that the roles been called and
all those president budgetly
firm live except those voting in
the negative by shell towns.
Senators we are voting on senate
judiciary committee substitute
please raise your hand.
both thirty seven has two passed
the senate sinners to found
madame president thank you very
much to the entire senate.
Thank you
consent of the senate that the
record shows that all action for
placing senate bill one went six
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
senate bill one when six removes
the tobacco settlement funds
status as a reserve fund by
doing so the state investment
council has the flexibility to
Is there a debate on the bill.
The.
consent of the senate that the
record show that the role has
been called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands senators we are
By voda thirty eight in the
Sooner peter worth and thank you
madam president amazon we're
going out our business
announcements and misleness
seeing no objection we're on
announcements in miscellaneous
senator when yours.
minutes will be posted for
public viewing and their ferrero
remaining the committee the
title of the proposed substitute
bill is related to p per peace
of the brand proceeds for the
reversion of the unexpected
balance of bond proceeds
authorizing the issue of state
transportation bonds and
establishing criteria for the
for two o two number is two two
eight zero eight nine point one.
Okay thank you center menus.
is consent in another okay soon
no objection.
It will be posted
thank you man president man
president center worth though
senator back up for minute go to
center per first thank you
madame presidentians thank you
mister leader unions consent to
excuse under due hick until she
returned to the chamber except
for the purposes of a call.
this topic for me I think this
summer I had the privilege of
attending ribbon cutting down in
beland and I know we're in the
middle of third reading but I
think this is worthy of that
wanted to notify the body um
that
today it had a recipient and
there was a a brand new bore
that child and I think we can
all acknowledge that and and
let's just give that new born
baby a welcome and maybe a round
of the baby box program and and
that's senator guy goes who's
really been the tip of the
spirit on this and i've been
around the state helping to
harmeo three lives this is truly
something amazing uh that this
body can be very proud of madame
president and I would yield to
others if they would like to
talk.
meal that helped when this was
all sortedness panola I thank
you this shows that we have very
in the statement mexico thank
you thank you thank you.
send it or sediolopes for item
number five sent about one forty
five is amended.
Senator city a lopez thank you
mess madame president
Seeing no objection the center
to port to explain the bill
thank you madam I mean thank you
congressional delegation have
found and documented harsh in in
human conditions faced by
migrants upon a prive arrival at
each of these facilities from
violated any laws they are
asylum seekers seeking refuge
from various forms of
persecution and discrimination
including religious racial and
privately run jails.
I have an amendment
madame president.
forty five as amended amendment
sponsored by senator and twenty
so deal opens.
forty five at the senator to
explain them and
thank you madame president
during debate entering the
hearing in
also spoke to me afterwards
about the concern he had that it
may the the way the bill was
written might affect one of the
programs they had
temporarily detain individuals
for the purpose of investigatory
detention
and then of course to really
have a related succeeding
that this bill will not affect
them in any way with their joint
project this bill only applies
for to civil detention and civil
detention centers.
Yes madame president and and
thank you madame president I I
guess i'm just curious on the
term temporarily what what time
that is necessary for the
investigation this is to for
example human trafficking may be
a circumstance that I don't
think are billwood interfere
would be affected
so it would be as necessary for
the investigation
so madam president senator it
investigation my understanding
of investigations especially for
organized crime and human
trafficking is that those are
quite lengthy.
to say temporarily and then
essentially
that's wide open so I think it's
just a little contradictory but
but i'll wait and listen to more
of the debate thank you madame
Thank you man and president I
move amendment number one to
those opposed need
think the item that the amount
man is adopted by condebated
bill
is there further debate.
um thank you madame president so
I do have a a few questions of
the sponsor of the bill would
yield do you senator steel
experience is
um so via genevieves from the
new mexico immigrant lost in a
free and animals consent me III
ask unanimous consent to invite
Alright senator share if you
Thank you madame present madame
president that is a really good
question these are all asylum
in the last few years
with the rise of these private
detention centers um
they've been detained alongside
We had a policy of seeing ok
asylum seekers go to the embassy
get processed do all of those
things before you show up and
anything about themselves
what would be the alternative
besides
housing them for a brief period
of time.
Um
Madame president button
but how are they veteran I mean
they're
there's there's a bunch of lot
more than ice members so how are
So madam president my
understanding that many of them
don't have don't have any id at
all
and
certainly
got to be some place for them to
sleep indoors certainly when
they get here so.
So it seems like the vetting
there they are immediately very
and.
of them have passports because
they're seeking asylum and you
can't get a pass you know you
can't seek asylum if you don't
if you don't have idea so they
are very with their passports
and then.
family that they can go to.
So madame president this
that don't appear to have any
kind of id they certainly don't
appear to have a passport but
although some court because
they're flying from where ever
have to have a passport to get
on there the plane
but
it also seems to me that those
are the very same people that
you could you could get to the
united states when a problem my
grandmother got to the united
states that well she took a boat
not a plane but uhm.
And i'm surprised that we can
that we convent people instantly
people without an id people it
certainly are not americans
vet them instantly but there's a
a law biting american by the way
but we can vit people that are
coming across our borders
something doesn't feel right
here
and again so I know people
people are fleeing from all
kinds of problems all over the
world
um.
That's that just doesn't that
just doesn't quite feel right so
again
this bill portrays everybody is
What I see coming across that
border
as a former infantry officer
battalion size units which about
a thousand minutes.
They do not appear to be hungry
they do not appear to be abused.
They do not appear to be
that's the group that scarce me.
I don't think that they're I
don't think the terror.
that when an infantry batan from
some foreign nation shows up.
They are not here for peaceful
purposes and they can show you
Yes there are some that are
families
and you can see those two.
And there are some that are
I hired a a lady
during the interview I think i'm
gonna hire you I ask do you
me her name was in spanish june
look spanish feel spanish milk
she looked like she was from
farmington
in while speaking spanish and
So I was surprised that a wow
okay so do you speak do you
speak northern new mexico
spanish christianian or do you
And then she start absences no
i'm in american now I haven't
been on
what's the work nationalized.
So she's one of those that came
with marm.
She would recent sheet looked
like she was from farmington is
she was still technically a
mexican and then and then she
had a sponsor and so forth
became an american and she's
very proud american by the way
In on on some level I can
appreciate that.
Even though she came across the
border.
Illegally I know I can't see
that anymore but that's that's
how mom brought her across the
board.
She's exactly the kind of person
we want the united states she's
proud american she she works you
That I had my chance the
brothers at that time.
I would still have wanted some
real vetting at the border.
It's all the other seven million
people.
Are here for legitimate
reasons.
And I know that's not true.
In yet what this bill is saying
is it well we can't hold
anybody.
We can't hold anybody.
We can't hold that informatory
And I don't want that.
I do not want to.
does not want to come back to
life.
He's pretty much retired all
yeah I can.
I can say who are when we do
roll call and things like that.
of young military age sit
soldiers that are coming across
that border
into pretend like they're all
humble in lovable in here
So I think that that this bill
is is again like so many other
things that we've done were
targeting the wrong people.
attack united states the moment
when they're damaged in
instantly and decide they're
good people
New mexico did may do not
detention act
on the other hand mister
president we're locking up
In had that been any other riot
many other city by any other
group we would have called that
interaction to get nobody's
actually been charged for
insurance and since nobody bride
any weapons it's really hard to
have a insurrection.
But I understand it was a riot.
through the capital taken
pictures staying within the
little the little
barriers
and yet those people are being
according to barriers.
The.
We don't want to do anything
about that.
Do we need immigration I think
it's been on this condition for
three hundred years but alright
that's not as long as well
probably your name mister
president it's been here four
hundred years but.
process and I think the problem
today is that there's no orderly
process
and of course what we see now.
Now they did sension center
might be a good life either but
it's not in the cold chicago
kind of.
They have them living in side
with blankets and heat and light
and food
outside in the rain in the snow
and the cold not on a street
mostly
either under a tree are in a
swamper someplace like that.
Granted i've never been in
prison so maybe that beds not a
fun better I don't know but
people that are that are fleeing
because they're being
abused somehow
from from their their native
country.
and things like that I don't
think so does abuse happen
everywhere in the world mister
president everywhere in the
world that includes here.
And why are more on their way.
What the reason their
communities because they don't
get abused here.
But in america we can be we can
be worried that there's an
invitory division there or ten
Until even if they're staying in
a detention center for some time
while we truly vet them.
I can't believe that people want
to leave.
I can believe that.
I know that when we we brought a
the taliban we took people that
actually helped us in
afghanistan and brought them
here
once upon a time the army sent
me to fort mccoy was concerned
most people don't know where for
that i'm from new mexico and I
don't do that.
I never even heard of ice
fishing until they sent me there
these folks from from
afghanistan.
It wouldn't wasn't a prison but
they were told to stay there.
And so I just want to question
why we think that this
particular bill is abusive when
we're actually giving people an
opportunity to live in doors and
Senate floor amendment number
two to senate bill.
we are still on the bill we have
senator neighbor there excuse me
senate gregs and our niver
cinema cutting and senator when
yours.
yes mister president I yield and
it agreed thank you mister
president and and senator do we
know or do you know how many
you can restate the question
please thank you president
center do we know how many
facilities are new mexico or
impacted by this closure yes
impacted one of them will lose
probably about a hundred people
from the couple of thousand day
they have their another one will
lose perhaps two hundred and
thousand people they have there
so it's just to deal with asylum
seekers and I do want to point
that asylum seekers
want to distinguish an asylum
seeker from individuals who
might be crossing the border in
some kind of
hostile way.
terrill county has bonded to pay
for the silly they've got they
will over about uh twenty two
million dollars when that uh
contract runs out this is
in those are new mexico people
which president I cannot support
dish bill and I I won't and I I
believe in in really not a good
we always want to treat people
right and treat him fair and try
to help people I mean those
people immigrants that are
coming across watch the other
under bridge
for food
they find directly into to
mexico to do that they're coming
to the us.
think treatment is going to be
better in texas.
And go ahead and vote for this
if you think those people are
gonna get better food
better treatment more respect in
taxes.
In this state that are coming
across.
You're gonna hurt him.
If you look at my little betty
getting tired
as you watch this tightening of
rural versus urban in what they
think's right for people.
roof texas where they don't
really want him they bridge in
cancements where they're gonna
throw those people
me help a little community help
some immigrants.
Senator servantes.
Who is present mispresident I
think it's important for us to
acknowledge the struggle.
And I I think it's important
they will use the moment to
challenge our federal
delegation.
Our congress man in
congresswoman are us senators to
The district could I represent
include someone park where on
the border with our password
we're on the border with mexico
it's routine to see immigrants
crossing through someone parked
This this bill challenges me
because i'm often times
replaying in my mind be careful
what you wish for
for the advocates.
These are ten like facilities
that i'll pass those opened up
these are to over over to deal
with the overflow of the
existing long term senate
resources of new mexico not
available I know the advocates
for the bill hope that fewer
people will be detained.
And it's unfortunate that we
have to.
Better information we are to
have ice here we ought to have
board of patrol here we ought to
have homeland security here we
had to really have answers
because we're only guessing
And we really don't have any
data or information or
statistics to my mind to support
that but all I can tell you is
that I i'd like to quote a very
refugee services in our parcel
the spokesperson emailed a
mainered who's the director of
that support group said this she
praised the opening of the new
amount of quota quote anytime
the US expands its capacity to
process people faster and
hopefully more humanely that's
always a good thing.
The.
You're at the end of a quote
that makes some sense to me.
Having better facilities more
facilities.
better and i'll just tell you
that
the rest of you in the state
gets your t v out of albuquerque
we get ours out of el paso when
you're from oscruces.
In in temporary facilities when
when we're overrun with the
existing capacity or parcel.
Be careful what you wish for.
in our history and we the fact
that we were once all mexico.
And we're sitting today in what
was once mexico.
Is much less pure than it is in
new mexico.
Thank you miss president.
Thank you senator servantes.
See no further debate senators
to the enough is to close
thank you mr president
I would just like to close by
saying a detention facility
torrents county is not the same
has a processing facility that
will get people processed in out
as soon as possible and I agree
new mexico has some of the most
notorious ice facilities in the
country the office of inspector
general which is the
government's own watchdog agency
their clients being transferred
here to new mexico
in a steady called if you build
it ice will fill it research or
research organizations gathered
arrest and detained by ice
conversation they've found that
the detention of immigrants and
asylum seekers decreases when
ice bedspace
is limited
so that means when asylum
seekers enter at the southern
border they are that much less
likely to be contained in these
horrific conditions it breaks my
this detention and intriguing
people in your mainly
this bill six dignity
and not detention
do now pass and I ask for a
voice vote i'm not i'm sorry I
asked for a roll call vote.
center twice and go off the
script and that and what just
goes started off.
Mr president I moved that senate
bill
No the nasty record show.
Rock yes and I asked for a roll
We're voting.
The clerk to call the room
santa barca center bucket votes
bert center bert votes no
senator compose sent a campus
votes no center servant test
center savantes votes no center
do hick.
Center greg spots now centre
hamlin center handling boats yes
center hit hell.
Santa hickey.
meal sent our meal boards yes
center lopes.
Center lopespot cs sent to my
estes center my estimates votes
center morris center morris
votes no centre in yours.
Sentence words no centre never.
Centre never bought snow center
neighbor.
tcipino votes yes centre buder.
Centre pedea bought cs centre
pinto.
Center pinto boat cs center
period.
Center sanchez votes no centre
smitties.
Centre smith's votes know center
city allow best since the deal
souls center souls volt cs
interested for next.
Centers I am born.
Center stimber and boat cs
center stewart.
woods center words votes no.
five is twice amended has failed
to pass the senate.
Sooner several offers thank you
mister president thank you
colleagues.
We are going to set her peter
worth for the next order
Mr president your conservation
committee to whom has been
referred senate bill to sixty
six has had it under
elizabeth liz stephanics chair.
Similar worth I miss president
as yams in center century we
ought to read all the committee
reports that we want on them
with one motion in journal or
flight they were acted upon
and then refer to the finance
committee
senate bell two forty nine
recommendation that it do not
pass but that senate
conservation committee
and move it appears in the
committee reports and here's we
have a motion to doubt committee
reports all those in favor
significant saying I thought was
has been referred senate built
to sixty as had it under
consideration and reports the
same with the recommendation
recommendation that it do pass
Yes yeah move an option of the
committee report
senator only we do have several
i'm sorry i've got my campos
acted upon individually no
objections reader.
Senate joint memorial to
recommendation that it do pass
Senator nil moved after the
committee reports centers we
have a motion to doubt the
community part all those in
favor signified by saying I
set senator said worth this
rocker
I challenged the chair
On that if you vote yes you are
pulled the ruling of the chair
if you won't know you overturn
your vote to overturn the real
end of the chair
anywhere that clerical called
around.
Senator baka.
Center brand.
Center
center bert votes yes center
compos center compose votes know
echoes votes yes and inter
gonzales no centre gonzas votes
no center gregs center gregs
voltsy s center hamlin center
Santa armio
center armia votes know center
centre mechanic votes no centre
morris center morris votes yes
interminus sentences votes knows
internet veil.
no drone nail votes know center
artisipino
center tissie pena votes no
centre per dear centre video
votes know center pinto center
centre roddery guess sent a
rodriguez voda no center sanchez
center sanchez votes yes center
cities center smith's volca
shandow center shandow votes
know center cells center cells
votes no center stephanie
center stephane exposed to no
Center worth votes no center
words center wood boats yes
going back centre brantley.
Buy a lot of fourteen the
affirmative twenty four and the
negative for the second time
this session the ruling of the
referred senate joint resolution
sixteen has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted to
so I move adopting the community
report we have a motion to doubt
the community report all those
in favor signified by saying I
has been referred senate bill
one forty two has had it under
consideration and report same
with the recommendation that I
do pass and that's referred to
the judiciary committee
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually no objection the
reader to read senate bill one
Senate bill one seventy eight
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
judiciary committee.
The.
referred to the judiciary
committee
senate bill to sixteen
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and that's referred
to the finance committee.
Senate bill two sixty eight
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator gerald or dizzypino
thought was opposed name the
eyes have at the common report
has been adopted and the journal
reflect they were acted upon
individually the reader to read
as amended respectfully
submitted senator george munios
chair
mister president every
consideration senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
amended recommendation that it
do pass.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for senate
bill one twenty nine do pass
submitted senator george monos
chair
with adoption of the community
report and there's we have a
motion to adopt community report
all those in favor please sign
the fight by saying I
Yeah.
business messages from the house
we are on that order business
scene no objection the reader
will read
mr president i'm directed to
inform the senate that the house
The journal show reflect that
the message from the house has
been received sent a majority
floridator peter worth take a
set next order of business.
Senate memorial twelve
introduced by senators steinborn
cydlo cybon mushrooms for their
bureaucrat treatments and the
establishment of a program for
sale bison mushrooms to be used
for their putin medical
on the other side as supposed
could you please read that title
again in the sponsor so I just
want to make sure I heard that
correctly I think I might be on
center more as I had the same
question a memorial request and
cill cyben mushrooms to be used
for their
medical treatments and the
sponsor of that is senator
steinborn and senator brant
center more mister president
mister president you couldn't
I mean so really
the sender someone you can see
in the gallery behind you
there's quite a few people who
were there really good time we
Senate moral twelve haven't been
read twice my title is printed
in is printed and referred to
the senate health of public
affairs committee that sent a
and actory dating to finance
amending and enacting sections
of the opportunity enterprise
act and changing the name of the
act allowing the new mescal
finance authority to pride
board and changing its name
providing duties require in
rulemaking amending requirements
for opportunity enterprise loans
first committee then senate
finance committee that's house
bill one ninety five.
Send a major floridator peter
were to take us to the next
order of business thank you
mister president your name is
resolution eleven and request
the concurrence of the senate
respectfully submittedly same
market he's my cutting chief
clerk reflected the message from
the house has been received said
president so we will be in at
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
and now it's the time for
committee shares to make their
announcements and I might yield
the senator pope first to
am in the senate launch once
again tomorrow morning ten am in
the senate launch thank you
senator pope civil mars the
everything was president with
center of pope yield pope
dealed.
same forty five minutes over so
what see yeah what's the
overunder today for tomorrow mr
president the plan is for one
hour one hour account will start
bad set about hour and twenty
The scene known today we had an
opportunity to honor one of our
our individuals in our body and
I think it was a wonderful
tribute we talked about the
decoral we talked about the
speaker are between the
individual given a presentation
that there is no line that is
interrupted there thank you
certain more big round of
thank you more center companies.
We do have other announcements
senator soles.
Thank you mister president as we
brought back we wrap up our
held the promise of transforming
our communities and riching the
lives of our children yet faced
with limited resources tough
decisions had to be made too
available this year
these were not frivolous
requests they were urgent needs
for the people of new mexico
essential investments in our
banks or visited a local
homeless shelters were
individual struggle to find
refuge have you witnessed the
heartbreaking side of children
waiting eagerly for breakfast at
their cells falling short of
adequately addressing the
pressing issues of our state
while we mass significant
reserves for the future over
homelessness and the treated
mental illness crumbling
infrastructure and underfunded
social safety nets
nor can we afford to watch our
talented youth seek
a poor state we possess abendant
resources and untapped potential
to enhance the quality of life
for all new mexicans.
Yet our actions often believe
reserve to a still robust twenty
percent we could unlock a
billion dollars for immediate
investment in our state imagine
the transformative impact of
reserves we release translates
to approximately one hundred
million dollars of funds that
could be channeled towards
tangible solutions to address
resources at our disposal again
new mexico is not a poor state
it's time we start acting
accordingly thank you.
The existence we are in that
years old and so if the body
would help me celebrate with
hamish at home and wish him a a
happy birthday send up and clap
The center period further
announcements we have sent a
sender followed by said anyone
else
they get mispresident your
senate tax business
thank you mister president
senate finance will go in right
after the four says we can get
there just have a few bills to
I can't see that on the floor
center work anyway
in cash that's not working for
the state but we keep doing out
capital at a billion dollars a
year and it doesn't make new
mexico grow either so maybe you
and how we do that but senate
finance immediately after the
four.
Thank you senator
thank you mister president
education will meet tomorrow at
See no further announcements
sent a majority florida to peter
worth thank you mister president
just before we wind up I do have
a unanimous consent request on
an emergency bill so i'm gonna
go ahead and read that and for
bill three or three continue to
be sponsored by senator
teasipino uh be posted for
public viewing the referrals
will be senate committees
committee senate health and
public affairs and senate
to include accupuncture
isolation sure that proposed
committee substitute two o two
number is two two seven seven
eight seven point one as you
name is consent for that
mister president it's an
emergency bell yes so mister
president the stomy bill or you
just all of the merchants there
was so emergency what's the
emergency about arch activation
scope of practice bills and i'm
my understanding is that certain
folks are being excluded and I
think this probably sends a
little message about what
direction they would like to go
Apologize at that you were up to
speak on the unanimous consent
seen no objection.
three two one and then a big
thank you to miss new mexico for
joining us and staying through
debate I appreciate you for
serving the state of new mexico
Center had a meal mister
president I think everybody use
mister mexico US a as my expert
with mess and tax today for two
bills that i'll be presenting so
I think that she will end and
now to table those both both
those bills
so we don't have to worry about
that and tax
senator brand
