center brantley
senator birth
senator campos
center survived this.
Center gregs
center handling
sent your headpile
sender hickey
centre mechanic.
Senator morris.
Sent him in yours.
Centre artisipino
center per dear
center pantel.
Center per.
Center smith
center city lopez.
Center share
center shandow.
Yeah.
Senator woods
center thomas
center mechanic
here
the buyer very own revenue
father richard any order of the
keltick francisco and are sent
to chaplain with also your main
standing for the pledged
legislative today by senator him
saturday snowy saturday and
santa fe welcome to the senate
twelve days left I think is that
not correct sir I know you
mineful
and senator work talked about
this yesterday that our words
are our stock and trade birds
but an hour and a half ago
before I came to the senate I
had a chance to see elizabeth's
law in full force have called to
give less rates to a woman who
see her body racked in pain
and be able to accept challenges
that she didn't know that
physically and.
Spiritually that she would have
to deal with in her eighty six
years.
it's our actions though that
will tell others what we believe
pray that we come together in
these days a half anticipating
our finding the light of that
do here further awakeness to a
vision of the enemies see of
spirit and matter nature in
grace
source and everything that is
being.
Mayor spirit lord continue to
help us in counter the sake of
unity at the heart of all things
you've wonderously created and
A pledge allegiance to the flag
of the united states of america.
losses start also need us the
america let a bully car career
per santander who are not soon
until the individual colleague
that used this year but at the.
Once again would like to welcome
all of our guests and our
members here to the chamber to
get things started today to set
a majority floor leader peter
business announcements with
slain is senator worth thank you
mister president and thank you
for the wreck is always for
always being here bringing in
an interesting double life to go
back and look at those statutes
and sometimes you know a few
stories behind how those words
got to the through the statute
and then you realize how
and so again I thought it was a
particularly fitting invocation
on count down day twelve to go
so thank you today is military
think senator pinto and perhaps
and shindo might have a few
words about that I have a
certificate of congratulations
for the saint michael's high
school volleyball team which
celebrate a pretty amazing
accomplishment for them
so with that ideal to other
members for any announcements
and then ideal to send their
party a first and other members
thank you simple or center
thank you mister president you
know it's consent to excuse
senators do hagging on that
until they return to the chamber
except for the purposes of a
call.
See no objections ordered center
by there thank you very much
mister president I just want to
take just a moment of this the
chamber's time to introduce
someone who is incredibly
special to me i'm an asking to
stand up tall enhanced some of
returned to new mexico about
nine ten months ago with a
master of social work to green
as a terrific job over its here
energy maso were here as a
clinical director in one of the
up at about four thousand
political meetings and things
that i've had along the way and
I just love him so much and i'm
so happy to see him here and I
just love your son thank you for
center by the senate brand
thank you mister president and
sorry
now is consent to excuse leader
backer
senator center and thank you
mister president night I just
want to thank my fellow veterans
in this chamber who have served
this country
all of my brothers
when any sisters and here that
serves all this thing all my
brothers and also leader backer
it's it's a double sacrifice
thank you mister president thank
you center round for that
acknowledgement further
announcement senator center
means restored
thank you mister president I
talk at ten thirty on monday our
own but dirty leader peter worse
will get the earth science
achievement award
lunch to which will be quite
fart thank you mister chairman
thank you
thank you senator stewart any
mentioned we have a very special
certificate today honoring the
same michaels high school girls
volleyball team and I would ask
the reader to read that
certificate and then i'll see a
few words and yield to any other
session twenty twenty four the
new school state senate does
hear by extend its
congratulations to saint
michael's high school girls
bollyball team whereas the
twenty twenty three state
michael's high school girls
volleyball team finished with a
record of twenty four and three
in a game set record of seventy
two and thirteen and whereas the
state michael's high school
high schools girls volleyball
team was honored to be asked to
play in the metro volleyball
tournament and was the only
three a school to be invited
battled in a full play and
city champion defeating five
capital high school three zero
in five a sanity high school
three two and defeating twenty
district chapter and was rained
number one heading into the
state tournament and whereas the
saint michael's high school
girls volleyball team played in
the state finals against the
not only are these young women
all stars on the court they
excelled in the classroom with
an average great point average
of three point nine five and
seven players above a four point
oh.
valre sendable assistant coaches
gabriel back of the hill
guarantee in joline liberty and
whereas the same michael's high
school girl's volabout team
siena montana victoria victorino
my pino alex crespen marisa sand
players on the first team are
alan over ten alex crespen
marisa sunday while moya my
apino and siena montana and on
alex crisps is not recent my
opinion and whereas the twenty
twenty three district two three
a player of the year is money so
high school lady horseman girl's
volleyball team for winning back
to back state championships
signed and sealed that the
capital in the city of south
afraid senator peter worth mimi
mister president and you have
our senate chaplain up their
speechless
we're all speech less water and
extraordinary accomplishment to
each and every one of you into
average in the classroom I mean
you guys are rock stars and we
are super site to be here on the
sand it just to recognize you
congratulate the team and I want
sponsor this certificate and
yeah we'll give him a big round
of applause in just a minute but
we've got some others I think
that certainly want to say a few
words I deal to send a rodriguez
standard nancy with rigorous
you make us all proud you shine
varietor every day you know what
in and that show you are the
champions of champions think is
so much for doing all that
you members and also to all the
parents that are up there
congratulations to you I know as
a volleyball parent former
myself what it takes to have
Yeah.
worth thank you mister president
today it's also indigenous
wednesday and I know senator
pinto I think is up in the
rotanda so i'd like to yield to
send her lopez to say a few
and but already later worse than
mister
but today isn't it necessarily
mistaken and the theme of this
year as safeness of matriarchs
there are several speakers who
will be
sharing some words of wisdom
with us this afternoon in the
department a few years ago in
seeing what we could do to
recognize or a digit as women
here within the rotanda because
of the
health in the whole list goes on
mr president so if anybody has a
a chance just to go in a peak to
listen to what is happening
today all our invited thank you
Thank you mister president I oh
I just want to speak an honor of
I am not referring this major
archi is i'm not referring this
to this major archi has a hire
give power like the white pay
turkey rather I recognize the
paraphrase of a statement by
tiller read thank you.
Thank you senator sailors center
mckenna
And new mexico is all the boring
rich with our indigenous
cultures thank you for your
respect thank you mister
president thank you center
mechanic.
Thank you mr president so just
for the members we do not have
we're not going to any third
reading today we just have the
objection away on that order
business message in the house
the reader to read mister
president I am directed to
informed the senate that the
house is passed house judiciary
committee substitute for house
the journal show the message
from the house has been
received.
Santa majority florida take a
send next order business thank
referred to senate judiciary
committee substitute force
senate bill six has had it under
consideration and reports same
with the recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
one motion in that general flex
they were acted on individually
I object has been an objection
the reader to read the report
that reports internet share I
don't think that bills in that
another appropriations bill and
the marijuana bill.
Thank you so just to be clear
the objection has been removed
that it do pass as amended
senate bill one fifty nine as
amended recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
senator george minos chair
all those in favor signified by
saying I
thought I was opposing the eyes
have it the current report has
been adopted in the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually thank you said
mister president your judiciary
committee to whom has been
referred senate tax business in
transportation committee
substitute for senate bill
eighty eight has had it under
president mister president as
unanimous consent of the senate
at the reader be allowed to read
all the committee reports that
we act on them as one motion but
the journal reflect that they
were acted upon individually
Senate bill one forty five as
amended due pass.
Senate bill to do pass as
supposed need the eyes have at
the common report has been
adopted as journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually the reader to
do pass and then refer to the
judiciary committee respectively
submitted senator gerald or
disepino chair in our disabinal
seeing no objection
the reader to read senate bill
to ten do pass and then refer to
the finance committee
senator bill two thirty four
tax business and transportation
committee.
Senate belt two seventy one do
pass as amended and then
public affairs committee
substitute for senate bell
fourteen due pass respectfully
submitted senator gerald or
favor signified by saying I
thought was a frozen the eyes
have at the cummer report has
been adopted and the journal
consent we go that are business
introduction of legislation no
objection
we're in that order business
introduction legislation
into crime creating the crime of
unlawful cell of a firearm
before the required waiting
period ends requiring a fourteen
day waiting period when
house bill one twenty nine
have you been read twice by
title is is referred to the
senate judiciary committee
that's house bill one twenty
the house that's a bipartisan
now
and we have traditionally not
given uncontra- are
controversial bills single
referrals.
things we've heard a very
similar bill already that's now
sitting on the senate floor
senate bill sixty nine the two
differences the primary
difference is this bill actually
this bill does not have the
concealed carry exception
so senate bill as they said
sixty nine has been heard by she
packed mister president I will
just state that there are a
and the members on the other
side that you know those are
going to get the appropriate
number of referrals when we
haven't heard those bills
left and a couple of things are
happening on night this sunday
but next sunday we've got a
super ball I just found out last
night on the last monday there
referral on this bill.
Senator ran.
Miss president.
controversial um and and you
know it's interesting to me is
um it's been called a crime bill
which is laughable
if I are stop any crime in fact
we had you know one person on
bills that still aren't being
hurt in the very committee that
this is being assigned to
and so
that I still have out there that
the governor and I have worked
on is sitting in committees with
ten days still
waiting for their second hearing
So this is extremely poor taste
for a bill that is this
controversial and is clearly
unconstitutional underbruin
request and make a motion that
house bill one twenty nine be
referred to the senate judiciary
committee again I add up like
respect I don't want there to be
a unanimous request given the
objection so I would make that
So there's emotion.
If you wish to go no please
raise your hand.
center gave us forty now center
body now send her rantally
voting now so there are kitchen
body now center share voting now
Center grades are hiding there
from a senate greg voting now.
Send him when you ask voting
now.
a referral be added to house
bill one twenty nine and that it
be sent to spack.
need the sponsored deal but I
i'll remind members
that were on the committee that
it's been asked that this will
refer to had me for a little
better than two hours on
that requires a two hour and
debate or discussion that we
hear the senate had some
additional exceptions that I
think are good and I I hope that
we'll be able to have those in
said a close to two hours in in
that same committee that the
motion proposes to refer it to
already and that's in addition
to the long hearing in judiciary
itself and this bill would get
that same hearing again in
think that the chairman of
judiciary you know just set it
correctly you know that it isn't
the same bill it is different
and I think that both committees
about so I think it does need to
have a full hearing of the
senate and if our committee
processed a sole important and
so worshipped.
an importased on a bill that is
this controversial and this
clearly unconstitutional that
were not having heard by both
committees in the senate.
opposite with short hands I
shall hand senators has been
emotion.
To have two community referrals
for that house bill.
Center servant is very no.
Center had a meal modino.
Center souls body now.
Center maesters for you know
send driving sort of volunteer.
Senator or dc pena voting no
senator tomorrow voting now
center stewart body now.
Center mechanic voting now.
Sinister fannox slowly know
center lowest voda now.
The.
By about eleven of the firmative
twenty one the negative the
motion is failed.
Senator peter words to take a
senator thank you mister
president so that is it for two
day we will not be on the floor
tomorrow
thank you so much we will begin
with you today center share
center share
mister president
now i'm really discombobulated
because I was going to I was
peace of p turn drink up a
coffee as opposed to just
sitting in committee waiting my
turn which went for effort
and i'm assuming we're going to
education committee will be
meeting at eight thirty in room
three eleven on monday members
please be on time we waited
forty five minutes on friday to
have a quarrel and none of the
inconsiderate of members not to
be there and not to have
notified the chair please be
there on time so we can get our
work done thank you.
Senator had a meal mister
president the senate rules
committee will meet on monday at
committee meeting that begin
this morning uh ten will resume
at three and we we we we will
resume with senator duics bill
bill then we will take up a
senator shares bill of course
we're going to get to that right
away and then rodriguez is bill
Thank you senator ticket me
enough center souls for a second
time
thank you mister president as
chair of the senate education
committee I try and watch what
programs that affect our
children educations when is the
largest piece of the entire
education budget and just some
of the things that I would like
area of early literacy that we
know is necessary for our
children to learn to read the
difference in the house budget
and the executive budget shorts
advantage of learning shorts
that program over the next two
years by twenty two million
dollars
transportation we hear about
difference of four million
dollars
school improvement and turn
around for our schools that most
need the help to get them the
additional resources in help the
trying to refill the teacher and
meet the teachers shortage and
the programs to do that there's
a short and job but nineteen
point five million dollars
occupations shorted by eight
point one million dollars summer
school and after school where so
many of our kids need the extra
help in order to make the
and student engagement we talk
about the concerns about
attendance and behavioral health
and how necessary that is for
our kids and the budget is short
over seven million dollars in
management system that things
that get us the data that we
need on how students are doing
and the budget short seven
finance committee the house
appropriations committee this
budget is shorted a hundred and
fifty five point five million
in funds we are not a poor state
in particularly when it comes to
our children and education we
need to stop trying to do
education on the cheap and fully
Keen the real that chairman
landgramped in honor of treaty
day twenty twenty four and so my
senate district has the most
landgrants out of any senate
revolution after its conquest of
new mexico and eighteen forty
six the united states uh
confirmed a hundred and fifty
seven of those landgrands is
staying valid a number of he
center center choice to make an
announcement
no announcement center cinema
Thank you just for a
clarification for the body I
just want to make a
clarification on the motion that
it passed at ninety new the
and the listing idea so it was
nineteen to twelve on that
motion and that boat.
Certainly us
thank you mister president
you know you heard where we're
need to know that we have
adopted our grow money into
house bill too the house has not
sent their grow stuff over so I
don't know if there is starting
house build two and senate
financing so we're gonna keep
moving forward we still have a
lot of gaps to go
we met with the exact on non
reoccurring and what one one she
in at five thirty am on monday
morning so we can work in the
dark and nobody sees us and sue
the sun comes up both with no
but we're gonna
that in so it'll be at the call
the chair so those members is
sent violence can do that but
you know we did by a couple
interest a couple of their
happened so senator should want
to see
that worry about your pampers
and get them up and
from and
right being supportive of how
we're headed in do you know
everybody has a priorities in
everybody has their needs and.
Or trying to get everybody there
right but you would think with
cyber security and every cyber
security project in the state
right which needs to be funded
and we looked at both spent
thirty million inst- almost an
all in cyber security.
this back in four days well
possession is ninety percent of
the law mister president.
Thank you center we have some
disputed transparency do you
want to indicate which room
you'll be meeting that five
prefer great for reduced but
a center rod riggers would you
like something else all the
state police would like a a
couple doesn't donate sick of
their can be here early
in senator rodriguez would like
thank you mister president
center minutes any further
announcement senators
see no further announcement
center peter worth thank you
about the process for doing that
we're going to ask for unanimous
consensus that those bills be
substituted that the subsidies
posted immediately and i'll read
together tax package and we want
to make sure that both are
chambers have bills in front of
them so first I would ask for
yams consent to sponsor for
proposed senate tax business and
be posted for public viewing the
referral on the substitute will
remain in that committee so
staying attacks committee the
title of the proposed substitute
is quote related to the public
single sales factor permanently
the proposed committee
substitutes two o two number is
two two seven.
Nine eight nine point one so it
asking absolutely.
Take your center center worth
for the same purpose of uh
mister president I ask in areas
to send the proposal attacks to
chance please in committee
substitute for emergency senate
the title of the proposed
substitute related to the public
piece health safety welfare
creating the clean car income
tax credit the clean card
charging unit income tax credit
substitute two o two number is
two two seven nine nine zero
point two
thank you center center there's
beneath a request for a nan of
consent
transportation to for that
clarification center center no
more accident to send that the
senate tax and business and
transportation committee
substrict for emergencies in the
I will continue to be
responsible for this bill the
title is related to the public
peace health safety and welfare
created the events energy
equipment income tax credit and
three center since others went a
request
yes under what's what for a
purpose do you rate
history mister president I would
Are there two referrals to a
mean to more than one committee
or is it just a one committee
deal than on the floor mr
president center sender
That they're staying in a tax
committee the second referral on
all three of these bills will be
to the senate finance committee
and again we didn't read that in
and have been an amendment but
that's a good point and I will
certainly double check with the
my chief as staff was probably
listening here if i'm saying it
wrong and we need to do another
referrals thank you very much
mister president thank you I
just
the chair will request that the
chief pack doesn't make an out
of that to ensure that we can
this problem if I could address
this issue
I was present I did look at
those and that was my
understanding is that they would
go to tax and then go to
financial
request for an animals can send.
I'm single shandow any objection
seen none.
So I decided worth our thank you
been working tired lessly to
make this happen and i'm going
to go down the lists our
legislative council service
legislative finance committee
legislative education study
committee legislative building
copy room e any IT journal
maintenance payroll proof
readers are sergeant at arms we
appreciate all of you in your
work on the floor committee and
hol attendance uh all of our
committee analysts secretary
analysts and communication staff
legislative assistance bill room
staff and a shout out to our
three chiefs of staff vince
torres sanders more larane
montoya the hill i'll did a
your staff of course and let's
just all give them a big round
president president fob on
center worth's comments and
thanks for the staff I didn't
see you last night at the hunter
bill party
mister lieutenant governor I
didn't see this major leader at
the hundred bill party last
night so let me just give you
and that we had incredible
participation in the staff and I
I think most matter great time
and it was nice to be able to
slow down for a few moments and
not be pushing our way through
the halls with our staff and I
hope a lot of you all had a
governor in the majority of
dance and I can understand why
you didn't show up
thank you senator want this
center when yours you know
mister president I heard a
verify.
Said i'm a kitchen mister
president a yield but do not
verify
cowboy happen from southeast new
mexico
said i'm a curtain mister
president though I do fit that
at mister president center I did
not but there should be no
records I think the rest of me
no cameras last night during the
party as well so we're just
going to keep pleading the fifth
here
Cinema catch mister president
in center movies now it was a
good party everybody everybody
was good and as far as I know
We do have further announces we
have senator on you thank you
mister president and I I wanted
to say you know for those of you
who are interested in pursuing
your singing careers talk to me
microphone I want to know where
the trophy is man like the
trophy it's not the right trophy
and there it is okay sorry but
it it's just AAA reminder of the
just orchestrate you know those
of you remember the wireless
read moment okay so that's all
thank you thank you senator rent
but also got it I got a text
message from one of our viewing
audience who who said that she
looked they look up the
in this person's question is I
wonder if that's why the senate
was convenient today.
Any center rant any further
announcements send their peter
it there's a second referral on
these three bills to first tax
then send it finance so I ask
unanimous consent that the
referrals on senate ability to
eighty two three fifteen and
mister president with that
unanimous consent the senate
standard recess until eleven
o'clock on monday see no
objection to senate to stand and
