Do hick
center guy ahos
senator hickey.
Center i've sort of.
The.
Santa meal.
Center minors
senator nevel
senator neighbor
Center period
senator pope nowaday senator
rodriguez
senator share.
Senator schendo.
Senator sawsuit senator
stephanics.
senator woods.
You do have a chore mr president
thank you at s at all members in
mexico please remain standing
for the pledgeably just to be
there today by senator harold
pope pledge of legions and
spanish to believe today by
senator gagos and the solution
listening to a short passage
submit yourselves for the lord's
sake to every human institution
whether to a keying as the one
in authority or the governors
are sitting by him for the
freedom as a covering for evil
but use it as bond slays of
guard honor all people love the
brotherhood fear guard honor the
king
thank you god we thank you for
your desire for peace in the
land we pray that you would help
us to be rulers that listen to
one another and care for each
other pretty that we would love
one another as you tell us here
that we would fear you the king
of kings and that we would
here they would draw them close
to you and everywhere protect
them in the name of jesus
christa bray.
In it.
I played allegiance.
The metal last though the
The.
Based allude flag said in the
mexico
the deal simple preferred
friendship among native
cultures.
yield to senator peter worth to
take a set order business thank
you mister president good
morning everyone unanimous
consent we go that our business
announcements and mislanes here
are no objection where in that
again as as we always discuss
it's important to just take a
moment and think about why we're
here and all the things that
we're doing and why it's
is a human nativity scene and I
cease he signs all on all the
pick us trail way away from the
church with folks parking
they're coming from all over the
have everyone pause for a moment
for a moment asylum
scott momentary who was a
political prize native american
writer and poet died
whole native american uh author
kind of inspiration and so I
just asked everyone rights for a
moment of silence for scott
momentary in his family.
Thank you mister president
members.
Send their part of worth thank
report with the secretary of
state's office
today we are going to have three
certificates read on the floor
first I will be senator
egg has a certificate for UNM
day to be read and guessed
introduced and i'm sure they'll
be a little bit of discussion
about the basketball game last
I have a certificate for zis
over a day
hand we're going to read that
we've got a whole bunch of
guests that are going to talk
very excited to have this
overday and so we'll do that
once I get done yield to senator
padia and then we can have other
fifteen by invitation only the
santa fe chamber of commerce and
new mexico chamber of commerce
twenty twenty four legislative
reception and the santa fe
tomorrow is valencia county day
the legislature in the village
of los lunas will be holding its
annual metanza on the east side
of the capital from eight to one
pm.
Uh with that mister president
up consent to allow cameras on
the senate floor and in the
senate gallery with all of our
guest today.
Here in our objection
everybody thank you very much
mister president you know it's
senator center brand new is
president I would like to to ask
everyone to rise again for
another moment of silence
yesterday our country lost three
airlifted to another base to be
treated.
And all over thirty soldiers
were injured and I just would
like us to have a moment silence
for the three passed and then
all closes in a prayer for them
being notified yesterday today
passing on their love once.
Bothering thank you for the
sacrifice that these men and
Thought I pray for the families
of the other eight or injured in
hospital probably be with their
families give them a piece.
And father I pray that you'd be
with those eight that are
worse.
Father.
To be your will I pray that you
would intervene
is there my print.
mister president before I get to
my guess i'd like to also notify
you with pattern read readers up
there I appreciate him when we
start the park caucus I in
pastried for coming down and
helping us out that much
president **** and sinners I
have today with me the privilege
to have individuals from the
first off we have our mayor
billy hobs
we have candy britos our finance
manager but big part today's
these are the leaders of brought
these incredible ute down here
on the bottom of this is our
union's junior youth council and
by now and and here like how you
can't stand she's heard if you
can would take you so on healing
current currencies we have um
we have kerr me karasco.
Elena fabella
carry himington
every pender
like to the decent to give them
a round of plaza welcome to the
capital.
want to do that during the
certificate
senator personal
and thank you mister president
newest addition to her family I
believe his name is going to be
fine fen lawson I would really
appreciate it please help me
special guests with me today i'd
like to first start with
introduction introducing dearens
spiro arosko can you stand up to
interests are learning more
about politics so is in the
right place today he is a
company by jeff killer his his
blind and visually impaired and
she's been there for over five
years and she has the best job
in the world according to her so
send him a catcher.
Mister president thank you very
much you'll see there to your
walked yet but he's finished all
of his requirements two years
early so he's a bit of an
overcheaper already and
he plans on going to union and
becoming a doctor of
Thank you center catching and
just as in addition he is also
have a guest with me today this
is tim slater uh met some of you
may know that lost christmas had
a big air show and demonstration
air races this last october time
rate runs it over four hundred
miles an hour down to plains at
about two hundred miles an hour
at fifty feet off the ground
going around pilons we had
demonstration races in last
making new mexico the new home
of their racing where it had
been in nevada in the reno area
so if the body will help me in
in welcoming tim slater to see
how we process things here.
Thank you mr president members
of the body with me this week I
have a UNM political science in
turn and his name is camera and
interested in environment I did
tell him that if he had come
last week it would be a little
less more social and that this
week would be a more stressful
Thank you center standards any
further announcement senators
first time born in following
center pope
honored to have join me today
the same as gabriel dan gabriel
is the last crucial native he's
a US army veteran he is an m s u
masters and public
he's a new support cole you
support coach and he has a
subsidy teacher and when he gets
the opportunity he loves to be a
Center pub thank you mister
president like two introduced my
guess who are part of
protecting youth from flavor
nick in a nicotine products and
twenty four seven which is
keeping our schools tobacco free
twenty four hours a day
seventies a week first like to
years she's very active in our
**** department participating
enquire banned theater and color
guard she's also member the
national honor society she plans
to attend west texas and
years and is in our first year
on the leadership team she's
currently a part of band quiet
theater and the national honor
society she's planning on also
attending west texas and m
leadership team for one she's
currently part of the national
our society choir theater and
color guard and plans on going
to new york
Any further announcement
senators.
Thank you mister president so
just one additional announcement
about an event tonight since
it's unm day the UNM along the
first to senator servant days
and then I believe senator
morris is going to do UNM day
second and then we'll
do some burning on the floor for
building is vacant and it's kind
of an early experience walking
through the halls and walking
through the building where
there's really nobody here.
Except that the the people that
are here tend to be tourists who
when I when I talked to them
sometimes they'll tell me
they've been sent here by
various hotels in town or tour
groups or others and they're all
encouraged to come to what I
think argue believes the best
mister president and i'd like
the reader read the certificate
from a chicago and then come to
some comments in some i'm sure
share comments when my
colleagues.
Thank you centers around this
here by extend its recognition
and acknowledgement to glend
cutter horas glen cutter was a
founding member of the new
mexico capital are foundation in
commission and whereas glen is a
recipient of the john glowaki
award the highest award bestowed
by the dorniana arts council for
and whereas glen was the
founding member of the done arts
council and a member of the one
percent for art selection
committee and whereas glen was
state universally library and
chemistry building and was a
supporter of the new mexico
state university college of
engineering in where as glen has
also served under new mexico
antiques business for sixty
years and whereas glen has
actively served many community
organizations and he is the
former district conference chair
it resolved by the senate of the
state in new mexico that
recognition be given to glen
cutter for his many years of
public service and contributions
to the state of new mexico.
senator joseph servant is mimi
stewart president protem sherry
de luhan chief clerk new mexico
state senate.
Senators about this and thank
it's a home that glen in sally
were part of preserving for many
many years they became their
gallery there are gallery and
from there really arts sprong
it being lost cruises day today
here and we've got colleagues in
the gallery from here from lost
cruises that I notice celebrate
today and it seemed fitting as a
good day to recognize plan's
impressive art collection in the
state of new mexico and that
says a great deal in a state
that so committed to the arts
it's it's also unique I I enjoy
there's nothing like this that
that i'm or in any other state
with this kind of a collection
glan was the founder of the
concept gling was the founder of
the board clinton as you said
capital and displayed and in the
submit their work they invite us
to consider it in glance has
been part of the leaders of
creating this whole concept but
he was really good many years
ago to bring me in to ask me to
who enjoy the collection in this
building to recognize the person
who really is most responsible
for making it happen and he's
sitting there right here.
steinborn van miss president two
rise and support the capital art
collection is probably the
second past I did see one in
private hands this weekend based
those of us are the senate do
travel to other capital
buildings around the country
night like center spartace uh to
try stop in and look at the
buildings to check about there's
nothing even comes close to
does capture new mexico
extremely well and I just want
to apply to you all for doing
that it is such an important
industry here in the mexico and
really captures our credible
history and you guys under great
for to mexico thank you.
Take a center more center
hambling thank you mister
president and senate you know I
think many of the southern new
and glen cutter was one of the
first get exhibits one of the
first galleries to exhibit the
incredible whimsical art of
artists stephen hanson
university and glen in his wife
sally spent a lot of time and
energy making sure that house
was on the historic register and
refurbishing it to the beauty
that it was when it was first
a senator crampel knows we've
talked about that before and
public radio stations can't have
advertising on there they have
what are called underwriters and
I always used to say morning
them but you know good glen and
sally at their gallery would
host events for care w g radio
and we would have socials there
we would have artistic
submissions and and I remember I
pocketbook and that it was not
something that I could afford
even though I appreciated it and
it was a francisco romaro piece
worker if i'm correct on that I
think I think am I right on that
clean.
And he paints these incredible
colorful paintings and many of
many of our local artists and I
got to see that and glen taught
me about art is that art is an
investment it never depreciates
and it is something that shows
the character in love that you
work that my wife and I have in
our house it's because of the
appreciation that glen taught me
about art
and so I think when we are able
and sally did for the area also
be in the founders of the arts
fair that is a big drawer for
our artists since other new
mexico and we have an incredible
artist community there and the
who is a dear friend to many of
us thank you.
Thank you senator hambling
centers time one thank you
mister president and gland i'm
so honored is just say a few
to tip my hat to you because you
know for whatever we get wrong
in this state and in the
legislature and state government
which course every government
that point job on that and I
know my mom she were here would
want me to say hello to you
because you're of that
generation where you know my
parents and my mom you're one of
best you glad in congratulations
I get and recognize they can
think mister president they can
sense time on senator worth
followed by central neighbor
thank you mister president thank
you senator servant days for
about how important or it is to
are acconomy you know we often
have moments here on the floor
were various industries are
highlighted and you know arts
a statute that we passed in
nineteen eighty six and for some
of the newer members it's a
really interesting statute the
art and public places it
earmarks one percent of
only in the capital but in all
of our counties there is art
that's been purchased using our
capital outlay money and what
for say to kind of put that into
think we've actually met but I
certainly appreciate all you
have done and could not think of
a better recognition to have on
the senate floor so thank you to
this forward you know I had no
idea where this are collection
came from and and i've never met
you but wow what a legacy
whenever anybody visits me here
work in a museum I mean it's
true there's really is true and
and I just wow I just think it's
really special and
thank you mister president shall
the previous question be now put
no mister president it's a
little joke from this morning I
would never try to stifle debate
on something as important as
will displayed all over the
state uh things that are our
house that the interest in
museum or the the other museum
within roswell and you know
being a country boy I didn't
really even understand what art
was until coming to this
building and and taking the time
to educate myself on the issue
really center ourselves and
realize that sometimes it's not
about getting their mister
presidents about getting there
thank you.
Any further.
The honor that the glen brings
this building is just one of the
many accomplishments that you
read mister president a
certificate and and I think it's
cornered the market on arts and
my colleagues in a pearl point
out and i've been to the
exceptional collections in rose
will just extraordinary there in
his work hard that I think it's
important in the gallery mister
president to also recognize our
former president of the senate
mary k paper and I believe it's
still up there she was earlier
and her family
godfather confirmed me and the
paper family their contribution
established one of the highest
honors in the arts and don't you
in the county though the paper
family award and again I think
the arts in them in las cruces
apart from all these things
their gallery was always the
place where you could look to
historic art they had one of the
most impressive retable
founders of the forum in los
cruises the forum is an
organization I think mister
mister president i'm imagine
you've been to the forum or
spoken the forum before I know
the governor comes routinely to
we're find of noting that out of
the group of fifty or sixty
business owners and executi.
And and a lot of the movers and
shakers monsters him and I about
the one of two only democrats in
community and the business
leaders and laws could have
glence part of that as well to
miss president just to such a
diverse individual who brings it
all together arts business and
leadership and so mister
applause for glen cutter in all
of his contributions.
UNM day and senator more as I
think is gonna handle that along
with center doing center more.
Cinema thank you mister
president if I could have the
here by extend its recognition
and acknowledge a bit to
declaring january twenty ninth
twenty twenty four u and m day
in the senate whereas the
university of new mexico was
thousand students and employee
tens of thousands of new mexico
residents including employees of
the university of new mexico
hospital and whereas in twenty
approximately two thousand nine
hundred bachelor's degrees one
thousand master's degrees and
one hundred one jurous
doctorates ninety one medical
forty seven million dollars in
scholarships and whereas there
are more than two hundred
thousand active alumni with
lowballs in every state
including one hundred twenty
nationally recognized faculty
cutting edge research
professional and academic
development and student support
and whereas the university of
new mexico's graduate
students and whereas the
university of new mexico health
science a center is the state's
largest integrated health care
treatment research.
And education organization with
national cancer institute
designated comprehensive cancer
center
and whereas the university of
new mexico hospital is the only
education where fact of the
members engage in investigation
and scholarship that create new
knowledge which brings a stained
wealth to the new mexico's
a contrast of cultures and
whereas the university of new
mexico is the university for new
mexico now therefore be it
the capital in the city of south
africa senator katy and duhag
senator mark moores mimi stewart
merrill expected remarriel her
meal expected cheer for my
fellow letterman winner over
there so i'll turn it over to
them after i'm done here before
I get started my introductions
the lobos are ranked nineteenth
in the resent
so we're extremely extremely
proud all of us lowballs and
letter winners are really
expired what they're doing this
year first I could introduce I
maintained a fact the
appointment in nuclear
engineering in a senior
learnership roll doctor told
hallway leads all of you and m
central campus education
research students success and
and excellence within UNM
education and research
environments towards a call of
making a positive impact on
individuals and communities
across our state dockway holzy
administration trees are
currently services university
new mexico executive I
presidents where she is
responsible for units that
provide financial administrative
and operational support
and institutional supports are
she works closely with senior
leadership including president
provos executive vice president
of the uh the health service
science center regions in united
don't you know yeah so I I got
both my masters are in undergrad
I forgot jennifer milad is
selected head the union calls of
arts and science in august um
doctor milat is a national
foster interpret investory
approach is to include education
and protect community engagement
doctor leadership role in
compass a large economic union
of u and m or should direct
university of minnesota where my
father was once a professor
in minneapolis and her graduate
student studies she received a
phd from university of michigan
national champions by the way
president for athletic affairs
at a newness will be talking to
you about some capital outlay
and before we do one round of
applause I know we have a lot of
a s u n students up there
correct I bet did they leave
more so center more do have
other members who would like to
speak to this before we could
yeah I I will be sending you the
list that you did have those
those individuals are in the
and so thank you thank you
center morning but we do have a
guest from you and i'm right
here that know that where the
opportunity person will get to
that list when you do your
closing
certificate by I am proud of
lumis of u n school of law and I
know how critical UNM is not
only to albuquerque to our
center how to meal mister
president i'm a proud of
loveness of the university of
new mexico and a u n letterman
as a former coed cheerleader I
chaired on the low votes from
that in celebration of u and m d
in the round house they brought
my megaphone on to the senate
floor and my senior cheer
picture is being displayed on
ninety seven the school colors
were changed from black and gold
to cherry and silver the silver
mister president came from when
students and faculty took
sunset when the university began
playing football in eighteen
ninety two the team was simply
referred to as the university
boys or varsities to distinguish
suggesting that the university
teams be given the masket name
of a lowball he suggested
lowball the spanish word for
work as the nickname the name
was enthusiastically received
is the leader of the pack in the
ideal name where the variously
boys was received that the lobo
would then become the official
mascat
that education would be the key
to my success and that
definitely is the truth and just
quickly in the nineteen twenties
the life for off was brought
down as the mass got in the
don't know if at this time you
want me to introduce my guests
who are in the gallery thank you
center had a mail center I mean
I i'm not sure if there's other
members who would like to speak
to this and then we'll go back
and introduce yes thank you
mister president see no other
members we do have center
and that has been in place now
for quite a few years and
there's no imagination to you
know what this program has done
though specially came in at a
fifty individual cell without a
job without a placement and unm
was right there you know with a
different glasses retalian and
the nose much as I can in any
meeting that I attend that that
is our golden apple to the
community because so it has
Unm also holds some intelligent
hardwood museum which is some
going to be celebrating their
one hundredth anniversary which
is a big plus to the community
deep roots to the entire area
and that it's given so many of
our individuals that are it just
gives growing and growing then
the faculty and the individual
says some are early childhood
program has just really
developed there and what a
perfect opportunity since we
with this I just applied here
don't they entire part you know
for unm b
in our part of her our area
thank you mister president thank
pleased last night to attend a
basketball game and if you watch
it on t v or if you were there
you saw an exciting game and you
saw
crowd was energetic and frankly
it did take me back forty some
years to to when I was a
freshman with michael coober and
The ranking love will continue
to go go toward the
very good seating in the
tournament will will do well but
albuquerque yet effects the
entire state and certainly we
are all proud of the work that
they do the research they do in
just driving around the campus
yesterday
different campus today than it
was when when I was there and I
thought it was big when I was
hit or so it's really grown so
with that I appreciate you all
bring in the
center bucker
thank you mister president I too
stand in and rise and thankful
for you and m and what they've
for me at the time I had young
children
and I didn't want up with them
from their school here so to
have that opportunity to attend
law school in state and it is
a graduate anderson school of
business and
additionally that we just we
just have constructive way
within my district the work
And additionally we have you an
invalency account is down
offline through the on the east
side of the river that helps our
youth and valencia county have
anyway I appreciate the memorial
being brought forward and are
more center doing and thank you
u and m.
part of my life and where i'm
out today when I initially
enlisted in the air force and
got out that's what brought me
toward kirky to go to UNM and
alfa file for fraternity
incorporated at u and m I was a
work study at african american
student services so it has been
still became part of my life
you'd when I was in the air
force and had any injury had to
get my account surgery done a
mba graduated in maine got
another degree so
i'm i'm a double lobo
but I just really love this
thank you mister president and I
also would like to support the
memorial and while we're
reminiscing no I I wasn't a
student there I didn't even know
ways I was on the fact of the
for six years
I got ten year and then went
over to the dark side.
I guess loveless
Incredible faculty at that time
and and I hope we're able to
continue to have that tradition
right on up through the day
today in the future it it the
and residents are here the
bargain is stay here seventy
maybe eighty percent and so I
hope that is we look at the
health science center is just a
dual in the crown and I can't
say enough about it and uh in
the courage to
go on in this really difficult
and on but anyway uh I I can a
group I administrative legs
there as well as my medical and
I am so much and I hope that
also want to rise in support of
the university of new mexico asa
law school graduate of the class
of nineteen ninety
into practicing law in this
state who you knew were in
classes close to you currently
five of the nine members on the
senate judiciary committee went
years ago so it's a very smart
community but just an
extraordinary education that
really prepared me and all those
stand up and support UNM.
Set unm so happy right now with
what's going on with their
bus university and will college
and promptly start taking
classes at you and I have forty
five hours I think that's half a
degree or something uh you are
diagnostic training for students
in the in the public schools I
took spanish uh two years of
the law of school that sophen to
our stick it's the school itself
uh so much has offered and so
many of our students who then go
last name but I can't think of
it right now um and he has
pledged to work with us on
structured literacy so that we
that he's committed to that and
we're all still working on it so
uh goloboats everybody said
about worth what work thank you
center stewart we have senator
proteman hertel dressed today
which is appropriate for
lowboat.
It's what
turkoise turkoise which
remorse with his with his boots
and and then you know it is
jacket
I I
enough
jacket and but it's you know it
it it really is
a u m
I know that I know that enemies
and and and when I but but the
fact that the matter is is that
is that you and i'm really is
someplace that
has been so instrumental and so
many people's lives I know that
and you know and so and sold
that so the so the campus is
always been a very special place
poptro which is one of the
premier cultural centers in the
southwest
and are and which frankly
doesn't get enough look love but
but it is because the pubjoid
other cultural festivities and
and and events that that are
able to take place and that is
truly.
A regional
university of new mexico
is is so instrumental in so many
different ways in people's lives
throughout this entire region so
this certificate unhm has been
very very good to me and my
family I got my undergraduate
degree at UNM which prepared me
so with that means is retired
law professor and i'm happy to
be a retired law professor unm
does amazing things it truly is
a crown in our state and it it
certificate thank you mister
president center city office
for a second time center
second time is print I might
have had you mixed up on the
second time if it is permitted
in a different than in rules
committee but i'm just happy to
stand in support of of the
certificate you know being a
really enjoying time with with
fellow class mates learning
about stamin in really just
enjoying our time as youth and
and spending
fan of of the lowball football
team in and enjoying that mister
president but really I just want
to think you know just this body
allowing us to freely discuss
appreciation of u and m and
speak freely about this topic
thank you mister president.
We do have for a second time we
have sender how to me I believe
recognised as you know president
christopher pacheko angel back
gabrielle greedy elena martinez
and jademan does that and also
chapadel deneally the rosco who
learned on hill joshua hickman
with all four but see ali and a
hundred minutes a and I also
have general tailor in the
gallery who was a member of the
They said we are closing things
bit bar in prayer impressive
resume dog if you could also
rise also tracy we all remember
tracy from which is our
we got a lot of lowballs
look at that picture sophomore
year sophomore your office
attack or yeah it was scratched
into that year that was out that
and love you in them obviously
blood sweater tiered for that
university I got my undergrad
their police political science
and communication got a masses
and business administration
student in high school and was a
high school american so I was
gonna go to uva but the UNM gave
me a shot and I was crowdly
appreciated at all i'll continue
fight for this university
university and you can see my
boots here we had a customary
this year got the old global
head on the back the stitching
actually says UNM has my
football number even has their
recognize and oh I almost forgot
this president you've almost.
My from the very last time the
fight song they can send more as
I was going to ask him to
consent to remind you about and
marching down the field ago
for the go fire now we play a
jar fairy today never show.
area business announcement
similarly saying that we have
another certificate but I
believe there was two
announcements that need to be
made center city a lot because
and then center button center
unem intern with uh with me have
field is here and I wanted to uh
and she will be here for the
whole week she is in the
political side science
department she is getting her
bachelors and her and and she's
toward our departmental honors
she works on a focus and this is
really important I think on
water management for indigenous
communities and then her masters
climate lobby and so she's been
involved in in various meetings
and then the other special thing
is that she is going to have her
next semester her internship
this is nothing like being on
the senate staff but it'll be
fun so without would you join me
in the and welcoming yellow
one of our most special treasure
days the world's largest mark
answer new mexico and it's right
right in my home town we compete
this this advantage draws more
than twenty thousand people in
last year are those twenty those
twenty thousand people pay a
gate to get in and uh the
history and I have to give a
produce one thousand dollars
scholarships for a hundred and
twenty kids last year helping
them go to to the school of
their choice in many of them do
choose unam and so i'm proud to
grand champion of the world's
largest mother
also want to give a shout out to
senator sanchez who his team as
you know where we're neighbors
from all areas around the state
all the all the corners that are
here it was amazing how many
people make that trip down there
to go celebrate with us and and
celebrate the the scholarships
you mister president thank you
center bucket.
Seno further announcements we're
going to stay and announce this
mislaying this one you'll decent
of the worst for the next
certificate thank you mister
president just before we go to
that certificate i'm delighted
about the UNM reception because
of reception tonight is for the
medical school at thomas test
the alumni reception is next
to present a certificate
acknowledging declaring january
twenty ninth twenty twenty
twenty four s zober day in the
senate and I would ask the
reader to read.
ninth twenty twenty four as
those over a day in the senate
horazo zobra also known as old
man gructure or old man gloom
burning of zizobra has been
carried out each year since even
during times of war and pandemic
as a one of a kind ritual for
release in the gloom was an
the historic tradition of the
burning of zozobra each year and
whereas in nineteen sixty four
will shooster entrusted the
to produce the burning of his as
over and purposeuity as a
festive only a new mexico
tradition and where as in the
decade since the conference club
improvement projects and whereas
for one hundred years the zober
has inspired new mexico
creatives to make their own
musicians dancers and performers
in all john ruz to display their
talents in front of a global
audience of hundreds of
thousands of viewers in person.
burdening of zizobra has become
recognized world light as a
singular representation of the
rich art history and the culture
new mexicans and visitors from
around the world to experience
the unique cultural magic and
wonder of the state of mexico in
be declared zober day in the
senate signed and sealed that
the capital in the city of santa
fe senator peter worth senator
Thank you mister president just
before a year old the senator
composed for a far up
there's some super interesting
history kind of the as how this
is one of the places you came to
dry out quote on quote
from the longs and my
grandfather also came to santa
show it up and
the the single pintores are in a
lot of our our history of arts
started as a result of folks
the inspiration of his overall
but it has been just an
extraordinary history that gets
bigger and bigger and we've got
a bunch of folks i'm going to
recognize who have made that
say a few words thank you send
to where center companies.
The.
The.
doing this a little bit
different uh.
Is it all you can do
one more time.
Members of the senate burn your
worries away with senator peter
wearth.
Thank you
do you have other members who
would like to speak to this
similar more big respress i'd
like to propose that amendment
to the certificate that we put
all the bills that we pass this
minnesota we spent that year in
est renewal while he was riding
his book education the death
which is still used today across
the addition believe in it but
and this is as over as one of my
remembers and I really
understand what's going on I
still don't understand it but it
really is a new mexico tradition
that is obviously loved by many
of us from with northern mexico
something that is really really
cool if you've never gone go to
this is over
don't take your five year old
children thank you mister
president I think it is an or
more center I just.
Mister president as they're
worth my understanding about
zover is this is where you you
burn away the the gloom is that
it.
Ten are worth mister president
it now my understanding it that
we're gonna do at the last day
of the session and all the bills
that didn't pass we're gonna put
them all in the middle of the
day as appear we're going to
mister president I think you
heard an option from senator
morris you've presented a second
option I might suggest we all
come back at noon on the
twentieth day after the bills go
thank you very much miss
president thank you center worth
thank you senator servantes was
under list at once the senate is
serving this in the chamber any
other members which in to speak.
senator compos again for making
it all feel very real on the
floor of the new mexico states
and if we appreciate that a
bunch
again it is a hundredth
anniversary and
it's better and better every
year and has become more and
more of a just a huge event not
only for as it was mentioned not
only for santa fe but really
northern in mexico and the whole
ray sand of all who is the obera
event chair we have our mayor
from the city of santa fe alan
webber city counselor male
santa fe ned harris president of
the connectors cut club of santa
fe can garley executive director
of southwest kuwan as district
judith moore is as over event
creator jake up romero gave
silver and jody maginnis porter
who were all here have all
worked hard on zis overall and
we appreciate them a ton so
let's give them all a big
don't think it's
a mister president I do have a
whole stack of certificates and
ray if you want to come down and
grab this stack of certificates
you can take them with you and
The.
Thank you once again to all of
our yesterday yield to senate
peter words to take us that next
daughter thank you mister
president what we're still on
on wheels and senator tallman so
everyone's welcome to go out and
get a salad
so just for today the plan is to
that mister president unanimous
consent we go that or business.
Message from the governor where
the honor ball me mister
president protemporary president
pro temporary store and members
of the senate pursuant to
article for section five b two
authorizing the department
environment to use the money
from certain fees to pay the
cost of other operational
expenses changing the basis of
certain fees from a dollar
repealing conflict conflicting
laws respectfully yours michelle
who hungership governor general
show the message from the
governor has been received
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
scholarship
changing certain requirements
for eldability for the
legislative lottery tuition
scholarship providing an
exception to the minimum credit
our gap end allowing credit for
summer semesters in each
scholarship respectfully yours.
president protemporary president
pro temporary stewart and
members of the senate pursuant
to article for section five be
two of the mexican constitution
that the ceiling of records does
not apply to crimes related to
firearms for purposes of the
national instant criminal
background check respectful
yours michelle to hungers from
stored president protemporary
president pro temporary store
and members of the senate
pursuant to article for section
five b two other new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
bond act in the county
industrial revenue bond act to
include certain electric energy
storage facilities as eligible
projects requiring the provision
stacks deduction for sales of
energy storage equipment to a
government for the purpose of
installing an energy storage
The reader tried
senator executive message number
fifty four the honourable memi
stewart president protemporary
president pro temporary stewart
session submission of senate
bill two oh four a bill
prohibiting the unlawful
carrying of a firearm in a part
or playground and providing a
business are thank you mister
president in amazing that we go
that are business committee
reports around that order
business objection committee
reports the reader to read.
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
benny senator benny schendo
junior chair.
we have a motion to do the
community board all those in
favor of signal by my sand I
was opposing the eyes have at
the committee report has been
adopted the reader treat mister
president your rules committee
to whom has been referred senate
committee respectively submitted
senator katie do hig chair
center how to mail I move
adoption of the committee report
we do have several from that
committee I ask you daniel is
consent of the senate that the
senate bill one o eight
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the finance
committee senate bill one thirty
seven recommendation that it do
Senators we have a motion to do
reports all those in favor
signified by saying I thought
supposedly the eyes have at the
whom has been referred senate
bill seventeen has had it under
consideration and find the same
to be germane pursuant to senate
executive message number three
Seventy one
thank you mister president I ask
it you have sent that they read
to be allowed to read all the
committee reports that we that
See no objection the reader to
read
senate bill sixty six and find
seemed to be demand and that's
referred to the judiciary
committee
finds seem to be domain and
that's referred to the
conservation committee
senate bill to fifteen fine
seemed to be domain and that's
The senate bill to twenty three
finds seemed to be domain and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee
senate bill to twenty four finds
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
sent a bill to twenty six fine
seemed to be german and that's
senator to twenty eight fine
seemed to be demanded that's
referred to the conservation
committee
sent about two thirty two fines
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted me me
stewart chair center stewart I
missed president move adoption
of the committee report as we
that they were acted upon with
one motion
the reader to read
this president your rules
committee has approved the
following certificate of
documents to express the
recognition of the senate
respectfully submitted katie and
do high chair.
Mister president I ask you not
to as consent of the senate that
the reader be allowed to read
all the committee reports and
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the general
certificate number fifteen
certificate number sixteen
certificate number seventeen
certificate number eighteen
certificate number twenty two
respectfully submitted katie and
do hick chair center and move
adoption of the committee
all those favorite significance
and I
will suppose need
the as have it communicate has
been adopted and the journal
show that they were acted upon
individually
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect that we were
that they were acted upon
individually there are no
objection to reader to read
recommendation that it do pass
and that's referred to the
judiciary committee
senate bill one thirteen
recommendation that I do pass
submitted senator gerald or
disepino chair
you know mister president I move
the adoption of the committee
report ever motion to doubt
community part all those in
individually the reader to read
this president jur- health and
public affairs committee to whom
has been referred senator bill
eighty seven has had it under
consideration and reports same
bill eighty seven do pass and
then's referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator gerald or the zipino
chair disappear I move the
adoption of the committee report
the reader to read
mister president your education
committee to whom has been
referred senate bill one ninety
three has had it under
consideration and reports the
report same with the
Center source mister president I
ask unanimous consent at the
senate that the reader be
allowed to read both of the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect they were
and then refer to the judiciary
committee respectfully submitted
senator william pesole's chair
I move adoption of the committee
report we have since it out the
current report all those in
this president your judiciary
committee to whom has been
referred sent a bill one seventy
five has had it under
consideration and reports the
same with the recommendation
survanters chair.
Miss president.
Senators around this
mispresident as unanimous
consent of the senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
community reports that we act on
them with one motion but the
resolution one the same with the
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and then's referred
to the finance committee.
bill five do pass respectfully
submitted joseph survant is
chair senator montes and we
would up to those community
reports we have a motion to dot
com report all those in favor
senator pete or thank you mister
president in amazon sent me that
our business introduction of
legislation or in that order
business introduction
legislation the reader to read.
department to expand existing
efforts to retain students and
improve graduation rates and all
public institutions of higher
senate bill two thirty five.
Reader to read the sim
citizen.
Senate bill two thirty seven
introduced by senators nibert
and certain vantage
five making conforming
amendments to other sections of
the nmsa nineteen seventy eight
senate bill two thirty seven
available to thirty seven
introduced by senator hambling
and act relating to the
metropolitan redevelopment code
and many procedures for
determining gross receipts tax
one twelve senate bill two
thirty six and about two thirty
six having been read twice by
title is ordered printed
referred to the senate
committee's committee then sent
a tax business transportation
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
health and public first
committee then senate tax
business tragedy committee
instead of bill two thirty six.
bond act providing powers and
duties providing processes and
procedures for the issues of tax
example in the bonds and
refunding bar bonds for capital
the issue bonds are requested in
mexico finance authority to is
to the bonds making an
appropriation senate bill to
thirty eight senate bill two
thirty eight haven't been read
two thirty eight senate bill two
thirty nine
introduced by senators munos and
hemphill and act relayed to
higher education scholarships
scholarship providing an
exception to the minimum minimum
credit our eligibility
requirement in the opportunity
scholarship act exempting dual
credit classes from counting
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the senate committees committee
then send an education committee
then senate by announced
committee that senate bill two
thirty nine
youth and family's department
for trauma informed training for
all staff and foster families
send it bill to forty seven bill
two forty haven't been read
twice by title is order printed.
introduced by senator had a meal
and act relating to criminal
history records checks and
acting a new section of the
agent and long term services
conducting criminal history
records checks ensuring the
confidentiality of the criminal
history of records providing
penalties declaring an emergency
thence senator district
committee that senate bill two
forty one senate bill to forty
two introduced by senator korea
him bill and act related to
providing definitions requiring
reports senate bill to forty two
senate bill two forty two
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered print and referred to
the senate committees committee
pill and act related to taxation
creating the help hotel
renovation income tax credit and
the hotel renovation corporate
attacks business transportation
committee then senate finance
that senate bill two forty three
send a bill to forty four
introduced by senator gonzalez
and act making an appropriation
four senate bill two forty four
having been read twice by title
is order printed referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate health public affairs
committee thence santa finance
interim public works committee
providing powers and duties
requiring the public works
committee to here proposals for
title is ordered printed
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
rules committee then senate
finance committee that senate
bill two forty five
mexico by adding a new section
twenty five to establish rights
of children to include health
care nutrition safe housing
youth membership programs and
attainment of skills for quality
employment and to require
establishment and administration
referred to the senate rules
committee then send it to the
sheriff committee that senate
joint resolution seventeen
san majority florida to peter
words takes that next order
business and thank you mister
you mister president so now's
the time for committee chairs to
make announcements uh I do know
that the senator pops not here
so I will announce now the
I should like folks know I think
the plan is to be on the floor
on saturday but not sunday of
this week and then the following
week will probably be both days
this saturday without a deal to
other members to make any
announcements that get senators
worth they believe in superbowl
is not next week but the
following week
democrats are caucusing well so
with two three people and start
through the agenda so we can get
all the work of the senate done
really quickly with senator miss
president what's that worth
get things done while you guys
are coxing about how long should
we prepare for mister president
I put you to work for about an
hour thank you miss where we'll
get was get through those
agendas quickly much present for
collection i'd like to return
the artwork please center more
at principle
i'd like to appreciate that
jennifer would appreciate that
very much we've also missed
night incredible come back by
the forty niners you all know my
team seventeen points down at
the half come back and raised
the deficit and then go up ten
points and incredible game and
so i'm very excited mister
notice my voice getting a little
deeper in me feeling a little
more elvis as we start getting
closer to the super this present
because I said we want them
forty niners to do very well
democrats are done with their
caucus
we chairman has left the
building
thank you services we do have
center handling followed by a
senator brant than center period
trust see it's enter
thank you mister president
friends in the senate er my
colleagues i'd like to introduce
some of my colleagues that I get
to have the wonderful honor and
kids can young entrepreneurship
program I was a young
entrepreneur at the age of seven
cutting out little shapes out of
leopard print fabric and selling
sold garden signs at the farmers
market and so I love this
program and I get to with my
colleague to be more get to
highlight these young
entrepreneurs that are ages six
are these and I said they can be
whatever you want senator tom
and I plan on using these
declarations in my plants but
this is from one of the many
youth entrepreneurs that sell on
and economic development I have
the one in only debbie more who
is the ceo and president of the
greater last crucial's chamber
one of my newest sisters and
economic development is beth
unless you want to feel like
you're at mass we also have
robert selby who is an
ambassador and lindsey martin
who is the twenty twenty four
chair of the ambassadors our
friends here from us crucial's
it's always an honor being able
to work alongside you to be able
to help an economic development
senate family if you please
welcome my friends and economic
development on the day as here
to the senate.
comments made about it but I do
want to make a little bit more
comments and apparently I miss
the tax committees committee
report but
you know the tax committee and
our rules are kind of lacking in
the senate the house actually
asks a very strong rules
governing how committees are run
but the senate does not
mind me they have some really
have the few places in mations
that I would like to bring up
one is the ten principles that
govern procedure in decision
making
and number four on that says
book and you look at committee
procedure less for more it says
the rules of procedure in the
committee are the same as the
rules of the body in so far such
the floor without us having a
corn present and that is uh I
think this says that we should
not do that in committee either
however and so far as and I
don't I don't want to drop the
discussion and not handicap the
work of committees it also says
no motion to close or limit
debate are allowed in committee
fixed rework asked the questions
that we have enough we want to
limit debate in committees we
can do all the debate on the
floor
that really not the place to do
you asking questions is not
right chairman
and uh
it's it's it's happening in some
committees
presence of a quarm is required
in order for committee jack
legally and officially a
committee cannot legally
transact business and isn't it
regular to proceed to the
are debating a bill in committee
now.
This may have started many years
ago with me and so it's easy
peanut i'm not sure but you know
gentleman's agreement that if we
started with a core men we are
in the middle of a bill and
someone needed to go present in
another committee we would
continue
thing started but it was an
agreement between our teasing
peneline me and that committee
not the way committees are
operated now if if our rules
and adopt the house we're only
we can bring it off and bring it
over here it's actually really
strong and it says you shall
not.
Have and start a committee
unless there is a corn I think
gavels me down
which he likes to do lately
that is an action so when you
gavel in the committee meaning
the bills committees are for us
to debate the bills we can
debate him here on the floor
but I don't know where the
started but it sure has come
full board this year with every
committee doing it.
And then I really concerns me
when I have committee members
coming to me this morning after
the rules committee
and saying that they were told
the squash debate.
They were told to stop asking
questions
they were told
to quit doing the job that they
some of the committees but i'll
tell you it it wasn't me or the
minority leader who chose the
number to be on each committee
that was done by the majority
The most president I I know the
time and I didn't make any
motion and I and I I messed by
opportunity to move that the
actions just not not just the
invite vote every time the
committee chair made a ruling
bear in that committee that's an
action.
Thank you mister mister
important that we are follow our
rules as center brands pointed
out it's interesting and house
does have a specific rule
sixteen years i've been in the
chamber I do not remember an
issue of a chorum in a committee
being brought up and I think
there's a reason for that is
and move forward III the rules
committee in particular jumps
out at me and I know the senate
finance committee I don't think
it could really function
without.
You know if it always had to
masons about that which again is
not consistent I think with our
custom and our precedent in the
senate and so the key point in
and states they're derived from
several sources and take
precedence in the order listed
below and i'll just read them
the body for a statutory
provisions five is adopted
parliamentary authority and six
is parliamentary law so custom
with you that's how we've done
it and so again I think it's
subject of course to the chair
and the specifics that are in
front of their committee but I
also think that the action that
was taken.
committee I will tell you on the
senate rules committee over the
years we have met with a sub
committee
multiple times to your
confirmations it said or the
and the ranking member in each
of these committee communicates.
And I think that's what super
important but I do think before
we get into a hyper technical
precedent for what's happened
and you're right if we want to
change that and we want to spell
it out definitively the way to
do that as to put a rule in
place in our rules we don't have
folks hearing the presentation
from those folks is something to
chair can I like to move forward
with so again it's a good
discussion and I just think I
forward and certainly if if in
fact you believe we should have
a rule like the house then of
course there's a process to do
that so just some comments about
interpretation of the rule as it
does when it comes to cut you
know with members being able to
speak once so just a couple
comments on response thank you
mister president thank you
senator where center brand new
with senator teasing penalties
that's something your
committee's done before the tax
committee never did it.
And we definitely never started
i've never seen a committee with
an except in the interim
but when you're hearing the
entire bill
now I will I want to say how
much I appreciate the chair of
tax when we did come in saturday
saying no we're gonna allow
debate because that's what
committees are for so I think
the chair for that
because I think that that was
the proper thing to do in that
situation
committee is to hear bills and
debate those bills
now again
ill we can talk about what makes
and
we we are the precedent thing I
I think we have to agree to
in the twelve years that i've
been here so so maybe your
committees did that but that was
not the precedent of the body.
people to vote on that when they
walk in the room.
I mean we've we've had
situations where we've had you
know in the past that we've
dealt with and they haven't
Remember those days mister
president
that was completely against the
rules and completely against
masons and we don't want to get
back to those times trust me
got ever debate and I agree that
we need to have a discussion
back most of the time
but on this one we're going to
change the rules well we don't
have a rule so we're going to
ranking member and the chair and
basically this year we came in
and were told that that's what
was going to happen.
and if it takes us putting a
rule in place I can have led
council start drafting that and
have it sent to rules committee
so that we can make sure it's
very clear but for one of our
you know we can play that game
and give everyone five minutes
but that's going to mean
everyone on both sides
you know I I don't think we want
to do that I don't think that's
putting it in rule but if we
can't then I go have the rule
drafted thank you mister
president thank you center
rental I will be able to send it
to work and so just discussion
we want to at least have a
discussion where not going to be
holding up committees in doing
that so I think that great
points have been made up of just
to mention that during my time
in the senate there were times
Send the worst.
Center part thank you mr
president I will I will see what
happened today and senate rules
any committee chair in my time
here
senator lopez was the chair for
nearly eight years of my time
being here and I don't know that
one time she ever
so hopefully that the democratic
caucus because we spent almost
two hours talking about art and
football today we were in such a
hurry to get out of rules
committee to come talk ardent
football that hopefully they'll
when they're going to be out
thank you mister president
center more
very much present by the way I
ashing amazing sent that you'll
be allowed to speak to the
senate chamber
the the these tradition and that
senator were talked about in
this chamber was respect that as
well we tried to always operate
didn't start in subcommittees
unless they're mostly for
confirmations because we have
people driving from around the
state and it was disrespectful
for their time so we did have a
gentleman general woman ladies
have done in the past on non
carter reversal bills or
confirmation.
I specifically spoke up i'm not
to rank a member by specific
spoke up we need a german
general ladies agreement that it
bills the very first committee
hearing we had the very first
bill up was a controversial bill
appreciate why we're angry
because we weren't respected
you have twice as many votes
here but we have rules here to
allow us to move forward of
We need unanimous consent to do
a lot of things the tradition is
that we give you now it's
consent.
And we always do until recently
just as a little friendly
thousand member people of our
state each.
And what you're not doing is
this is not respecting australia
not respecting our consider what
you're not respecting this
institution you're not
respecting the republic you're
About our chamber here which I
have struggle to do for twelve
years mister president as you
will know I try to work across
but try to keep that in mind we
don't have to do that we could
just melt this place down for a
eighteen days whatever we have
left that doesn't do us any good
that doesn't do us any good
doesn't do the people in the
Just because you have the
numbers does it mean to product
respect us thank you mister
president thank you we do have
other members on announcements
ministerials.
it goes both ways and we get
that and I think actually this
this chamber has a pretty
extraordinary history and not
different place where you know
basically anyone with twenty two
votes have tried to do whatever
they wanted to and I think we
have come a long way and I very
much appreciate you know the way
side know I am certainly
committed to again having that
type of dialogue in respect
because I agree it goes both
ways and when you communicate
things better I think the key
thing is that we've got key work
to do for our state moving
forward and like I said an
opening day I think when we are
held up as an example of a
an example of how it it can work
i'm proud of that and I think
that's something that I want to
continue and am committed to
continuing and so again
communication is key thank you
in a masons as you will all be
grateful for umber uh you know I
would remind the body that
mister president and and this
was brought up right at the
odd years and thirty on even
years and and on the thirty
eight even puts guard rails on
that it says for budget vetoed
items from the previous year and
special messages so it really
the floor is that this body and
or say the other chamber as well
are trying to put sixty day
sessions into thirty day
sessions and it just isn't
supposed to work like that we
there's thirty days it's it's
intentional the public decided
that when they establish this
very building they said it on
that foundation because the idea
been here and extending some of
these committees and and floor
sessions and things like that to
wait in the night and and i'll
say the majority floor leader
will be passing one where in
that sort of condition tired or
maybe not in the best of moods
um what will we be doing here
and what will we be passing if
we start ramming through these
think and will come out with a
decent product at the end rather
than ever making sure everybody
gets a i'll say gold star at the
end of the day by passing a bill
like to give a gold star to send
her buck on his teacher on this
that he brought by the day so
there's a gold star for the day
center back everybody the
do have feedback from the f a
grow everybody in this chamber
is fine the other chambers up to
themselves so everything is good
on your on your grow money the
quickly and we seem some
interesting stuff in there that
they can get funded
for banks
metrons some interesting funding
that's very concerning to us in
love see as we move forward
but members just remember
tomorrow a year capital is due
capital is due to moral because
I was in your office and they
didn't even go for your first
list this morning you're
celebrating the football name a
little too much
more agencies and then we're
going to start to hear some
bills this week uh some budget
bills that money's already in
the budget some stuff we may
have to move around a little bit
I just told him give me a minute
to digest that before he walked
in I know that's his heritage
and he's proud of his heritage
and that's what it is but center
share walks in a kilt
that and while not that early
but dress like that
so I think I got everything I
need to do we're going to go in
at two thirty I think announce
that we're going to try to be
there but you know to to the
six billion to ten billion
dollars budget and there's a lot
of moving parts inside that
budget and it takes a lot of
time in a lot of staff and a lot
year and in tracking that
budgeting getting this ready as
we come into thirty day but when
there's big changes made in the
thirty day that another chamber
doesn't know about that it's
more time we need more staff on
the on the senate side to handle
that and so we got some great
staff upstairs and things all
Thank you mister president in
members the
senate health and public affairs
committee will meet in room
three eleven
agenda number two will not be
heard today senator schmedies
has requested that
senate bill one forty five the
immigration violation bill
and opportunity to get here they
they just found this revised
agenda this morning and so that
that's not fair to them so we'll
roll it over to wednesday but we
the cyber security acchanges the
state fire retirement changes uh
cute care facilities subsidies
senator woods bill
the DWI don't overtile next
monday okay
so with that if members if you
can be there right away we want
to have a corner immediately so
president I just wanted to maybe
add a little bit more and
clarification about the capital
out there
the sponsorship less not the
introduce them you should be get
about four copies I think is
what it is and we introduce
them.
Next day by state I just council
expect to get us our allocation
capital outlet area that those
were in fact that's the is the
list of sponsored projects you
wanted to sponsor and that was
due by my sunday that just
has center share
say no further announcements
center by the
thank you very much mister
president seeing no other
announcements I will yield
momentarily to sen
am thank you
now now there's a vanix thank
you mister president the senate
conservation committee will meet
at nine am tomorrow morning in
the judiciary can be thirty
minutes after caucus and we're
going to devote most the day to
marijuana
and so I knew that I would
probably get the interest of
many of you all here so if
you're interested in the subject
pages of amendments and
modifications how many now sixty
five oh members of modern cash
settled I assure you there will
be a lively a debate in
discussion and i'll just let all
thank you centers are not this
peak the interest of center
share and he doesn't want to
speak center share.
Thank you mister president you
know we've had a lot of talk
about canabas and hell much
six hundred thousand dollars in
gross receipts tax every weekend
six hundred thousand dollars
every weekend in canada sales
that sounds really good
hour from oil and get six
hundred thousand dollars a week
and uh for uhm happy gummies
just keep that in mind when
we're talking about what to
to remind everyone that the oil
in the gas in the ground belongs
to the people of the state of
new mexico it does not belong to
industry and this is just
strike a balance in protect into
protect our natural resources in
our state we are stewards of the
land and we are stewards of the
resources.
I'll go ahead and begin my
reading.
the state consistent with the
use in development of this
resources for the maximum
benefit of the people has added
november second nineteen seventy
one thank you mister president
announcement positive center
probably did have your hand up
and they and mr no problem
mister president just reminder
the democratic carcass will be
meeting in the lounge
immediately after the four
if this was discussion going on
about about oine gas only gash
you know there's federal
language state language loan
holders private language
entered variety of uh of
and natural resources since it
was founded we've lost out on
call the revenues we received
from call we've lost out on
driving the economy version
right now is on a gash.
And when we look at what how do
we replace that there's not a
where you replace which senator
share was talking about.
It cursed in an hour when this
other.
I think it's important as we go
forward and as you you go
forward because i'm not going to
get that opportunity you talk to
you much more
to the table how to help them
help you because all of this
benefit did you receive today.
Is coming from there
I mean we can we can talk about
So much in this room is still
here surely because oil in gas
allows you to happen the
have and we have about this it's
too important to sit here in the
flippet about some of their
to make it different i'm on
apply game was sit back in my in
my loans chair in alama gordon
and applied to fact that you
guys found that out and that I
don't whether you would or not I
serious discussions and we have
and there's the build it caused
some of these discussion in
and in two years that's never
been looked at by any of our
committees that are related to
the judiciary
I think we miss that opportunity
mister president members of the
body I hope that when it gets to
fine answered and opportunity
excuse me an opportunity for
that committee to look at that
working with the all the rest of
this.
Session thank you thank you and
that order business still
announcements misleading a
central country
mister president thank you very
much this is an extremely
to sacrifice about fifty three
percent of her capital outlay
the caucasia said they would
absolutely take that so thank
you very much.
you know there's senator lopers
and senator I mean senator
rodriguez senator monus both
per member and I see maybe we're
going to get that announcement
and I appreciate that and yeah
the poor people going to survive
and stay in mexico and we cut
our budget behalf
as much money as we put to them
it's going to be a we're going
raft again so just a thought on
that subject thank you much
president I said it was for a
second time we have center thank
you mister president now
come forward you know basically
the new green deal well this
sounds like we already have that
in our constitution so I don't
know why we keep bringing that
so i'm glad that's already
covered in our constitutional
up as the cleanest air in
america
the cleanest air in america
and yet it has call and natural
clean unfortunately we should
one of them down
but I I think that the the
comments by center words about
the budget may be next year i'll
our schools funding look like if
we had no oil and gas money
how in the world will we pay our
teachers while we're paying our
teachers if we got rid of the
long gas industry so I think
that you can have both thank
you.
There's senator gaggles for the
first time mister president
thank you I want to get in on
this discussion I like the idea
of the clean air act and
what new mexico could have done
for the climate change across
the world this governor did not
sign it cause you want to keep
we want to hoard them in new
mexico is one one thousand just
around in air of the climate
issue in the world thank you
mister president.
outlet thank you senator woods
the amount for each legislator
would be four million one
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars just like it was last
Center but there are thanks very
much mister president with that
you names consent to send a
santa recess until the eleven a
m tomorrow morning no objection
I think there was a longest
announcement specillations we've
had
