sense of what the weak will look
like
so mister president a couple of
events and want the members to
know about tonight the governors
also is a reception at lefond at
five thirty nine mexico farm and
live stock bureau their
legislative reception by
invitation tomorrow morning at
seven am as the new mexico farm
centers where in that order of
business announcements the
mislenious center store
thank mister president I just
want I remind the committee
committee members that were
Center value thank you very much
sure mister president I just
wanted to rise and ask the
chamber to
many years also worked in the
senate president protemps office
when senator richard romero was
the president protem and has
worked on you know multiple
and I just want to ask the body
to please help me to have a
moment of silence for my friend
michael adam chovers he was
fifty years old a remarkable
human being and my buddies and I
are going to miss him his wife
who many of you probably know
works for a speaker have yet
martinez her name is clear dudly
chavez and we lost him last
me for a moment silence.
Thank you mister president thank
the whip senator mary jane
garcia here and i'm sure the
appropriate time will address
that perhaps with some more
detail but I I do want my
members to know from her from
understanding from the majority
leader is that we are not
scheduled to meet in the senate
on friday and so the judiciary
committee will not meet on
friday but because we want to
get it jump start on all the
surrounded as we share what room
number that committee will be in
it will be in our usual a
meaning room mr chairman and
there is mister president sorry
and and there is already an
agenda out absolutely make sure
heard the attorney general of
new mexico suggests that he
could not prosecute what we're
ultimately what i'm going to
call fake electors in other
words those that were sent to
washington dc at the last
college vote in new mexico and
what was done to try and avoid
that electronic college result
will do that on wednesday should
be interesting and will hear
from the attorney general on
See no further announcements
seminar and thank you mister
president just a reminder to our
committee chairs what will try
and do is kind of go through the
so with that mister president
you know that we go that our
business messages from the
governor or on that order
business messages from the
governor the reader to read.
The.
The honorable
the honourable mimi stored
president protem dear president
in accordance with article for
section forty two of the mexican
constitution I hear by submit to
the senate rules committee the
following nomination for
confirmation and concluding on
december thirty first twenty
twenty four respectfully
submitted michelle to hungrishm
governor.
are business committee reports
where in that order business
committee reports
the reader to read
mister president your committees
Conservation be meeting on
tuesday and thursday from nine
am at nine am in room three
members senators said about this
hambling but cut in the bill
pope and soles education
committee meeting monday
wednesday and friday at eight
senator nevil members senators
brand giagos hickey my estimates
and pinto.
Finance committee you be meeting
monday through friday at one
senator branley berked compos
consilers and pilled by the
steinborn and woods
health and public affairs
vice chair senator talman
ranking members senator
schmedies members senators
hickey my establishment cut in
mechanic neibert and said the
it'll be chared by senator pinto
vice chair senator o'neil
ranking member senator sanchez
chair is center survived as vice
chair center doing a ranking
member senator perto members
senators bucker iv so though
due hig vice chair center
automate ranking members senator
neighbor members senators back
at two o'clock p m in room three
twenty one chair is senator
schendo vice chair senator
hambling ranking member is
senator stewart vice chair
senator worth and members
senators back up brand servant
is do here campill bunyos by the
centers there's a most should
not community report all those
in favor sign up by my saying I
there was a person a the eyes
so we're going to work our way
through the prefiles and the
plan is to do
items for one through forty
there are some gaps and there's
introduction to legislation the
reader to read
senate bill one introduced by
senator worth in representative
chat field for the water and
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate constitutional committee
introduced by senator hambling
and act relating to utilities
and acting the low income solar
act required equitable
distribution of benefits on on
promotation of related rules
regulating the tax valuation of
an solar energy systems senate
bill to
senate bill too haven't been
tax business transportation
committee senate bill to
the senate bill three introduced
by senator stewart in
representative chambler.
and medical leave program to pay
an elderly employee a percentage
of the employees wages to allow
the employee to bond with the
child with a new child or to
accepting certain employees
providing for administration of
the program by the work for
solutions department preempting
similar programs creating a
transportation committee then
sent it finance security that
senator built three
senate bill four introduced by
senator griggs
immunity ability pursuant to the
largest tax act amending the
limitations on uses of certain
of the proceeds of the tax
adding to frame the costs for
you quality of life related
quality of life related
facilities combining multiple
sections regarding the use of
the tax proceeds into one
section amending and rebuilding
that's senate tax business
transportation committee and
senator due hig and act related
to canada's regulation changing
definitions providing powers and
duties.
relating to canaba's regulation
changing definitions providing
powers and duties providing
procedures for criminal history
background checks removing the
cam canada activities and
alcoholic beverage sales or
services activities to the
public or members of private
clubs providing for
license conversion from
nonprofit to for profit
corporate status changing
packaging requirements
racatirian act the delinquency
act in the uniform licensing act
include including canabas in a
list of contraband in jails and
enacting sections of the msa
nineteen seventy eight senate
bill six senate blacks haven't
been read twice by title is
just got a question on on that
particular bill
the title was too pages or more
sounds like log rolling even
define loggering for some of the
fewer members not today but
maybe we have some other time
mister president senator worth
mister president there is a
going to pull back senate bill
six I will revisit that the
reader to read
the senate bill five introduced
by senator worth in
representative to spain scheme
election providing exceptions
providing a penalty senate bill
five.
Senate bill five having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
For the mortgage finance
authority act oversight
committee and act making an
appropriation to the new mexico
housing trust fund senate bill
finance committee that senate
bill seven
senate bill eight introduced by
senator tomorrow and act
registration fee for electric
and plug in hybrid elected
vehicles providing that the
additional registration fees be
distributed to the state road
senate tax business
transportation committee then
senate finance committee senate
bill e
the senate bill nine introduced
senate bill nine senate bill
nine haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate
committee's committee then
senate conservation committee
then senate finance committee
send a bill nine.
judicial retirement allowing for
the appropriation of money into
the judicial retirement fund I
adjusting age and service
greater requirements for normal
an appropriation senate bill ten
senate bill to haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate judiciary committee then
The.
And doors by the court's
corrections and justice
committee and act relating to
magistrate retirement front
senate bill eleven senate bill
eleven having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate community
committee events sending
senator severe lopez and act
relating to domestic affairs
renaming the family violence
protection act as the protection
repealing sections of the entire
msa nineteen seventy eight
senate bill twelve senate bill
twelve haven't been read twice
by title is order printed and
senate bill twenty one interest
introduced by senator haramiel
and act relating to firefighters
requiring the department of
finance and administration to
making an appropriation senate
bill twenty one senate bill
twenty one haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
act relating to taxation
creating the mall mall
renovation it come tax tax
credit in the mall renovation
tax business transportation
committee then senate finance
committee center bill twenty two
senate bill twenty three
For an academic review of
behavioral health statutes and
making recommendations for
amendments to behavioral health
affairs committee then send it
finance committee senate bill
twenty three
senate bill twenty four
introduced by senator tomman and
revenue for beneficiaries senate
bill twenty four bill twenty
four have you been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate
The senate bill twenty six
introduced by senators brightly
agriculturals existing lifestock
mexican wolf compensation
program senate bill twenty six
senate bill twenty six haven't
bill twenty five introduced by
senator moores and act red
eighty two taxation including
receipts for fee for service
payments and payments from
individuals to be allowed for a
health care insurer for the
deduction senate bill twenty
five said a bill twenty five
haven't been read twice by title
is order printed a referred to
the senate committees committee
introduced by senator brantley
for the economic and rural
development and policy committee
and act making an appropriation
to the mexican department of
twenty seven ever been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate conservation committee
representative rod montoya for
the economic and rule
development and policy committee
and act relating to taxation
creating the real infrastructure
share information concerning
rail infrastructure income tax
credits and rail infrastructure
corporate income tax credits
senate bill twenty eight senate
committee center bill twenty
eight
senate bill twenty nine
introduced by senator by the up
and act relating to metropolitan
metropolitan court repealing
sections six dash twenty one
dash six point thirteen and
eight chapter ninety one section
two and laws nineteen ninety
eight first s.
nine haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed to
refer to the senate committees
committee that send a judiciary
committee then senate finance
committee sent a bill twenty
said about thirty haven't read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
health and public average
committee then send it to the
committee and act making an
appropriation of the department
of finance and administration to
carry out the purposes of the
affordable housing act senate
finance committee center bill
thirty one
senate bill thirty two
introduced by senators or dc
beno and hampile courier him
homes for housing people
discharge from the new mexico
behavioral health institute at
las vegas or the university of
mesco adults psychiatric center
committees committee then said
in health and public affairs
committee then senate finance
committee that senate bill
thirty two.
Senate bill thirty three
introduced by senator or disea
the next generation fund to
increase the amount of grant
funding that can be used each
year to sport programs that
protect children senate bill
committee senate bill thirty
three senate bill thirty four
introduced by senator or disease
diseapino and act relating to
redistribution of unused
prescription drugs senate bill
thirty four send a bill thirty
four having been read twice by
title is ordered printed
committee that senate bill
thirty four.
The senate bill thirty five
introduced by senator or disease
you know and representative
cates
for the legislative health and
in patient and outpatient
substance abuse treatment
facilities and programs that are
operated or funded by the state
creating the evidence based
printed referred to the senate
committee's committee then
senate health and public affairs
committee that senate finance
committee sent a bill thirty
five set ability thirty six
deductible from gross receipts
to be within the scope of
practice of the practitioner the
fining co payment in the
deduction senate bill thirty six
senate finance committee senate
bill thirty six
center bill thirty seven
introduced by senators
conduct meat inspections to
ensure the safety and quality of
meat for human consumption
creating the office of meat and
paltry inspection provide
Senate bill thirty seven senate
bill thirty seven haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
representative figured out an
act relating to primary
elections allowing voters who
have not designated a major
major political party
participating in a primary buy
requesting the party's ballot
senate rules committee then
senate judiciary committee that
senate bill thirty eight.
Senate bill thirty nine
relating to criminal justice
limiting incarceration for
technical violations of
probation and parole although
committee then send it judiciary
committee senate bill thirty
nine
senate bill forty introduced by
income and franchise tax act
increasing the annual
agriculture caps making the
credit pursuant to the income
senate bill forty haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed referred to the senate
committee's committee events
senate tax visitors
transportation committee then
senate finance committee that
for today that's it for
introduction you know success we
go that our business
announcements misleading around
that order business announcement
is misleaning us senator peter
worth thank you mister president
tomorrow wednesday we're going
to do some confirmations
bunch of bill introductions on
thursday we're going to do a
split session center box.
process of getting the train out
of the station here is to get
all the bills ready and they've
got to get up the committee
they've got to get analyzed so
what we'll do on thursday is
come in again private about
couple of hours probably come
back at two thirty again do some
again additional confirmations
we have sixty five confirmations
that were done in the interim by
chairs that have not introduced
I know senate rules
and I know center moneyos
committee snows a good time
announce committee meetings and
then we can wrap up for today
morning at eight thirty will do
a very short organizational and
probably trying to get started
on any ad bills that might have
been introduced that are already
referred to the committee at
I thought center told me to have
this battery charge as many
bills is the introduced things
now to the room but he must get
some real he's got ten bills
that he introduced out of the
thirty seven center tomorrow
going to have to play it by
years we moved through there
will look and let members know
the one if we will have a
meeting or won't have a mean on
friday we'll figure that out.
and form center steinborn he's
he'll be there.
Senator satanics thank you mr
president members of the chamber
the senate conservation
if not too that we could hear
that morning the first one is
the water trust fund which is
straightforward appropriation
for water projects all over the
state and the second one we just
hick thank you mister president
the senate rules committee will
meet tomorrow at ten am for an
organizational meeting in room
notice the ipad ride on your
desk not in your does not
leaving the chambers this is
just for the chambers thank you
up I think it's important to
acknowledge the incredible
amount of work that goes into
getting the ship off the dark
and our chief clerk and the
where they budget in the three
point four billion dollars
surplus tax package and you're
going to hear a whole time of
bills it's a tremendous lift for
get us to where we are today so
let's give them a hand
now should send to senate
standard reserves until eleven
o'clock tomorrow morning seen no
objection to senate to send a
