The senate will come to order to
the clerk to call the role
senator barca
Center do hick.
Center guy costs.
Santa gonzalez present.
Center hickey here said your id
sort of
center armio
center low best.
Centre minors
centre never
center niber
center pole
centre panto
center roddery guess
center sanchez
center souls center stephanie.
Center steinborn
center stewart center thomas
president thank you I asked that
everyone please rise for the
implication to be that today by
doctor joan or a single
spreadsheet director and author
and the solute in the risk of
leg to be led today by sooner
schedule.
Right good morning everybody i'm
really told it to be back here I
how you legislate and how you
help the people so as I thought
this morning of what kind of
prayer I would like to offer I
one of my very favorite sources
for blessings as I wonderful man
who died several years ago john
o'donner here anybody know the
work of john o'donner here
heard and became off for loss of
her in a power and he speaks
frequently of blessing in fact
every time mine hit a blessing
john o'donner who use blessing
for a later and I can't think of
anything more beautiful and may
may you have the grace and
wisdom to act kindly learning to
distinguish between what is
personal and what is not.
The.
center of things
may act not from arrogance but
out of service.
May those who work for you now
that you see and respect them.
May you learn to call the vote
Made the graciousness with which
you engage be there stairway to
renewal and refinement.
the encouragement of the
appreciate of gaze
the decorum of held dignity
front tears so that you can
evoke the bright fields that lie
beyond the view of the regular I
So many blessings today and
every day in the important and
work you do for the paper thank
you so much.
But.
My nation undergod I mean it is
Once again I would like to
welcome everyone to the senate
today and i'll yield to set a
majority of thirty to peter
where to take us to that order
business thank you mister
president good morning everyone
president and doctor barsinko
thank you for your blessing uh
what a I wrote down john
o'donnell here because I just
thought that was an
of doing this here each
session's difference and I just
think the words of wisdom are
appreciated so thank you so much
for being here and just solve
and spirituality she is a
constituent of mine lives in to
sucky and as the author of
seventeen box including the new
york time best seller's pocket
full of miracles and sore
that is in the senate lounge so
members
in your chance others lunch and
in the lounge provided by
lincoln county we appreciate
that a bunch it is the
that certificate in terms of
advance tonight readosa valley
chamber of commerce lincoln
county day legislative reception
at the drury plaza hotel five
community college will be
serving its annual lunch and.
To the senators in the chambers
from eleven to one thirty and
the blue cross blue shield ban
we parked in the east side of
guests this morning.
Thank you center michael villa
good morning mister president
you know it's consent to allow
cameras in the senate chamber
and the senate gallery.
See no objections cameras are
Here in objection sort.
Thank you center for there we do
have others under this who would
introduced some guests I have
today I have a doctor daniel
duhek who is a addiction
psychiatrist with duke city
recovery to a box a
pathic medicine with the body
please help me add a welcome I
guess
cleveland high school and
achieved academic estimate
excellence like placing when the
top ten percent of her
graduating class she's currently
pursuing a course of study and
computer engineering with the
list three times additionally
she is originally from ghana
moving to several different
states but has decided to stay
here and the great state of new
mexico as a sophomore at UNM
chapter in real rancho
contributing to her leadership
skills and community involvement
jolines commitment texans
extends beyond academics as
evidence by her forthcoming role
commendable third place and the
state competition with the team
of two as opposed to teams of
four to six jelina exemplifies a
welldashrounded and accomplished
stand together around applause
for my gesture line
thank you
today is as my guest is paul
spinosa
paul is it award winning film
maker and he's had many films on
tbs and over the years he's
antonio who say martinez father
martinez most of us know
positive martiness most of a
snow from willia catherine's
novel death comes through the
archbishop and in that novel
so he's he's been in in in in
california for most his
professional life has been in
california but he grew up in all
the kirkey and his one of his
brothers peter has been also
because he was my guest at the
spinal round table dinner last
night and I introduced him to a
number of people as he seeking
support for his film project so
with the members please join me
Thank you mister president
either shadow today she said a
hard time keeping up with me all
master's degree and special
education with the concentration
and gifted education so please
to see students going into
the psychology so these are a
wonderful students for
graduating from highland from
state I am so thrilled they're
ready to go into the educational
system please help me welcome
tallian center.
mister president thank you very
much
the center gay goes usually has
the he is the sponsor for the
kids that come from junction
christian academy and we're
christian academy and if they
will stand up as I call her name
recordery
jackson gwell
looked at all day
kailey rammers.
cargile penny burden and twile
martin uh mister president which
are really really good group of
kids here
in address address to the nines
Thank you center i'm a kitchen
which do you have center holiday
followed by senator birth mister
president i'd like to introduce
the student council members from
in the gallery vice president
the end of secretary and week is
to carry treasure g a good good
dear s representatives maria
martinez who's in the third
michelle martinez who happens to
be their sponsor to follow you
can please rise and help me
welcome the i'll call the
elementaries to the council.
Thank you mister president I I
appreciate the floor leader
mentioning leaking county days
at this
all day today here at the round
tonight after five thirty and
enjoy this it is open to all of
our legislators to come down and
and visit with us the good folks
from linking county I just want
that just before the session
started uh they have worked
through the myer of coming up
with a plan in the ability to
who work in the service industry
round those areas and they are
about ready to pull the pull the
trigger on that one and get that
up and running there's just so
capital corona and in care is
those and certain come up to ado
serious also downs and enjoy the
race track right now you can see
uh uh had one of the premiere
and we're doing so and I know it
was redistributing
I am happy to take over a good
portion of linking county which
was being so well represented by
Thank you senator birth or yield
to center separatics thank you
mister president and thank you
senator bird
for the past eight years I have
everyone knows linking county
has many wonderful things it has
for extent it has the link in
historic side he has smoking the
big fires so
blink and county is someplace
that everyone should go and
visit if you have not been there
but when people here on the
Thank you certain some annex.
The.
Any further announcement
senators.
behavior a health day in the
legislature and that is going to
be read and then after that
senator or neil scott a little
announcement that was trying to
uh certificate for behavioral
health day building connections
in recovery in the senate.
Seen objection if the radio
please read fifty six
four as behavioral health day
building connections in recovery
in the senate whereas many
mexicans cope the effects of
disabling behavioral health
reach their goals and where as
many new mexicans affected by or
advocating on behalf of those
with be able to help conditions
work to a improve the health and
education and training for
individuals families providers
and the public d zic adequate
local state and federal funding
to address behavioral health
behavioral health care in new
mexico and g increase
appropriate employment and
housing opportunities for people
living with behavioral health
senate of the state new mexico
that recognition be extended to
the many people who devote
themselves to public policy
making on behalf of the
in the senate signed and sealed
at the capital in the city of
some affair senator gerald or
disea.
Pino mimi stewart president
remember
the two.
The.
Catastrophic episodes that we've
had that left are still trying
and just about the time we were
starting to recover from that
then we had the covered uh
pandemic which
changed the way behavioral
health services were provided
those who were seeking help with
mental illness addiction or
alcoholism but we need to
encourage more and more of our
young people to get into these
we're struggling with that to
make it possible for people
instead of going into court and
just cycling over and over again
out the door like a revolving
need desperately our physical
facilities
we don't have the work force
we don't have the facilities and
we need changes in the law the
for the neediest among us those
who are addicted those who were
mentally ill those who are
alcoholic and this this
certificate is an opportunity
expenditure number of colleagues
that they need in order to be
really able to treat new
mexicans with these problems so
without all or see if anybody
else is interested in commenting
Senator hickey.
Thank you mister president and
thank you senator or these
penalty.
Theer the way we approach health
doesn't work without the head in
the brain and the connections
and we are just now beginning to
things get disfunction on the
brain we all know we have crazy
thoughts at four in the morning
and sometimes for a lot of
people those go on into the day
certainly have resources were
hopefully going to get a plan
and we have leadership executive
and in the
think we'll will be seeing the
radio increases that I help make
up for the devastation caused
prior to our current governor
things get difficult to for some
people really severe and
major depressive disorders gets
a franeia by polar and so on
professional hand there to reach
out to them is so fundamental
and so I stand in strong
support.
Of this
need to get their get rid of the
stigma and no that we can go get
help when we get help and
there's no stigma attached
that's the day we're looking
The.
I thank you very much mister
president and thank you senator
these are penal for bringing us
to the floor today
those who are providing health
mental health care in our
communities are so valued and to
It is so important sometimes
just having an opportunity to
sit to someone who can listen
someone who is not going to fire
back and
have a comment back to you that
especially for our young people
today and we all know the data
in mexico is high the suicide of
our young people.
that say about society what is
that say about us
life is hard there are a lot of
issues and life mister president
with those who are
and is always were hoping that
there are many more who are
going to this profession it's a
gift to be able to listen to
someone it's always easy for us
to have the gift of gab as we
mister president and I remember
being in that committee hearing
at the old that less health
hospital there and gips and we
were in a committee hearing a
were all shocked and didn't or
what else to do at that point.
Um for essentially what the
prior governor of trying to
administration did to our state
we are rebuilding thank you to
this field and thank you for
those who were there thank you
for those who are studying and
there are others I know who
could possibly share their gift
loppers center smeath.
Thank you very much mister
president and I again echo and
and so thankful for a senator or
to see pino
to echo as human interaction and
not only human interaction but
positive human interaction can I
believe that the the family unit
is the basic building block of
loving meaning for carrying our
capacity and so any any policy
that we can have to equip
parents or anyone that's raising
we also want to include policies
that will take the work load off
of them I would love to work
myself out of work I would like
it if there are no sick people
and then I could move on to do
and uh thought on this from ryan
low spokesperson for the
association of child
psychotherapists
he said the you know the issue
conversation so just one other
one other thought as I continue
to see not only when I walk into
a restaurant in my district and
of this problem it is destroying
our addiction to screens is
destroying.
Our children's formative years
and depriving them of meaningful
this mean yesterday I think it's
appropriate
said when the phone was tied
with a wire humans were free
so let's continue as a state to
only two drugs but but to
screens and and continue III
just cannot echo what my
colleagues have said today is
that we we must value that pause
Senator disappear.
Mister president members of the
senate thank you for all you've
said about this bill and and the
issues that it certificated and
the issue that it brings up I
just want to say that
I would hope that we would be
able to see over the coming
years and increase commitment on
the part of this legislature to
financing adequate behavioral
scattered announcement about a
certain event coming up thank
you so much thank you
majority of the leader and
locked safely so that how
scandals don't comments try to
steal it like they've been known
to do so basically this is so
important that the game is
tomorrow night it's seven
it's gerry or teasy penalty
coming off the bands with that
legendary floater that that he'd
shot like back when I was in the
house and we're still talking
about that and then we need
senator harmeo in in the quality
minutes that he can do and so
just know that this is really
really important and of course
it's a great cause and new
five the thing is we have a lot
of people on injured reserve
injured list like a lot so so
the bench is really really
important and smeeties is
everything he's our secret
quality minutes from our bench
and will be okay so I just
wanted to s- point that out in a
center propers michael jordan's
number but he's he's on the
See no objection so now do you
have a starting five that's been
identified yet yes I do and I
can read their names of if
that's okay
whatever joshua sanchez and of
course are ace peril now he
needs to have the ball as much
as possible alright he might
even have to bring the ball up
does too kind of go at it and
then senator smeaties who just
leap in a way last year as leap
in up and down the demo now we
got hey we've got senator
five thank you senator nail and
from the start in five what do
we have for available players
off the injured reserve list
senator or teasy pino senator
playing time potentially mister
president how much
i'm not sure is that it's a game
time thing it's situational but
at least three minutes
back
that's our that's one of our our
weapons is we have this
immediate defense that just you
know those of you who remember
jerry tarkan in back in the day
and there are maybe defense we
u n will be our coach and we'll
have a lot of player coaches i'm
sure.
Well in the bench but will be
set up and who knows maybe
senator flying sender will be
able to come off the bench
we have a lot of injured people
that have skills so boy and then
of course our gladiator senator
uh you know source but I mean
you know he's not really now
about the injured reserve list
but you have ten strong going
any level strong going in you
know we have more women in the
senate then we've ever had
before their chance that we can
mimi whomever yeah we need
everybody we just want to show
up center low pets disease name
it you know just just it's
really fun you we all very we
you know like so it's a number
saying a big part of it so thank
you center nan I was concerned
exactly what the injured reserve
but you're going in with the
strong lane up a strong back up
you don't need to institute the
man that sorry boy you know as
you know we have a lot of
history with that and it's
always been a negative but but
who knows but also to reassure
everybody where we're making a
doing this uhm i'd like to make
a motion that we have a thai
vote today so that the
lieutenant governor has to break
the tie which means he is then a
breaking boat I believe that I
get a negotiative capital outlay
just like every senior date then
we'd be able to be in business
mister president I suspect
share really appreciate that but
I have been around here for a
long time sending and I knew
that the deadline for turning
capitality dollars where it has
already passed so I know that
that's not an option of a good
trice senator thank you.
again we look forward to the
opportunity to see in everyone
there even if you aren't able to
participate in the game if you
show up I think it sends a
strong message for the reason
for raising money for you and
that are your to senator
honeymoon
thank you mister president now
all of you have an art can only
a desk and I want to talk to you
about something horrible
happening right here new mexico
and throughout our entire
replaced heroin and prescription
drugs as the the most likely
cause of opined overdose right
here in our state seven hundred
eleven opened over doses with
six hundred and eighteen of
more often to avoid withdrawals
that and all over those cannot
happen through casual contact
now nor can work some that all
just like any other operate
mister president method don't
harm reduction program people
who get narcam can save a life
so all of you have now can only
or desk you can also life with
Thank you center had a meal
scene no objection
okay judge is going to stand up
he's opening the package he
takes out the north camp see
somebody get the staying come
out into your communities and
talk about how dangerous fatima
is uhm I hope that you don't
have to use the large candidates
on your desk but keep it with
you because you just might have
to thank you mister president
on this senator hike you would
like to speak
thank you mister president just
a little clinical note the
fatima is getting such.
that out mr president thank you
thank you.
Well we'll wait and that thank
you center brantley.
Okay we have sent a gregs
followed by a senator going on a
senator greens.
municipal day reception by the
municipal league that's to night
between five thirty and eighty
clock at the find a hotel in a
we were might be able to remove
our jackets
as when I request for unanimous
consent that jackets maybe
removed.
Seen objection
mister president so what we're
going to do is either work up on
the table and then we'll go to
third reading we're gonna do
items on third reading one
through four
joint memorial so one through
four
nine eleven ten now i'll be the
order and with that mister
president you name this percent
we go without our business
mister president I am directed
to informed the senate that the
house has passed house bill
ninety one as amended by the
house and request the
concurrence of the senate
respectfully submitted lisa and
o nine and request the
concurrence of the senate
respectfully submitted this I am
marties mccatch and chief clerk.
The journal show that the
message from the house has been
messages from the governor.
See no objection we are in that
order business messages from the
governor of the governor or the
reader will read february
seventh twenty twenty four
members of the senate pursuing
to article for section five b
two of the mexico constitution I
am authorizing for you
consideration during the fifty
six legislature second session
act relating to confidential
information amending a section
of the mental health and
development of disabilities code
relating to confidential
information and providing for
peter worth six and next order
business.
Ah thank you mister president in
amazon we got that our business
committee reports there no
objection we are in that order
senate bill forty five has had
it under consideration reports
same without recommendation as
amended and then referred to the
finance committee respectfully
portion that we bother them with
one motion and the the general
reflected they were
acted upon individually here in
the objection the reader will
read.
Senate bill one seventy six as
amended has had it under same
recommendation that it do pass
committee respectfully submitted
senator bennishando junior
chair.
Center schedule
I moved the doctor of the
their acted upon individually
reader to read mister president
your rules committee to whom has
been referred to senate memorial
eight has had it under
Senator did mister president
asking animals consented at the
senate that the reader be
elatorate all the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
journal reflect their active on
individually.
recommendations certificate
number thirty six
certificate number thirty seven
certificate number thirty eight.
Certificate number forty three
certificate number forty four.
respectfully submitted katie do
a chair thank you saturday
mister president I move the
committee reports and as we have
emotions about the community
reports all those with senator
reader this president your
education committee to whom has
been reformed referred to house
bill one fifty one has had it
under consideration and report
Here an objection we have motion
to doubt curry port all those in
favor signified by
the was a posnay the eyes have
Mr president you're finance
committee to whom has been
referred to senate bill
seventeen has had it under
consideration and report same
with the recommendation that it
I asked me as consider the
senate that the rear be allowed
to read all of the community of
ports we've older than what when
motion and the general reflect
that he are acted off on
individually action the real
read
amended do pass
senate bill two thirty nine do
pass.
The.
Senate bill three hundred do
pass respectfully submitted
community port has been adopted
in the journal reflect they were
acted upon individually
worth thank you mister president
university we go out of business
introduction of legislation here
Senate memorial thirteen
introduced by senator lopez a
memorial requesting that the
legislative finance committee
track president buildings
send it memorial thirteen
memorial.
Senator memorial thirteen
a state track federal phones
thank you senator means I yield
to senate majority florida peter
worth in that memorial mr
off the house these mission now
we're going to hire another ft
to track federal money so let's
just look hold that one over and
we'll get that red in on the
back and so just what pull that
one back if we could take some
Husband ninety one introduced by
representative robot royball
collaro and act relating to due
thermore resources amending the
grants creating the duo thermal
projects revolving long fund
authorizing loans making
appropriations hospital ninety
one
I was built two o nine
introduced by representative
representatives erred out dixon
development districts to receive
grants and aid from the
department of finance and
administration providing that
matching funds shall not be
required for receiving a
House joint resolution
eleven introduced by
to concurrent legislative juries
diction over property known as
the enhanced useless parcel on
committee that's how's joint
resolution eleven.
The senate memorial thirteen
introduced by senator lopez a
contaminated communities senate
memorial thirteen memorial
thirteen haven't been around
twice by title's order printed
and referred to the senate rules
during no objection where that
order business announces
misleading senator worth and I
think you mister president so
just again
we're going to do items one two
three and four and that order
resolution sixteen that center
novel in survantes then we'll do
the house bill item eleven house
bills one seventy one I believe
that's going to be senator souls
and senator stewart and then
yield to senator padia for item
number one thank you we are on
that order of business third
renewal legislation similar
michael by the representative
thank you very much mister
president asking him concerned
amendment or substitution in
objection senator feel present
your bill thank you very much
mister president so we do have a
couple of plans as we all know
what the public employee
retirements association
will now be called the state
public safety plan one and it
adds state fire members who are
not in their plan and they do
their own thing right now.
This is approximately ninety
people mister chairman mister
thousand thirteen uh mister
president this adds about ninety
folks the hot shots that were
all aware of that are parachuted
into communities to fight these
massive fires that we have all
over the state these days and
sorry mister president we did
have one amendment through the
committee process due to a
drafting air we had to change
the term to that the number two
thousand twenty five to two
thousand twenty four so it
applied to this year thank you
close on the bill thank you very
much mister president I move
that senate bill one twenty
eight as amended do now pass and
ask the ends consent of the
senate that the record show that
the role has been called and all
please all senators to your
seats.
If you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
I would have thirty seven
information on the negative
senate bill one twenty eight as
amended has passed the senate
center by the air thank you very
much mister president members of
senator woods and a correspond
to diamond apparently as we make
this presentation mister
president members of the senate
I as unanimous consent of the
bill one fifty one is once
amended.
Be placed on final passage and
uh
i'll go hit and i'll start that
and then if I may go ahead and
deferred to the other sponsors
and then from there we may ask
to support ems services across
the state and again the
committee substitute delays the
effective date of the
redirection of health insurance
mister president if I may i'd
like to defer it this time then
to senator woods to continue
with the explanation thank you
center compos
thank you mister president thank
what this bill will do this is
not enough money to operate and
my equipment this bill will
and it will be paid out more
less by the by the trip runs
proportional to how much the
equipment is being used with
that I would you o two senator
rule and urban new mexico and
how you know different issues
have different impacts depending
on where they are geographically
areas to make them hole my
favorite part about this bill I
will tell you some examples that
they gave so when we talk about
how underfunded these are
their annual operating cost is
over twelve million dollars in a
small town of clightened
thirteen thousand is currently
distributed in their annual
operation costs are actually two
emphasis on rule new mexico this
is just making those rule and
remote counties and I think
senator composed in center woods
for being the lead sponsor on
Server there thank you mister
president fully support but you
don't contend to excuse center
lopers until she returns the
chamber for the purposes of a
call in no objection senators
funding that they need
especially in the rural areas
thank you.
Thank you center city.
See no further debate center
and I ask in animals consider
the senate the record showed the
role has been called in all
those present voters in the
affirmative accept I was
wondering the negative by show
of and thank you all senators
The.
Send a tax visit to transfer to
committee substantial center
bill one fifty one as amended as
passes senate center companies
thank you very much mister
president on behalf of senator
worth and senator name and
rentally we think the entire
that the record show that all
actions for placing set up bill
twenty one as once amended
be taken and that it now be
subject to debate amendment or
seeing that volunteers are
scarce now and so we're trying
to recruit the next generation
of firefighters to help us right
here in new mexico this bill in
we're demanding senate bill
twenty one as amended anyone
wishing to debate.
See no debate center automatic
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
thank you all senators to your
seats please we are voting.
The.
negative senate bill twenty one
as amended as fast as senate
senator had a meal thank you
mister president in this
decreases insurance premiums
with more firefighters out there
thank you thank you we're gonna
go to item number four.
For a center bill one sixty one
and I yield to send it woods I
think mister president I as
unanimous concerned of the
senate that the record show that
I'll be put on now final passage
has been taken in that is the
subject to debate a amendment or
substitution.
are having troubles ah this
opening laws keeping the doors
open and this bill goes to
manage that by direct cash in
fusion to those uh in the bill
happy to enter any questions
president thank you senator
woods center is we're debating
senate finance committee
substitute percentage bill one
regional medical center and the
bill and think you've to the
bill sponsors for all the work
that was taken to help support
him in your son is the funding
thank you mister president i'd
like to thank the sponsors
assist many of our small world
there do not have less than a
hundred days worth the cash on
hand uh rmc each and gallop has
one point five days of cash on
up as senate bill seventeen
comes down to the floor I think
it's down here already and so
this is part of
giving him a law catch up till
that kicks in an
Thank you center when yours
center by there thank you very
much mister president I also
rise in support we had a really
good robust discussion on this
in the senate finance committee
and scrave a nce and fine ways
to keep their doors open and and
you know like any other business
there's portions of your
business that generate all the
revenue and some that don't but
you put it all together and it
makes the most aid of whatever
fifth largest land mass as we
know mister president forty
sixth and population and it's
very important that we bring
health care to our most rural
portions of new mexico thank
you.
thank you mister president and
now move that soon at finance
community substitute for senate
bill one sixty one
in the negative by show of hands
thank you center wood centers
where voting all senators tear
seeds please.
If you wish to both know please
raise.
substitute for senate bill one
sixty one has passed the senate
senator woods i'm going to think
the senate very much for your
vote of confidence for the small
senator bill
thank you mister president
mister president asking animals
since we could show that all
action replacing senate joint
resolution sixteen on final
cycle approximately the counties
come to the legislature as
required by the constitution to
request a pay adjustment for a
newly elected officials what's
forth in these and it we this is
the only group as far as I know
in state government that has to
do that city of course cities
are not state government that
city councils don't have to have
a request our permission to
forth for their officials and
elected with that i'll re- defer
to senator servantes if he would
like to speak
on this issue as my co sponsor
that I join as a cosponsor with
center novel and to support this
effort as a former county
commissioner I think it's
important that we recognize
county officials seller is now
county level or set by the
legislature we try to go back
and look at the constitutional
origin of this because of course
mean as palis don't have a
corresponding
be a brought up to date and
removed you all have heard me
for many years here talk about
the information of the
constitution that's another good
chance read a plug a
constitutional revision
joint resolution and i'll you
know to send her how to meal for
by seven minutes thank you
mister president I don't need
this the main sponsor to but I
also signed up to this bill as a
former county commissioner
senator many of us thank you
mister president sponsor you
send it an avail deal yield I
would yield mister president
mister president center is there
a cap on this.
I think is there a cap say that
county class a county's class
because so forth there's a cap
for each of those categories I
have those there's a lot of
numbers but because it varies
bike commissioner county claire
cycle to adjust those to meet
the constant changes of
inflation and so forth.
Send anyone else think it was
president you know just the
cautionary tale in in our county
mountain land mass we have that
we do that I I believe counting
commissioners work hard and they
deserve the right pain
maybe some day will figure out
how to do that in the
legislature thank you thank you
rise to just make a statement
that I not only could sign this
but I do support it as a prior
county commissioner that was
just affect commissioner
salaries it affects the sheriff
the counting assessor and county
treasure and the county clerk so
ability to uh compete to attract
folks who
want to seek those positions I
would note that in our county
there were several instances
where the deputy clerk actually
fully support this uh this
measure thank you mister
president thank you center niver
president voted in the
affirmative sip those voting in
the negative by a show of hands.
Thank you senators to your
scenes please we are voting all
senators to your seats if you
By voda thirty seven the
affirmative zero the negative
senate joint resolution sixteen
has passed the senate center in
a bill thank you mister
all thank you for your support
thank you senator ville so we're
going to go on to item number
eleven on today's calendar and
that's going to be house but one
seventy one as amended all
you'll to center stewart.
one seventy one asthma one final
passage has been taken as not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution here in no
objection center stewart if
you'll explain
thank you mister president i'm
bill that we had last year that
was uh towed by the commoner so
in the interim I worked with the
governor ped bride in the elia c
school graduation and almost
twenty years old there is been
shifting work for us needs we
have a real desire to bring in
districts want it so we have the
very rigorous set of core
academic expectations we remain
at twenty four credits for
districts can pursue we require
still four units of english
they have to do english nineteen
and eleven for twelve they can
switch to journalism
of eligible algebra one and she
on my tree or its equivalent is
required algebra to will be uh
offered in every high school but
it's no longer required.
other high level math courses
they can pick computer science
they can do construction maths
it can do statistics probably
where we're going to talk about
it science units still two units
of a web science
the fourth unit can social
financial literc government and
economics with personal finance
and civics involved it's really
fun to hear representative and
the fourth unit can be of the
student's choice
they can do more financial ideas
if they want but psychologies
sociology or another science
each local board so this will
apply to the ninth grade class
of twenty five twenty six
so I just want to mention
and that's not true I call the
governor's office and they said
I can say that on the floor of
the senate so you might hear
more from from my spots.
cte focus math courses such as
that construction math which is
so good i've seen the booklet on
that uh its stick it makes a
so let me mention again that
three different areas where
financial letter sees
highlighters first students are
can count as a mouth course for
student chooses that an
additionally in their local
discretion local districts could
choose so I I focused on that
I would like to yield to what I
close sponsor senator souls.
Thanks in australia center
stores thank you mister
president many of you know that
were likely to hear and this was
one of the bills I talked with
every single class about and
their biggest concern is having
see it's only been there for a
year but are beginning to see
the elements of that showing up
in the social studies curriculum
but these students have
credit that gets them started on
their higher education program
AP courses also that they get
credit in college for very much
if financial incentive with that
technical education we know that
if a student takes and passes
the second career technical
education in their interest area
their graduation jumps to ninety
five percent
indoor financial literacy
every single additional
requirement that we put on high
school students means there are
going to be a few students who
won't graduate on time because
have to get very creative as to
which course is count when we
have very specific requirements.
These new graduation
requirements add flexibility
that are appropriate for that
district for that community
without requiring it for
everyone in the state we often
talk about local control giving
to have as was mentioned and
financial literacy is one of the
big ones it's embedded in
multiple places from
kindergarten off the way through
required to be offered at all
high schools
they're also concerns about
staffing if their additional
requirements added to this.
Where will those teachers come
from
fees and staff members for this
one additional course because
every student's required to take
it if there were additional
requirements whether it's
bill is supported as he is by
the school boards association
by the superintendents
association by the near
talked to on the friday before
the session started they want
they need that flexibility and
they want to have the option to
take financial literacy as a
options to make good choices for
their interest for things that
will keep them in school we need
to increase the flexibility that
they have to make those
decisions and choices
statewide elected officials was
claiming that the governor's
office was supporting an
additional course in there I
find that somewhat unethical but
it please understand that the
courses to be required in this
bill.
school that requires flexibility
in the graduation requirements
we have been working on this for
four years it is fully endorsed
by the LESC that worked on it
center cell center store I think
we ready for questions mister
president or stewart we do have
a florida amendment the reader
will read.
Thank you mister president I
moved the senate board amendment
two house bill one seven one as
Thank you mister president first
like mistake I am thrilled that
this bill is here in front of us
I think it's an excellent bill
our new mexican children who go
through high score
however
when I heard the bill and
since two thousand and eight
financial literacy has been
offered as an elective in new
mexico's high schools they're
only about eleven percent of
there are now twenty five states
in the us who require a course
in financial letters literacy
out by some of the
advocates for the amendment is
that it will help the new mexico
work force and I think very
support enacting the law to
ensure that every high school
student will complete a course
in personal financial covering
So as I saw this through and
kind of in my from my own point
of view and experience one of
the things that that struck me
principle that particularly
something like math you have to
learn the fundamentals and keep
building on it and the account
can learn it and keep it and
make sense of it and attach all
be in one single semester of
course
secondly I thought back to my
time on the reservation for
into my office that are they
were they were sad and they'd
say what's going on well the new
truck that my husband bought
really shiny great just got
chinese to sell people often in
flag staff regard you know would
say hey you know right you can
have this today and by the way
we're giving alone of twelve
the payments and then it's gone
so I think that really ways
heavily on my thoughts I also
have to say that you know i've
had thirty years of continuous
Credit card fees reading the
after fifteen percent now that
plays out and I again think this
is a fundamental life skill but
i'll tell you when I was in
money is probably the greatest
source of
partner descorate in a family
financial literacy were there in
the beginning we could avoid a
lot of asus occurring so I urge
my colleagues to highly consider
also have those great life
skills and I also want to know
to I I can't tell you about
elected officials in this but
they're supporting this bill so.
Mister president I moved in for
certainly appreciate everything
the senator is saying what he
may not have heard is that we
already have a required course
title of it an additionally we
have thirty two financial litter
seas standards that we have to
follow twelfth of them are in
choose it as a mouth course
they've not been able to do that
before we're allowing them to
use that as one of their mouth
courses additionally the
concerned about it going back to
the house and it's also this
bill is a
almost day years work between
year long required course and so
I urge the body to vote no on
the immense thank you senator we
do have further debate we are on
the amendment center so.
are fairly new standards are
very clearly lying now the
financial literacy requirements
this amendment does not have
many standards attached to it
required courses that are
already taught and those
required that every single
student gets financial literacy
as part of those courses uh
in this particular course and so
I would urge you not to support
this amendment it is already
there for students it adds an
extra burden to their graduation
wishing to be we have set a
masters while by center share
center my assessor we only
amendment thank you mister
president thank you sponsors
with a response to the amendment
yield
regards to the to the sponsors
and all the many many many of
years not just one year but two
or three years that have gone
into this curriculum it's
the core of education what are
students learning what our
students required to learn and
mister president just strikes me
that student should learn what
they need to succeed
state in the country and one of
the most poor states in the
country wrote with generational
curses and generational poverty
generational wealth and I truly
believe that uh as as we both
touted financial literacy I
believe is a key component to
that I think we all agree that
financial iters is important
that it should be in the
financial to see semester course
or not and the literature that
i've read and what i've learned
is that the answer is yes if you
want the best outcomes regarding
in strong support the amendment
I think it'll make this near
perfect bill a perfect bill but
I but I also uh you know
high school have to mandate it
come this september.
So hanking.
Directed a page twelve minute
president page twelve line eight
of the bill.
Thank you for the indulgence
mister president uh it starts in
twenty five september twenty
I would submit it doesn't start
in september of twenty twenty
five it starts for ninth graders
who enter high school in august
amendment will go into full
effect if passed in twenty
twenty nine and so when you
change a curriculum there are
five things you need to consider
mister president one is you read
eleven or five was passed uh was
touted by then speaker lohan and
then president protemative and I
know signed into law by governor
richardson who then touted it on
the presidential campaign trail
and we became one of the first
schools since two thousand seven
and this amendment will go into
effect mandating each student to
take it by twenty twenty nine
already occurred because every
single high school mister
president offers it now as a
stand along course number two
you need a implementation plan
two year implementation.
This bill has a is is pushed out
for one year and then
essentially has a two three four
year will be be anticipated into
the subsequent fiscal years we
have the funding and when it
comes to financial literacy
there is numerous numerous
interests in this country for
literacy and that brings me to
my fourth point you need teacher
professional development and
this should be a major concern
to all of us with regards to
respect for the profession
respect for our teachers but
offer these courses a funny
thing happened mister president
and virginia a center hiking
virginia there was a fun fact in
which the teachers over the
course of three years a third of
state of virginia and then five
mister president uh synergic is
developing standards and and and
and and selected resources will
financial literacy has been
offered in every single high
school in the state of mexico
for sixteen years as a stand
alone semester course but as
high schools in the entire
state.
Mandate financial literacy as a
graduation requirement and that
is never prep
and mother learner high down in
change an implementation plan
funding for teacher professional
development five developing the
standards all those things are
highly up into financial
literacy did financial literacy
summits the plan was to put it
in every single high school and
then three four years later put
it in the curriculum and then
recession should have reminded
us
because we were not only the
poorest state going into the
great recession but we were the
last state to come out is that
we would have a hundred and
twelve requirements this isn't
like I took philosophy back in
the day and I think every
student should take it I took
anthropology into my life every
squick credit scores by at least
twenty five points across the
board how many thousands of
dollars can be then a security
and in in low interest law
purchasing homes and cars and
Pay yourself first protection
against fraud and scams track
your own spending borrowing
interest identity theft
protection saving for college
understanding risk saving an
investing for the future
protecting the family unit
of curriculum available as we
all know to do the full semester
course our this is not a new
idea mister president this is
twenty twenty two SB one seventy
seven was introduced by senator
pinto and senator kernan it
didn't receive a message senate
bill one eighty one in twenty
by senator korea hemphell did
not receive a hearing senate
bill two forty one last year
introduced by myself uh did not
brown center current and did get
out of sea packed four to one
mister president but did not
receive a hearing in house
education two years prior to
in house education the one year
that it did receive hearings of
mister president house bill one
sixty.
Three introduced by
representative madrid uh then
represented my asked as yours
got out of the house floor sixty
five zero so those four people
that voted no and house
education I believe some of them
may have had a change of heart
when all eyes were upon them and
on the senate floor I believe
had the majority supporter that
was pulled because of a
technical glitch in the bill and
never got recalled so anyway i'm
implemented in twenty twenty
nine I truly believe it is a
skill that every single young
person in this state should have
it's gonna take some work while
we have the resources we have
make financial literacy as a
stand along course mandatory for
every single high school student
in in this state from this
moment forward forever thank you
discompopulating year for me
because senator my estimates and
I have been on the same team
just almost too many times for
me to handle
but I also support this
I can tell stories for forty
five minutes I can't make you
understand anything about
finances in forty five minutes.
In the course that I thought
which is for adults granted is
not for ninth graders or even
seniors
and so we've got a couple of
things that we look at because
if you don't know why then
there's no point going any
further so you have to figure
out why you want to do anything.
assets and try to figure out
networks and all those kind of
things which probably doesn't
apply to ninth graders but so
now we know where you are and
map is irrelevant and those kind
of things aren't really taught
and math classes certainly the
way you want to go isn't stuck
not tight and most classes most
of us don't have a clue where we
literacy class cause it's not
just math there's math involved
but there's more than math okay
so
we also talk about credit
abuse credit okay how does
credit help you in in life
because certainly the higher you
credit score the lower the
interest rate on almost
everything you buy so if you
that maybe they don't have a
credit score yet but out and
know that and again that's not a
math class that's not a social
studies class that's a financial
literacy class
them at four percent interest or
less
that helps that's a direct
positive impact on on a dols-
which means students today there
are going to be adults later.
my father wanted to know how
much money he had
and he wanted it in cash now he
was he was an accountant
that that meet him absolutely
the crazy because
he had to know that that bill
was paid in I trusted the bank
send them the money
and pete factor is the the pain
in the rear factor okay and so
for each of us that's a little
different
the way I did it would have been
and know that the bills were
paid know that his paycheck that
he had his paycheck so for me I
want direct deposit I don't want
anybody had any money on the
low peter factor for my father
was a huge peter factor
you can certainly save money by
putting it in a can and buried
in backyard
down to savings plan for me
to to do that and those are
things that we can talk about in
financial literacy classes that
don't happen in social studies
classes and don't happen in math
classes
but the rule of seventy two also
helps so you take seventy two
divided by the interest rate
that gives you how many years is
going to take to double your
money or double your debt if
with that the rule of seventy
two is is very very easy to
figure out in use
another one of the things that
we've taught in our class is
through and you figure out how
you're going to spend your money
and when I do it I want you to
know how you're going to spend
every single penny
account it for and some of that
can be I just want to waste
money
okay so you want to go to the
movies you want to eat out you
won't do whatever you just want
to give so you got a hundred
until so when you get to the
hundred dollars point okay again
that that's not math that's just
how you think about things and
can start out small and grow to
some other kind of investment so
at first the investment is put a
few dollars in the bank and
you're getting I don't know what
the interest rate is today like
and again that's not math that's
how you think about money
thinking about money is
different in just math courses
somebody says no money down well
it doesn't mean no money down it
just means more money down later
not to differ but later it's
going to be more money
as we go through all of these
things and senator my estimates
read a whole bunch of those
things which included things
like wills and okay yes all of
that all of that
Because the math we can do on
this
and if we don't know how we say
hey google how do you do it in
now google is going to answer me
okay
support this amendment because
financial literacy classes are
not math through social studies
financial literacy classes
include math and social studies
if we can start without with the
students today who are going to
be adults tomorrow and they
already have thought about how
to use money
we're a poor state not we're not
a poor state we act like a poor
state and we act like a poor
state because too many of us
that's why I support it it's
more than math mister president
it's more than social studies or
whatever else we talked about
there so that's why it's
important thank you hey thank
see did you want to introduce
your experience with this right
behind you.
and I wanted to defer to the
committee and then I have my
losses students and then the
unless the students on this side
who all say that it should be
student who is going to have to
file her taxes for the first
time this year and is really
really great grateful that she
didn't take it all of the
so I am torn i'm and just I have
this conundrum because I think
uhm
it's I don't know whether the
committee and I would be
senders to do I do you center to
the all of us
mr president and senator weaker
before the last sea and are all
of them do I just want to remind
people mister president
currently we require financial
exactly what are in the
standards right now just heard
from the director of la c saying
everything they're talking about
deciding in the standards.
personal financial literacy i've
got the standards students are
taking this course right now in
hope that it develops to be more
than just one lecture in which
is what they experience I I
imagine that it is developing
florida amendment number one
center gregs
thank you miss president with
the sponsor of the amendment
yield center hickey dealed I do
senator greg's thank you missus
and the proposed bell is that
your course becomes required
for the school board and the
student in each individual
instruction center hiking
up mr senator and mister
president I couldn't have set it
show well sometimes I don't have
it average but
we have a little guy I wandered
around over near he can take
your attention ever now now but
uh
The have the half unit is a
surmeasure is in and then
which president and senator the
Mr president and senator my bill
is only one semester
thank you mister president thank
thank you mister president
sponsor so
currently as proposed in the
bill the
mr president yes but it's
already required and they're
already taking it now we've
updated the financial literacy
standards in the last few years
to a half year I believe uhm but
it's required in the bill moving
forward it's actually required
currently.
required or does it have to be
an option.
Mr president senator
with this bill we raised we kept
two credits uh to be able to be
chosen by a local district and
they could choose financial
letter see although it's already
required this full core social
so that's already in place and
with this bill it would move
forward.
Senator gregs thank you miss
president in sinner so we
senator are we are we changing
anything to were financial
literacy by itself is is a year
long caution.
The.
government and economics and
personal financial literature
let receive that's the title of
the year long course I hope I
answered your question.
the
the amendment is going to define
financial literature to be
exactly a half shame measure
there's no length of class
exactly identified is that is
that correct which president
center store mister president I
I believe that what's being
and it would also remain an
elective and it also could be
put in place by the local
district if they want to.
the amendment the the amendment
is going to misresponse or just
define it's going to be a half
half a measure required course
in financial literacy.
literacy i've long find is
something extraordinarily
important to
our children
know in order to function
outside the the school system
when they when they graduate uh
one of the first things I think
members that wasn't something
that they were certainly
familiar with uh I mean I should
in let erin have the credit card
it's it's important that this is
there
whichever way is there so thank
you mister president and thank
you
senator and senator in channel.
am challenged a little bit by
the debate we're having because
of course I hear the sponsors of
the bill itself who I respect a
great deal with their background
education to say the amendments
seems to think that the the bill
is necessary for financial
literacy so
I am i'm trying to reconcile and
hear the debate about why
between what i'm hearing from
people who have a great deal of
respect for an education the
highest response in education
telling me something in your
telling me
going to give an answer to that
but I would also like to engage
one of the previous supporters
of the amendment to answer as
answer to this is the following
when I heard doctor i'm sorry
well almost doctor and in
financial literacy senator share
economics I think is is not
going to be sufficient with the
skills that are needed today
secondly government and
economics uh particularly in
to the point where we are today
and the nuances of that and the
need for every student to be a
supported by economics and
economics is really difficult
and that the two of those I
believe take up a full year plus
uh noted and I would like to ask
senator myesters if he would
yield to add to my answer center
alone course or folding the
financial literacy correctly
maneuver economics is
advantagious if in terms of
teaching financial literacy of
of mexico every state every high
school offer it but only eleven
percent of the students are
taking and so that's that's
that's the antidashquestion if
this amendment passes one
you know and then so the the
house bonds are actually
teachers this and and is very
persuasive that that folding
financial literacy into the
economy class and connecting
financial literacy with
school student.
Senator.
Thank you mister president and
fact that the her guests today
say they wish they had it they
wanted to concentrate of course
and probably it I I don't know
how they learn government and
a stand along course for a
semester similar restaurant this
thank you mister president miss
president I think from the
debate i've reconcile really
what's what maybe the difference
in the information that i'm that
subject matter than than the
bill without it and I don't
think there's gonna be a
disagreement about that at this
amendment would put a greater
their twenties they're doctored
lawyer architect and interesting
i'm surprised with the really
high education frankly how
little financial literacy they
have
far more likely in my generation
of my parents generation to move
around from job to job
the the numbers and statistics
of people these days of moving
really speaking to them to
senator sediolopis my
grandparents generation people
would work with the minds.
An entire lifetime and have a a
pension to rely on in social
support ourselves in retirement
outside of the old systems of
pensions
so increasingly we have that
going on mis- mister president
members that it we see this
block in in the argument this
week made as well we're going to
let the economics regulate that
market they'll go out of
business that's why we don't
need to curb licenses that's why
we don't need to curb plant
and i've always found that to be
really sad and and we know
that's what's going to happen
and i've got to believe the
folks who enter these leases and
made these financial commitments
and invest in their life savings
and more self reliance on saving
and self investment I think
there's another thing that adds
to this discussion which is at
least in my household
when my when my daughters had
we divided the responsibilities
in the in the and working with
our kids that way but but the
point that i'm i'm trying to get
out as I I really do hope that
what are you doing to save who
is your financial adviser can I
see you turn in your tax return.
Can you show me how you fill
your taxes
that kind of education going on
away fortunately that's the way
things worked in my household
and so we're not only educating
the young people in our schools
were hopefully educating the
entire family
and and everyone in that
toward self responsibility and
that's something that I when it
is and I i've i've enjoyed the
debate for my my senator my good
center when the spouse of center
sold repeatedly emphasising this
savings accounts as a state and
that's true when you look at our
permanent funds as a state but
we remain a poor state when it
comes to what folks have in
their bank accounts and at home
commenced this is one way to to
make progress there miss
president thank you.
Thank you so much about this we
are still debate in center floor
member number one.
Thank you mister president and I
have just couple clarifying
questions for the sponsor of the
internet senator hecky dailed
yes a year brand name is
president and right now as as it
stands
if someone wants to take
financial literacy every every
district offer correct as a
semester course is that correct.
Senator hiking
Center rent was present senator
uhm
what does it take the place of
if a student wants to take it
depends upon the school district
to school district can let this
count towards a math credit and
also a social studies credit so
it could actually take the
it would take a half elective
out of that today
center brand mister president
with the sponsor of the bill
yield I I think there's some
confusion on this center still a
deal am I do mister president.
what so my children two of my
children to my three as he took
financial literacy instead of
taking elsewhere were too and it
counted as a math course is that
still the law.
some people don't like uh so the
idea behind this to have that be
a math credit if you want to use
Thank you
miss president in managed
protemini appreciate that I I do
see the benefit right to
I like the way that we also fold
it in I don't think having
seeing it twice hurts anyone a
lot of our students you are
right now we're we've been
and actually most colleges don't
even require it anymore though a
lot of use to most of the don't
need more they're just looking
at your score on the insurance
exam and whether you got a
but
it just seems to me that having
that option is is important for
times on the floor the only
about twenty percent of our
students actually go in finish
college so you know I think
honestly part of the problem
going to college my concern with
taking away another elective
is that those students that
aren't going to college now they
aren't going to have as many
doing.
And what this does this takes
away another elective
if you think that's okay to take
direct some of these they can
actually say no I want we want
every student in our district to
take that that's left up to
local control you know me i'm a
big
that in at some point we got a
mandate as center soul skits
bringing up and I really
appreciate him being a huge
advocate for math because that's
you know the thing that me and
him having common issue both
so i'm i'm hoping that in the
future we can start mandating
those things also uhm in not
just teaching financial literacy
we got actually have some
district got away with it but
they allowed my student my
children
name is because it was me and
i'm so great looking I know but
you know as my children that was
and that I think a lot of
students in reranta have taken
financial letter say i'd love to
see that broken down by district
because I would almost bet you
that we're answer where they
Commitments that i've made prior
to this
because that's the kind of
person I am I stick to my
commitments thank you.
See no further debate on center
floor amendment number one
senator masters for a second
time thank you mister president
thank you members just to be
clear up
today under current law the
laws so this bill doesn't do
that that's current law thank
you thank you we have center
stewart for a second time.
I don't need a second time
financial literacy I don't think
that the co sponsor nor I either
one of us are against financial
literacy we think it's wonderful
all students ought to know that
the changes that the standard
occurred less than a year ago
they are brand new so the
students who are currently in
high school if they are seniors
there before my guess is that
and and I don't mean that this
is a put down but the the
sponsor of the amendment has not
read the standards that are
accounts are for different g
between saving and investing
identify ways insurance may
minimize personal financial risk
and spending plan that the pics
varying sources of income in a
plan savings strategy taxes uhm
how to use financing for higher
education explaining the types
requirements that are in the
current financial literacy
portion of the required course
for one hundred percent of
students students of the past
the students that because of
this will not be able to take
a dual credit class that helps
them towards their future they
may not be able to take an AP
against students having
financial literacy we all think
that's important it is already
there this is not needed and it
does put extra requirements on
thank you mister president and
thank you senator sauls I think
you made my point thirty two
areas and you only mentioned a
literacy that will be needed in
today's society I think senator
servantes made a good point
going to take a semester I also
want to point out that i've been
informed that there are number
of other polls polls that show
that eighty five percent of
professor of economics at
montana state university
currently urban phd who's a
noted leader in the fill and she
student has access to personal
finance education a stand alone
course is preventive medicine to
start young adults financial
seventy one a and ask for given
the length of this debate a roll
call vote thank you senators
where voting on center floor
amendment number one all
to call the role.
Senator barcass.
Centre barker boats no centre
brand.
both cs center compass send a
compos votes no center servant
center savantes votes yes centre
do hick center do hake votes now
center guy echoes.
send a good spots no center
gregs.
Center greg's pass center hamlin
sent you a handling votes no
center hamper.
her meal central meal about snow
center low best.
Centre lopus votes yes into my
estes center my estimates votes
morris sentor morris pass centre
o.
Yes center more votes yes center
minutes.
Send terminos votes no centre
never.
o'neil central nail votes know
central to zipino center to
zipino boats no centre video
centre be dear about snow centre
pinto.
rodriguez center rodriguez
bought snow center sanchez.
Center sanchez would see as
interest meetings.
Centre smith's votes yes
shandow votes know center souls
center souls votes knows
interested finecs interested for
next votes no center steinborn
boats no center words center
woodboat cs.
Center brand.
Centre in avail.
Central novel votes yes.
robust debate and I just want to
reiterate the bill as a whole is
wonderful thank you thank you
senator we do have another floor
amendment
the reader will read.
one as amended amendment
sponsored by senator linda am
lopez.
Senator love is to move and
explain the americans
thank you very much mister
mister president members of the
senate
I am proposing on page thirteen
line twelve after the first
semicolon to insert ethnic
studies.
mr president members of the
senate yes I know that we have
um recently made some changes
within the standards for the
studies and information that
reflects a little bit more about
new mexico's history about
people of color in what we have
contributed to
ethnic studies course be part of
the graduation requirements
which means mister president
that when my soon to be twelve
year old starts high school this
will already if this was to pass
drawing board start everything
over again mister president we
don't
there are courses currently been
offered in many of our school
districts across the state
in history so it's not going
back to the drawing board mister
president what this again is
proposing that as our students
progress as my colleague
and mister president I know that
there's maybe for those who are
asking what what is ethnic
studies and what it is it is a
culturally responsive.
fill to feel that they are seen
and included
as to pointing out what
contributions have been for
their community of which they
represent.
and mr president in my own
particular school district in
the albuquerque public schools
there is a certain teacher at
highland high school mister
and have changed their
perspective on who they are but
is actually given them more of a
standing as who they are as a
a few of them who've gone on
that i've kept in touch with
have actually taken on more a
course work as they've gone on
to university of new mexico and
also to the cnm a central
ensue thank you thank you center
love is very debating senate for
member number two and I yield to
the sponsor center stewart I
have thank you mister president
two of the four of those units
so this is already built in
as part of uh this the fourth
have embedded that also into the
standards to give students more
options and they have this as an
option so again the amendment is
See no debate senator lobbies to
close on the amendment thank you
mister president I now was sent
it floor amendment number one
two house bill when seventy one
as amended and I ask for a show
apologize mister president
brushel hounds thank you senator
senators where voting on sender
florida amendment number two
if you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
San availability now send
removes volume now center
hambling voting now similar to
their hampile voting now
send it a rant body now senator
Senator driggers following now.
Senator woods boring now.
Senator pertal volley now.
Serena.
Senation does voting now.
Center hicky volley now.
Center my estus volume now.
Sending a brand new already now
or neal volume now
center composer right now.
Center city olos voting now
affirmative thirty three and the
negative senate floor member
number two has failed to pass
the senate centers the elophants
to explain your vote thank you
mister president
only started thinking about this
in the last day or so
and either committee has been
working on this for two years
and so as I explained to the
hope I I know that the committee
um
has worked on this they have the
expertise and I also know they
will continue considering these
issues in the future thank you
mister president thank you
senator stewart to close on the
bill
thank you mister president I
wanna thank the body for the
robust conversation we've had
now pass and I ask unanimous
considered the senate that
record show the role has been
called now those present voted
in the affirmative except for
those voting by hand in the
negative.
if you wished about no please
raise your hand.
center store thank you mister
president thank you members of
the senate you're gonna go on to
the last item on today's
calendar that will be taken out
that seem to be item number ten
that all action for replacing
senate
trade memorial two once amended
be placed on final passage
a memorial as we know with the
task force will be moved into
the attorney general's office
and I would like to yield to
senator lopez as is also a
I was honored to be a member of
the task force
that I think it's wonderful work
learned a lot of information and
be taking and with regards to
the task force thank you senator
pinto
moved that some senate have done
subject to debate
so we'll go ahead and go on to
that so any debate on the senate
joint more
we do have debate on the senator
important work and the other
thing that's very important to
understand is this topic affects
so many issues in our state this
this this issue touches domestic
violence this issue touches
sexual assault this issue taught
touches poverty this issue
you service sale of as we have
senator mckenna.
Thank you mister president good
afternoon and thank you to my
colleague signers pinto and
I think it's a grand idea that
it is put under the attorney
general's office where it will
get the
what's happening with our
indigenous people who are
missing and murdered and missing
and this gets to the the highest
this task force under the ag's
office gives me of a bit more
solicitors mister president
thank you very much.
Serve
with some of the families who
have missing members some of
those members are missing not
only from albuquerque but even
my senate district so I know
it comes to jurisdiction
are different law enforcement
agencies on dealing with this
issue and so this is so needed
I guess every pop center had a
mail
mister president I stand in
strong support over this uh
memorial as you know I represent
two peblo's and senate district
communities all across this
country and right here in our
own backyard and the native
american women are facing
extremely high rates of violence
and epidemic which is marked by
pintos senator pinton senator
lopez for bringing this forward
thank you mister president
center how to
center schendel
big missed president will the
the shift over to the
to the attorney generals offers
and in the
in the memorial you're asking
the turning general.
question is is there money with
this I mean once they convene
what happens after the
convenience can you tell me a
little bit about what we do
what's going to happen because I
what grow stands for into that
the perfect and also we know
that we also have the ability to
have money transferred from
department to department.
task force as well I don't
necessarily think they've
abandoned the whole thing so i'm
just curious how this will all
play out now between in an
secretary that has just nearly
been appointed we will
you know could she just got into
office that we will also convene
unless this joint memorial is
past center cinder okay thank
you mister president I did get
clarification from the chair
senate finance that there were
Thank you mister president you
know this is a real issue where
I live in gallop a van drives up
they grab somebody that's
intoxicated they throw me the
have you see number eight and
they everybody tracks everybody
pretty well but when someone
disappears it raises it is
raises your radar my wife
hauling people to arizona to use
them for medicaid and then not
allowing them to
call the relatives say where
they're at anything they just
hispanic happens to everyone I
mean we had a a an issue in galp
or there's another band was
driving around looking at
teenage girls
community starts looking and
watching and paying attention to
what's happening so it happens
in end we should do everything
we can to help them find them up
recommendations about how they
do that to immediately amber
alerts how do we how do we do
this I mean how do we really
buying some money disappeared
years I I know it a concrete
plant in galip during the summer
they found someone.
In it now telling how long they
had been there.
to try to actually really put
some teeth to this and i'd
really hope that I would have
some some help across the isle
with that.
this situation to this issue.
Made american people.
And honestly.
It doesn't matter who it is we
should be heartbroken when
someone is taken.
the life of indigenous people
and that is wrong.
If this was happening to any
other group of people
We'll be banging down the doors
of the governor's office
demanding that she do something
about it
although quite honestly
because of the jurisdictional
issues this is an fbi issue
brought a report on some data
what they do
gave a good data now.
Yeah.
I know closer number that is not
correct so I don't know the real
number.
What does that do for us getting
data.
them within forty eight hours if
something's not done.
The.
More asking years to go back in
the past because nothing was
done.
no one took it seriously because
we have deemed.
As a culture individuals people
not to be important
No matter what part of the world
they come from
their important and their lives
matter.
Every person.
I want to be able to come here.
Because of the work that we've
done and celebrate the life of
an additional woman are in a
So I will continue to reach
across to my friend sir spent
etc lopez and tried actually
get a message I get understand
I don't understand why the
governor wouldn't message it I
understand that she wasn't going
to.
people from going messing right
we need to work with the with
the tribes with the additional
people and help them to figure
out how do we keep people from
going messing in the first place
And then when they do go massive
unfortunately they will just as
others will.
We need to make sure it's
investigating we find them.
The.
That's what's needed.
I'll be understand like my
passion.
The.
The reason I have stood up here
day after day talking about
what's happening in israel's
because I have a compassion for
people.
And when I was in england we had
a serial killer on the loosen
england.
We need to value life in our
society but we don't
we've got to turn that around in
our culture folks.
to have to take a much bigger
step next year.
To make sure that we don't just
do a memorial
Are not doing messing and no one
noticing
we need to call it out we call
it what it is.
mister presidently very much
appreciate the debate mister
president I moved out senate
joint memorial to once amended
do now pass and I asked
humanists consent of the senate
We are voting if you wish to
vote now please raise your hand.
Yeah.
My vote of thirty in the firm it
is on the negative senate john
set next order of business thank
you mister president so that is
it for today
just in terms of a roadmap the
rest of the week and on the
weekend will be in at eleven
floor session given the event
that evening will certainly take
that and consideration on sunday
but we do need to come in and
announce some committees are
going to be sunday morning so
that's the roadmap by the old
will meet tomorrow morning and
room three eleven for one bill
on clean fuels but since it's
thursday we will have breakfast
Senate financial going for maybe
an hour right after the four we
have a few bills we can hear
shuffle around and get that
increased snap benefits for
people that were only getting
twenty five dollars to a hundred
we meet state police the highest
p place
the department in the state
house bill two is pretty well
rapped up so we just got to
start moving some bills along
and senate finance mister
president.
Senator do it
never mind mister president
thank you senate artist if you
know.
here in objection proceeds
mister president members of the
senate with me today are two
students from donation county
who were part of the
enlightening uh contingent that
the first one here is caralina
data catalina goes to mayfield
high school she's actually in
the center stand standborn
she hopes to go to college at
UNM
and has hasn't decided yet
between psychology and nursing
gadsten and he's undiversity
basketball team against him
I just wish I just fervenly pray
he doesn't watch the game
it's a tough district and I
think you know
we had a great conversation
about that school is very
knowledgeable about basketball
he keeps on top of it at all
our two in last students here.
a very long agenda today so I
think even though we we won't be
starting till the quarter of
four we have senator but the as
bill on housing office.
and the on the unsafe use of
public roadways and senator
styborne's steinborne's bill on
serato's housing fund in the
changes and so if the members
would come about quarter for we
should be able to get through
this before I too very long
thank you very much thank you
is center hambling santa bert
center brand
negative president in i'm gonna
try to get through this
as we had a very peaceful answer
and a time of of meeting worth
the jewish community and those
we were joined actually by two
people live from israel which
was amazing one of those
individuals was actually an idea
us where he was out but who
joined us live and so was able
to talk to us and and talked
about how much it met to him
he's actually been here to santa
fe two new mexico.
had the deputy mayor of
jerusalem who who free recorded
a video for us and in her words
were
inspiring
and we pulled into a war that we
didn't ask for
I got it wrong i'm sorry i'll go
back and lodge it in bring it to
you know just an amazing time a
great group people was very
peacefully in have any you know
anyone interrupt and so I just
appreciate that appreciate the
I can know back the tears
when they mentioned the four
year old that's being held in
captivity
and then the one year old who
ask for hamas to release the
hostages
do that
then let's discuss peace
A four year old needs to come
home.
Thank you much present are you
send a rant center share.
but somebody else will point it
out that I hadn't given a
history lesson yet so I tried to
get everything together and so
this being black history month
it was the true reformers bank
in richmond virginia and a
gentleman a methodist minister
reverend william washington
eight down to georgia
and later sold to a horse trader
in tennessee before he escaped
slavery
president as you might know I
think all informed tremendous
are great so he became an
information in the union army
and then he opened this bank he
did several of the things meter
and almost every bank in
richmond closed or took on very
little effort but the true
reformers bank which was a black
fully funded the only banking
virginia was in enrichment
virginia that didn't close and
wasn't wasn't damaged by the.
black own bank eighteen eighty
eight two reformers bank and
he's a hero because well he's an
infringement but I guess they
also financial literacy guy.
wanted to go and start out to
let you know
these two individuals were and
have been very insightful
they paid close attention if you
will to the debate on education
turn out to be and they are both
having more variety successful
than very close with how they
bought especially on the
amendment during one of our
educational bills with turnout a
really hearing what was going on
but within that the questions
that they asked for very
perceptive and they were very
again inside fall and I am just
bit of information so I sell
more so taking note so with that
mister president if I may i'd
like to introduce arborio arnold
individuals to our new mexico
state senate
thank you mister president thank
you
Thank you very much mister
president members of the body I
you did hear manaces to to stand
up next to me you did hear about
elisa and darline yesterday this
is a lease of romato and early
information this and uh mister
president they were here on a
really great day yesterday and
again today and I needed a lot
them is going to serve in this
chamber and maybe one of them
serves and the other chamber may
be in the united states congress
mister president because I just
really felt great about their
insight and they take took a
farmington for being with us
this week from the enlarged
their program.
Center to him.
yesterday so I won't go through
their buyers but it's been
wonderful having them here with
us and i'm excited to see what
they do in the future so please
strengthen thanking them for
joining us this week.
friendly reminder that if you
need a good way to online from
today come join us for linking
county day it's all happening at
the jury beginning of five
senator pertal police stand up
it's energy thank you mister
president I just I found out
earlier we're coming in on
sunday possibly so so in order
doing the people's work so
hopefully the team will will be
able to survive I know i'm just
one man I can't pass it to
myself I learned that last year
unfortunately but just to
we have center look center and
offers
thank you very much mister
president you know it was
consent to introduce my guests
here no objection approach etc
she is involved in programs at
her school such hours and last
french honor society french club
advanced orchestra
mayfield diverse city downs she
alters serving every weekend at
holy cross catholic church
I also have mahelei holiday and
she's a senior it may field high
top ten of her class and is
dedicated to academic excellence
by taking all ap classes and
mister president as we are
having debate on the education
we had here with us which they
were in support of both of them
so mister president we could
also welcome these two wonderful
young women who I know have much
center hambling.
Thank you mister president
anybody I just love seeing all
of the unless a students are in
this room especially those from
jackson proceeds ever thank you
and I do want to
inform the the body what in last
they means it's engaging that
the communities for education
and it is a grass roots
initiative dedicated to
my two guests today have talked
about how the and last eight
program has been incredibly
important in their high school
career I have ales on the sister
natos who was eighteen years old
the unless a student she has to
meet an albuquerque for a
student government association
meeting uh she has been involved
with the last safe for two years
and has been involved with
theater for five years and while
used to be my next door neighbor
um so that is that is true new
mexico form
she plans to attend animated in
the fall and be a psychology
to join in las a and now she has
been within last year for three
years she actually was one of
the first freshmen and last say
it's centennial high school that
last crucial's high school thank
you for the correction but
months you and she is
particularly interested in
watching CYFD related issues
going on through the legislature
so we've had.
A lot of discussions about that
and will continue and so said a
Center pub
thank you mister president the
democratic carcass will be
having a caucus meeting tomorrow
morning ten am in the senate
schedule center gregs thank you
mister president in just a quick
reminder about the new mexico
municipal league uh reception
tonight at the founder hotel
reminder of our senate tax
business transportation
committee dinner tonight at the
boring five thirty one
thank you san francisco.
o'clock this afternoon we have a
long agenda and there may be a
long night so if so planned to
have dinner in the committee
please stand in just issue we'll
start at four clock things.
Thank you center servant is.
clean up a few things first a
UNM is asked that we are not
take the jerseys home with us
just leave them in the chamber
the sergeant and arms will look
was read in had the wrong two o
two number on it
the two or two number that was
read in was two seven seven
eight five three point one and
Has been a request for your name
is consent seeing no objection
sort of senator mister president
the second thing is the senate
finance committee report read in
for senate bill three hundred
hundred do pass so what i'd like
to request as unanimous consent
that we expunge that committee
report that was read in then
we'll go back to committee
reports and read in the correct
See no objection senator worth
thank you mister president
amazon said we go that our
business committee reports.
Seen objection where that order
business committee reports the
readable read.
not pass but that senate finance
committee substitute for set
about three hundred do pass
respectfully submitted senator
george monos chair adoption the
community report and there's a
worth thank you mister president
unamazing sentence we go that
our business announcements are
misleading seeing no objection
around that order business
announcement specially thank you
mister president so given the
of the pool over there right on
the on the number so with that
mister president and it's
consent to send a standard
recess until eleven thirty
tomorrow morning for act on the
unanimous consent elected
structure sergeant arms
and take it away the sergeant
are you pick up that shop in
ago we don't need that in the
senate
just a thought since since
burdens and it said he's not
going to play but I just have a
feeling that he's
know what the spread is on the
game saying but you know what
the spread is on the game today.
Senator
I don't know you won't make one
up
really not lowball i'm a wild
cat no way I leave my local
stuff here usually use it to
walks washington wax my car
center more mispresent I noticed
Senator moores i'm always game
so if that's what we need the
animals consent that our
president play.
