Sent a brantley.
Center birth.
Center compos
center survived this.
Center grags.
Santra hamlin.
Center hickey.
Sent our meal
center locus
center my assess.
The.
Center methods
Center neval
center only.
Center neighborhood
center the pino
Sent a router I guess.
Center sanchez.
Center smithies
Center step.
Center style born.
The.
Branch.
core currently in their force
and obviously he had asked your
main standing for the pledgeable
agents to be led today by
senator the lovers
And vader joined me in prayer.
officials as they serve this
great state and its citizens
watch over their families at
home and the communities they
represent.
We say thanks for the men and
women who wear our nation's
foreign and domestic bless them
as they pray for peace and
prepare for war.
We say thanks for our first
responders law enforcement
officers and health care workers
bless them as they serve to
bolster the health and well
being of all people.
Nor we pray for our veterans
especially those who live with
give them true and lasting
healing.
Lorry pray for the education and
safety of our children and for
opportunities for jobs and
just an equitable resolution
which begins with the
recognition that we are our
brother and sisters keeper.
all hostages finally we pray for
the peace prosperity and
protection of the citizens and
land of the great state of new
I pledged to the flag of the
united states of america.
Premental attack.
morning everyone is senator
lopez likes to say happy monday
I hope everyone got some
downtime as we gear up for weak
just the tone you sat for us
heading into this week I talk a
while about those pauses and
saying thank you obviously
lights of folks are impacted as
by us being here and recognizing
important so thank you so much
for leading us off uh so we have
a busy day up front on the floor
in recognition of eva and
seniors
there is a representative from
the secretary of states office
and the senate lounge
today is tourism day at the
capital it's also an msu women's
athletic day at the capital and
I think senator brantley has six
is so i'll check with her and
we'll get that announced before
we get done today uh this
morning today is also
antisthesiologist assistance day
and senator picky we're glad to
have you back.
confirmations that were done in
rules this morning senator
schmede's gonzalez
meetings as second one hotel
can't allow us and neil once
those are
lot of confirmations today in
terms of advance this evening is
the hikaria apache nation
legislative dinner at the find a
hotel at six o'clock by
at the founder hotel from six to
nine are by invitation only and
then the national hispanic
cultural center foundation is
having a legislative breakfast
tomorrow at the in inspire at
tonight will figure out exactly
where that's going to be so what
I would do mister president is
your first center but he and
then other guests let's get the
guests introduced and then we
thank you mister president good
morning to the members and think
you sent leader worth so I do
have a couple things mister
president unanimous consent to
allow cameras on the senate
benny schender you know it's
consent to excuse senator sendo
january twenty second through
january twenty fifth.
Here in our objections so it's
objection center thank you
mister president I do have some
guests however if you'd like to
handle that this morning.
Center by the year got
introduced your guess and will
have sent a brant and senator
continue to build up a year
and in in so as a result we have
a lot of state officers running
economy and so i'm honored to
introduce three guests that I
have here today in an
organization I was very active
in when I was in high school I
was a state president in the
right by she's the president of
business professionals of
america for social media may
have heard a stand bristol ruize
she's the vice president of
correspondence she's from she's
state business professionals of
american cheese a junior carl's
bad high school can we please
welcome these three hard working
individuals to the state senate.
the state presidency it was not
aware of the national presidency
good job settlement thank you
mister president I want to think
our chaplon and in the chapel
from the air for space for
when we were overseas so we were
stationed overseas and and doing
exercises I was security police
and we were in a fox hole and
the chaple and always came by
and brought us your coffee or
service or thank the the rest of
the military for their service
and and just understand how how
big of a role you do play
especially to the end last
listed ranks when it comes to
being one of those that were
standing out there in the cold
as an airman in england as the
rains coming down in your in a
whole so I always appreciated
Yes
I have hard to send a bird I
thought I said your hand raised
I I just want to let
folks know I was here I was like
to do that but I I don't talk as
long as center sheer so all
showed up now thank you mister
president you sent a bird
saturday
mister president thank you for
prayers this morning but I
didn't want to talk about c t
earlier we're talking about the
young people that are here today
welcome to be fully funded out
did want to tell the body that
state invests we get seven
dollars in return so looking at
a state that is looking to spend
a lot of money I would recommend
center poll.
Thank you mister president her
i'd like to introduce some my
guessing when I name them all
first I have mia apart
I have which
the members of the senate
please stand up and get them
around a pause to our special
guess.
Senator brandly
good morning looting at governor
I want to begin by thinking ske
new mexico for the passes they
give us every single year I was
just hounded by a group of
we should fall we get that have
got your past here
lieutenant governor it is in a
ms women's athletic day and so
names of those for over in the
house just to honor them i'd
like to begin by welcoming
athletic director mario mochi
and also the interim president
dray googe to the new mexico
softball coach kathy wrote off
welcome caddy and our women
soccer coach rob barts is next
door as well
welcome jail allison gostel i'm
a senior golf from shopper new
mexico mari sharp are senior
volleyball from albert kirkin
new mexico
soccer also from phoenix erizona
ladies welcome to the new mexico
senate we know that men's
basketball and men's football
Really shining AAA super star on
on women's athletics I think
it's important to mention they
have combined averages of three
point two or higher and at
Thank you center randomly
you know i'd be remirsed if I
wouldn't say go against what to
help
yield to senator lopez who will
lead us through a performance or
two and a certificate and then
after senator lopez it'll be a
some wonderful entertainment
cultural entertainment to are
for those of us here in the
senate and in the gallery
and we are joined by mister
there mosica and dancer dancing
performance in flame and go some
estimate president we will start
with eard the charter school
who's here sitting to my left
and her team and then after that
mister president we'll also have
a recognition of missing seniors
to end our our time period here
prepare.
Thank you center in office
center love mr president we have
one last year from the national
institution flamingo.
we have from terror then through
charter school via gibs.
Megala agula.
Elena
We also have here for that sign
the floor is
the sentence
is over here by the door
and raya loss I know a loy
consilers
we also have with the sign the
floor mister president is diana
and seniors.
We also have working and seniors
And mister president just a
couple more persons here who are
through november he come and
also the principle generate
floppists they are here that are
come with a students today and
last mister president up in the
And so mister president
if I could
consent a to have the
certificate red for a very
the legislature of the state new
mexico fifty six legislative
session second session twenty
twenty four the investigator
states senate does here by
national institute of laminco
and conservatory of flamenco
arts in albuquerque and whereas
the national endowment for the
for folk and traditional arts
established in nineteen eighty
two to honor individuals for
their artistic excellence
lifetime achievement and
her profound impact on the
flamingo world her dedication to
preserving and promoting this
vibrant traditional art form and
forty years of teaching flaming
with the university of the
mexico's college of fine arts
where she is a professor america
and played a pivotal role in
founding the festival flaming
quality.
And he he asked for us the
american flamenco repertory
company and the creation of the
whereas even seniors continues
to teach and perform in new
mexico and enrich lives through
the art of flaming call now
therefore be it resolved by the
center the state of new mexico
her life long dedication to the
preservation and promotion of
the art of slum income signed in
sealed at this scaptal in the
Thank you senate lovers thank
you very much mister president
and members of the senate arm
comments mister president before
I ask for us to recognize
missing seniors
thank you centered offers and
thank you to the reader for
bringing this incredible dancers
the school so phenomenal I have
been watching avon seniors for
my thirty years that I have been
phenomenal background phenomenal
family her ability to extend it
to all of her children and
family and then teach others we
but they are followed by center
cities thank you very much
mister president I also want to
think senator locus for making
such a wonderful start to the
week here in our state senate
thank you mister president I
just decades of love and support
and and really caring for new
mexico I just also want to just
mentioned two other individuals
mister president that are a part
of this activity dane and and
just a part of flaming coherent
them out they have been working
over time mr president to
introduce me to flame
they have been working over time
to get me to show up at various
events this and that and I did
unwind and get things centered
again and it was really very
beautiful that thank you very
much mister president thank you
celebrity center still offers
thank you mister president I too
and I will confess i've taken
flamingo
you guys the the performances
were amazing uhm and I just want
to congratulate everybody
president you send us the love
as any further.
See no further comments center
lovers
thank you very much mister
president members of the senate
with me in the senate and if we
could please
welcome congratulate and think
mistake send us for all that
she's done.
I would ask free anonymous
consent to introduce my anna
seasonality associates who are
we have students who are working
here as students from other
states and the great thing is we
may be able to ask them to stay
five recognizing an assesior
assistance as a valuable part of
our entire health care system
and we did get that pass and
percent so to introduce a board
members of the
certified energy algee
assistance we have lense does
uh abega more
have worked with uh over the
last few years to to get our
patient you will see them more
and more around the state
the students who are
participating in the program to
get their degree from outer
And brat excuse me again shop in
it and decent
that pretty okay
are and again we're looking
forward to them hopefully coming
on and i'm strictly and uh even
in cynicis I believe
participates in the program as
well and finally doctor joe
virgining practice of uh
assisting energy theologies in
medicine and as I say you can
look forward to meeting them
yourself in an operating sweet
and could you
revisit
The legislature the state in
mexico fifty six legislator
second session twenty twenty
four the numbers go state senate
in the senate horaz certified
and this these geologist
assistance have practiced in the
united states since nineteen
sixty nine and whereas certified
a critical role in health care
delivery and whereas certified
and it's the ologist assistance
have provided care to thousands
of patients in new mexico and
legislative session which
ensures that certified and this
these theologist assistance will
continue to practice in new
mexico and whereas the certified
see locally trained student and
esthesiologist assistance
beginning in august twenty
twenty four assuring continue it
support that they have received
including the passage of senate
bill thirty five now therefore
be it resolved by the senate of
the state of new mexico that
january twenty second twenty
stewart.
President protem senator martin
e hickey sherry de luhan chief
clerk.
Senator
again I would ask that you all
join me in honoring the answers
assistance through the
certificate and giving him an
applause for coming in today
thank you.
majority florida repeater worth
tickets to that next daughter
business uh thank you mister
president so as I mentioned up
front we have a large number of
then we have twelve that are
carry over the community reports
are there for those
so we're going to go ahead and
kind of read in some of the
messages and
the house we're on that order
business messages from the house
the reader to read.
January tenth twenty twenty four
message from the house of
class have been read in full and
signed by the office of the of
the house in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the senate
well electronics to the members
of the body that the officers
the senate have signed an open
session
house bill on with emergency
cars
the reader to read.
business messages from the
governor of the reader to read
senate executive message number
twenty eight data january
five b two of the new mexican
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty sixth legislature
second session submission of a
bill bearing legislative council
requirements for public entities
receiving state appropriations
in certain situations and change
the membership of the cyber
security advisory committee
executive message number twenty
nine the honorable mimi store
president pro temporary.
President pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuing to article four section
service drafting number point
two two seven two eight two a
bill clarifying duties for the
department of transportation
appealable to district court
updating definitions and other
provisions of the motor carrier
act and repealing sections of
governor has been received the
reader to read senate executive
message number thirty the
honourable mimi store president
pro temporary president pro
six legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
legislative council service
drafting number point two two
hundred shim governor cannot
show the message from the
governor has been received
the senate executive message
number thirty one the honorable
need me stewart president
hear by submit to the senate
rules committee the following
nominations for appointment.
Lanny gwinmaddex phd for
reappointment of the public
safety advisory commission
pierce for reappointment to the
public set safety advisory
commission miss pierce's current
term commenced on january second
message from the governor has
been received.
Reader to read senate executive
message number thirty two the
honourable mimi stewart
constitution and mms a nineteen
seventy eight twenty nine dash
two dash four end twenty nine
dash two dash nineteen a I hear
department of public safety for
a term commencing june twenty
fourth twenty twenty three to be
served at the pleasure of the
secretary of public safety
So they're peter worth thank you
mister president that we go that
are business announcements and
miscellaneous.
When that order business and
reports so we're going to start
with some other confirmations as
soon as those committee reports
come down will switch gears read
them in and then get you are
confirmations and I yield to
senator hot I mean run that
order business confirmations
center hundred mile mister
president I as of the
credentials of sicily a barker
president pursuant to send it
executive letter number three
dated february twenty second
twenty twenty two I moved at the
senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of sicily a barker
Deputy cheap barker joined the
albuquerque police department in
two thousand four after graduate
from the police account me she
served in field services bureau
from two thousand and four to
twelve and where she served in
the fill services bureau and
later and the violent crimes
division as the fast also
promoted to lieutenant and
served in the juvenile property
crown division and the
criminalistics division as well
these assignments include the
oversight of organized crime
where she served as the
northwest area commander which
is
right near my district and she
lives out there on the west side
as well and have gotten to know
her serving on the civilian
her career deputy chief barker
hit served on several panels and
commissions and continues to
work closely with stake holders
the strength and community and
partnership.
confirmation
see no debate so they're pope to
close and the confirmation thank
you mister president I ask
unanimous consent that the
senators we are voting all
senators need to be after
i'll send it is to your seats.
If you wish to follow now please
raise your hand.
The.
To get.
I have one of thirty one the
affirmative zero negative the
employment assistantly
mexico states
senator pope thank you mister
president unfortunately
definitely cheap barker couldn't
be here today but I would ask
Senator had a mail mister
president eight weeks sorry
mister president I asset the
credentials evan bill ups be
presented to the full senate for
everything thank you very much
mister president I moved that
the senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of van bill ups to
the gaming control board.
You know objections center for
their explain.
had a remarkable new mexican
show up here in the senate last
year and that was actually his
mama and she is one of the
longest serving nurses in the
brings a valuable combination of
tax audit and investment
expertise mister president and
he is all of those those
acronyms since a two thousand
nine he's worked in public
currently the cpa member of the
new mexico gaming control board
which regulates and monitors the
states gaming industry in
addition he's the new mexico
role that he feels there mister
president prior to this van
worked with an investment firm
as a mutual find accountant and
sec financial reporting manager
very very serious and detailed
finisher actually van serves on
various nonprofit boards
focusing on feeding the states
hungry in helping those and need
a mister president he does a lot
of this work as a volunteer I
don't know where he finds a time
but he's a remarkable new
Seen our debate are you to send
a breath thank you mister
president i'd like to excuse
center share center neighbor
certain gagos until they return
the mark with this particular
new mexican he's just a great
edition while continuing to be
in addition to this board with
that mister president I ask
unanimous consent that the
record show that the roles been
if you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Five o twenty nine the
affirmative on the negative the
new mexico senate center by the
thank you very much mister
president members of the senate
will you please congratulate van
phillips for his reappointment
to the gaming control board.
credentials of daren patrick
white the second be presented to
the fourth and after
consideration to the gaming
control board I now yield to
confirm the appointment of
darren patrick quite the second
for the gaming control for.
In the objection center stewart
to explain.
administration a what I think is
amazing is uh uh darren whites
background that I had no idea
about uh daremoit was
force serving curtain air for
space he also successfully
fulfilled his enlistment
commitment while attending last
school full time he got his
for their work in the clinic and
their commitment to public
service mister president we've
known darn white along time he's
got a great background I think
is perfect for the game in
close mrperiod president asking
animals consent that the record
show the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a
short house.
Semi rent
where voting centers to receive
please.
The.
By vote of thirty three in the
affirmative zero in the name of
the appointment of dentatric
wife the second as in a member
of the game control board for a
all rise and give
congratulations to during white
for his point.
fourth senate for consideration
to the construction industry's
commission I know yield to
senator stewart.
Center stewart thank you missed
president pursuit to senate
to the construction industry's
commission.
Seen no objection center stewart
to explain
mellow workers I say it was born
in albuquerque but he was raised
in tome and he graduated from
belint high school his father as
person is class and construction
technology number one number two
and number three after high
school he worked in the
apprenticeship programs one that
local forty nine he believes in
helping new mexicans he is a
great appointment to this
commission I stand for
questions.
and I ask unanimous consent that
the record show the roles being
called that all those present
voted in the affirmative accept
those voting in the negative by
If you wish to go no please read
your hand.
By order thirty six in the
affirmative zero the negative
the appointment of is there
example as a member of the
construction industry's
commission for a terrible
comments in on january nineteen
mister president so center store
had to run up but let's all
stand and just acknowledge this
appointment for I say as emphy
thank you serving.
announcement to miscellaneous
and that order business and now
just misleading us send their
peter worth thank you mister
president so we do have the
committee reports down for the
confirmations this morning and I
would ask the reader when we go
you know we go that a business
committee reports run that order
business committee reports the
reader to read the report this
president gerald's committee has
had under consideration senate
golstein as a member of the
museum board of regions for a
term commencing on november
twenty ninth twenty twenty three
and expiring july eighth twenty
katie do high chair senator
mister president I ask unanimous
consent of the senate that the
reader really treat all the
committee reports that we read
on them with one motion and that
the journal reflect their acted
appointment sonya key choves as
a
as a member of the governor's
organized crime prevention
commission for a term commencing
senate confirmed this
appointment.
Senate executive letter number
twenty six dated january second
term commencing on november
twenty ninth twenty twenty three
and expire in july eighth twenty
twenty eight you committee
recommends that the senate
confirm this reappointment
chovers as a member of the
museum board of regions for a
term commencing on november
twenty ninth twenty twenty three
and expiring july eighth twenty
twenty nine your committee
twenty twenty three and which
the governor makes the following
appointment mark as joseph
montoya junior as a member of
the governor's organized crime
Senate executive letter number
nineteen dated november
fourteenth twenty twenty three
and with the governor makes the
and expirent on delay eighth
twenty twenty nine your
committee recommends that the
senate confirmed this
appointment respectfully
submitted senator katy duhig
was supposed need the eyes have
at the human reports have been
adopted and journal reflect that
they were acted upon each
individually
senator thank you mister
president you know sent we go
without our business
the credentials of george steven
goldstein the presentation of
full senate for consideration to
the museum board of regions I
now yield to senator worth.
Send a pinot worth thank you
reappointment of george stephen
goalstein to the museum board of
regions for a term commencing
november twentieth twenty twenty
send the word to explain I thank
you mister president so
doctor goldstein is back
an ongoing public service uh
doctor goalstein is a health
care executive with over forty
years of four profit non profit
public and private manage care
hospital in public health
united health care senior vice
president medicare medicaid for
the foundation health
corporation and again has has
set those quarter and quarter
gold steam and thank doctor
balls dean for agreeing to serve
outstand for questions and you
send it a worth we are debating
senators center thank you mister
president at very full full
Seeing no further debate center
words close thank you mister
president asean sent the record
show the roles been called and
i'll action uh in all those
present vote in the affirmative
Have you wished about no please
raise your hands.
november twenty twenty twenty
three and expiry july eighth
twenty twenty eight has been
confirmed by the new mexico
senate send the word thank you
mister president thank you
members i'd ask that doctor
again for this position
senator had a meal
mister president I asset the
credentials of data send package
senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of
davison
packard coin
to them is to the museum board
of regions.
some
mister
mr coin that comes to us with a
lot of experience in the area of
museums his being with a many
very strong recommendations that
were percent at this morning at
the at the hearing and he would
be a very strong acid to new
See no debate said it was out as
close
mister president members I ask
unanimous consent that the
record shows that the role has
i'll send it to see your seats
if you wish to vote now
please raise your hand
on.
museum border regions for a term
commencing on november sixth
twenty twenty three and expiring
on july eighth twenty twenty
nine has been confirmed by the
new mexico senate center was
mysterious and he's gonna be a
very strong asset to our museum
border regions.
The.
the four set up for
consideration to the governors
organized crime prevention
commission I know yield to
senator guns are less than
everyone's honest mister
the appointment of marcus joseph
montoya junior to the governor's
organized crime prevention
very strong recommendations and
very strong
experience and providing this
this morning at the at the
hearing you know there were some
questions answers were very much
very well
taken and I also feel very
strong you know that mister
anyone wishing to make.
See no debate synergons are
discourse mister president I ask
unanimous concern that the
record shows that the role has
center by the mispresident are
you now send to excuse senator
compost until he returns to the
chamber here in no objection
i'll send it a share seats we
the appointment of marcus joseph
junior monthly junior has been a
point as a member of the
governor's organized crime
prevention commission
for a term commencing on march
representatives of his present
and members the please help me
also in a very warm applaud to
mr month for this appointment
Finish me them as president and
I pursue it to a senate
executive letter number twenty
six the general second of this
members of the body miss travers
has a lifetime experience of of
community service master's
degree in art education at UNM
community and i'm happy to
suggest that we reappoint her.
Thank you sense me centers where
debating the reappointment of
consent the records show that
the roles been called in those
present voted in the affirmative
except for those were in the
neighborhood show hands all
senators to receipts please we
are voting to be wished about
the chamber already
so that came into late.
By vote of thirty three in the
affirmative you're on the
negative the reappointment of
senate senators meetings the
mispresident members of you
could rise in join me and
credentials of sony I can charge
be presented to the fourth set
up for consideration to the
governors organized crime
prevention commission I know
year I moved that the sanity who
by confirmed the appointment of
mison each others to the
governor's organized crime
prevention commission.
Here are no objections in their
smithes to explain the
msu and then graduate degree at
UNM so she's got both of those
covered
a presidential award from the
women in the federal law
enforcement foundation just a
and has a lot of experience
working as an fbi field agent
etc so i'm very pleased to
recommend her
nomination today.
They send me this
steinborn until he returned to
the chamber and senator pope
until the returns to the
chamber.
There are no objections thank
you center for the.
Senators to receipt we are
voting if you wish to vote
please raise your hand.
governor's organized trying to
prevent your commission for a
term commence in a march twenty
eighth twenty twenty three and
expiry december thirty first
twenty twenty five has been
confirmed by the new mexico
please rise and congratulate
mischothers
center had a meal mister
president I ask that the
credentials of joseph m thompson
president pursuant to senate
executive letter number twenty
six day to january second two
thousand twenty four I moved at
the senate do hereby confree
confirm the reappointment of
Senator to explain oh yes oh
thank you yes um boy this fell I
I think many of it all of us
word the causes uhm i'm very
close to mister thompson I don't
know if people realize this but
he is he was an avid reader I
think that english degree from
signing off on it and you know
my second novel I dedicate to
him under the sudanese joe
christmas I can share that and
then i'm he's the one that gave
basically I would also direct
your attention to the fact that
these president of the capital
art foundation and so that
actually came up in in committee
today because you know there are
art so it's it's very fitting
that he is here he's on that
museum board of region so with
that I uh stand for questions.
thank you mister president and I
think everyone in the body knows
mr thompson and mister thompson
has a light of outstanding
abilities and I think well uh
dramatic skills and and michel
thompson is extraordinarily
talented in that regard and I
hope one day each of you have an
this appointment uh michel
thompson is in ashed to our
state and and in the the genuine
uh system show thank you much
rise to support this confree
what you may not know about
former representative thompson
names and that are collection so
he he's a living breathing
person who should be on the
museum board of region very
happy to support his
support a didn't get to know
mister thomson until they became
a member of this of this
legislature and I can tell you
that he does have a wide
interest in the type of work
that he does but I will tell
mister president when he agrees
to do something I I think he
probably doesn't agree to do
something unless he's going to
do it well and so I would say
that that that's his mo and and
that's why support the serve
this confirmation and without
you very much mister president
mister president with the
sponsor of the appointment yield
on all deal with ideal.
Miss president
and then mister president to
settle and and his relation with
art hole what is the what is
what does that have to do with
this confirmation spending on
the
I don't know comprehend they
them you know we these folks
they have wow they have very
interesting lives I mean I know
I know for fact that mister hall
they they particularly reveal
revere center every sort of
thank you mister president and
senator nil
you indicated that
really interesting art at his
house etc neal have we've done
an inventory lately of the art
here in the capital.
Senator
i'm considering this this this
nomination carefully i'm just
might my big concern having bent
to has
actually additional house
and and and on his property he
actually has a r
has a chapel.
on their on their property
mister president etcetera nil
and
so i'll i'll listen to the rest
of the debate and decide how i'm
going to vote at that point but
the center neighborhood center
more thank you mister president
this is actually serious a a
going to be a hypocritical today
i've made a big point in rules
committee and on this floor
pay to libe this chamber to also
be
in a policy making position and
I I do stand by this but so I
expect after I vote for a job
been friends for twenty five
years long before I ever decided
to run for the state senate and
blown before he was ever in the
house representatives we've been
friends for that long and I know
his passion for the our
also maybe that's something we
need to talk about but I do i'm
brief vote for joe he's a great
friend he does a great job and
hope that in the future of this
body will take a look at that
and the future governors prass
governors have done it so i'm
not just calling out this
governor for it that we really
need to be careful pointing
lobbyists who are.
and encourage the body to go for
you but I do encourage this body
and the governor in the future
seriously consider the pop this
policy of appointing obvious to
put solutions thank you.
if someone become in late to
this
appointment you would have
thought to mister thompson was
on trial
but uh
over the joy talking to him but
he must be very humble because I
didn't realize he heard all
these different talents and
interest in abilities so just
want to congratulate him and
then not only being a very
about mister thompson since a
lawyer disparaged his good name
I I feel compelled to try to
rehabilitate him
thompson's property said in
everyday asking center on the or
two yield
yesterday yes thank you mister
president I have no idea
to come to be his bride
and a gentleman who sits close
to me actually was the architect
be his bride and albuquerque and
so the remarks of the senator
I be so we're not for confession
only a friend of this
institution a friend of rossell
but uh is then remarkable things
as obvious from his resume and
Send a sort of for a second
time.
Thank you thank you very much I
first of all as to consider more
hypocrisy if he is going to be
amazing art as well
convinces me that I should vote
for his reappointment thank you
very much thank you center every
further to me
seen them send out near the
it's sitting up there k but it's
a
so anyway
there also I have to acknowledge
my colleague of senator greg's
comments about his acting
this body and all of us said in
the certain person got involved
in and down it went so anyway I
have let that go you know you
know it's classic by partisans
that we're trying to do the
right thing where people could
consent that the records show
that the role has been called
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
I ask unanimous concerned what
that the record show that the
role has been called in all
those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by show of
hands.
senators where voting to your
seats please
if you wish to go now please
raise your hand.
The.
Thanks
but I have one of thirty six in
the firm because you're on the
negative the reappointment of
joseph m thompson as a member of
the museum border regions for a
center now thank you mister
president and so can we we have
joe thompson to rise and all of
business announcements are
miscellaneous and that are the
business announces misleading is
senator thank you mister
president so we have eight more
confirmations and we're going to
go to those in just a minute but
senator gregs had some guests
students in the director of the
technology student association
and if I could please get them
she the president this year and
katelin briesto solish she's
from santa teresa high school
down in near my port of the
world and she is the vice
Thank you senator greggs center
peter worth thank you mister
president you know this is that
we go that order business
confirmations and I yield to
children's trust fund board of
trustees I now yield to senator
mckanna senator sinner mckenna
hereby confirm the important of
margaret elliston to the
children's trust board of
pardon me the children's trust
fund board of trustees.
ellison has provided decades of
service as an advocate for
children of new mexico her roles
have included project director
for the new mexico mental health
mister president has been a
dedicated community service
volunteer and leader for many
years in new mexico.
and thank you center mechanic
stand and extremely strong
support of this confirmation and
reconfirmations of president I
can tell you that this
time with her honey and
everything but right back at it
mister president just working
really really hard for the
children of new mexico so I
stand in very strong support and
I just love it a death and I
think she's just a wonderful
of this reappointment to serve
on the children's trust fund
board and thank you senator
mckenna for bringing miss
elliston forward and thank you
make you sure of course that
there's some money I have to
help fund what important work
the children's trust fund does
in our communities and even
sometimes the the I call on the
willingness to serve thank you
mister president.
Thank you senator we have sent
her disability
thank you mister president and I
important body she made a
presentation to our interim
committee this summer and it was
it was pretty clear that the
realize the the potential of
that fund and so they they've
come forward with the proposal
that will be heard in our
committee this afternoon
license pleate and over the
years that's built up a little
bit of a of a corpus but
spending the interest on a small
fund
made a I thought a very eloquent
pitch for that this summer the
kind of projects that would be
funded with that extra interest
earned by the money we
appropriate this year
the the work of the of the trust
fund is what kind of
does the cutting edge work for
child protective services or any
that then become part of CYFD or
the health department or some
other.
Entity can be funded through our
regular appropriation once
they've demonstrated their
Senator cynthia nava uh
introduced a change in the trust
phone so that a portion of it is
goes for what's called the next
projects for older kids for
teenagers for example incredibly
important so I would urge the
members not only to confirm
margalistan for the children
our disappearance would you have
for the debate we have senator
severe lopes followed by center
but the center is the other
thank you I too joined the
course and support of
fund and I was also pleased to
learn about what we're going to
be learning about inspect this
afternoon so thank you for for
stepping up are continuing to
consent to excuse their senator
hickey until he returns the
chamber.
Here in our objection any
further debate senators.
and that all those present voted
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hounds to your seats we are
voting please
Yeah.
But I have out of thirty seven
the affirmative zero in the
negative the reappointment of
market ellison as a member of
the children has fun border
mckenna thank you mr president
may we are right and
congratulate miss elliston.
senate for consideration to the
military base planning
commission I know yield to
senator neighborhood.
Saturday night.
twenty twenty four but I move
the senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of raymond monday
to the military base planning
commission I now stand for a
question.
mindergone is appeared before
this body a number of times
because his resume is replete
with public service i'm proud to
development and now serves as
the eastern plans council
governments uh director of
economic development community
planner
like to add a personal note
mister mondagon is a graduate of
clovers high school in the
that uh graduated in that class
one has an association with the
governor's office uh kelly
maxfield now kelly max filled
honoured to uh uh move this
domination and please at uh uh
mister mondagon continues to
protalis area and that is
protecting canon air for space
so that I stand for questions.
Thank you center nightmare
center is real debating
for a minute uh mister president
he has one too many awards it
just unbelievable how many how
much community service is
know him in in area
uh
he was a long term policeman
that a lot of words while he was
we've got to have been a
surround to to hire those
spouses and uh missed thursday
selected to one part national
and world tournaments and has
honored as a US s s a um part of
mexico you say softbare hall of
the fame and i'm so proud of him
from his many a copy thank you
mister president thank you
senator woods
accolades for mr monday to go on
but i'll tell you one other that
I kind of heard come out but i'm
gonna say it again in little
more detail.
Any time you land in his
community mister president he
can tell you about every single
the background showering them
with attention and recognition
and all of those wonderful
things that in a town and and
and I guess town ambassadors do
about the place where they're
Thank you center party are any
further to be yes we have
senator composed followed by
senator senator companies thank
you mister president to the
members of the senate
small communities he offers
everything that he has to insure
that they're going to be
successful in that's the key
term to be successful and that's
regardless of whatever he was
over the endeavour is he
insurers that we're all moving
forward together and again rame
and congratulations and the hard
work grow that you continue with
thank you mister president I too
stand in support of this
nomination this nominee i've
known mister mondroom for a long
clovish but all across the crash
of state and I think that he
will be an actual and
appointment to this commission
this committee because he will
their will be on the shame page
there the desire to make those
men and women that we have in
our state today from all over
supports them and support their
mission show me president I I
place normally and
congratulations.
Thank you center creates any
further debate.
mister president I ask unanimous
consent that the records show
the role has been called and
that the all those present voted
in the affirmative accept those
voting in the negative buyers
Yeah.
twenty three to be served at the
pleasure the governor has been
confirmed by the new mexican
senate center niber thank you
mister president if mr mondagon
The.
trust fund I know yield to
senator tomorrow thomas
thank you mister president
her very pleased to present this
I moved at the senate do here by
confirm the appointment of
british gathering snyder to the
children's trust fun
mr
has a long distinguished career
working with children and
families
for a scene of direction to go
ahead and explain.
thousand one she began clinical
social work in that santa fe as
a treatment coordinator and then
a supervisor overseeing the care
of children and the treatment
foster care program.
working with a university of
working with you and
health
her in two thousand nine she
began working as AP
beginnings foster care clinic in
the child abuse response team
that you and m
she currently works closely with
science and child development
from the union and a masters and
social work from the university
of texas and finally
president thank you center time
and senators were debating the
reappointment of kathleen
schneider
in the affirmative except those
voting in a negative by show of
hands all senators to your seats
we are voting
i'll send it as to your seats if
The.
My vote of twenty nine
in july first twenty twenty four
has been duly confirmed by the
new mexico senate.
Center tommy
thank you mister president
commission I now yield to
senator more there mister
president pursuing the senate
executive message twenty nine
day january twenty second twenty
twenty I move the senate to here
commission for four years and we
haven't heard any complaints and
he's awesome at building things
thank you mister president.
Thank you center morning we are
debating.
Senator sure seeds for these
we're voting
if you wished about no please
The.
I have out of thirty one of the
affirmative zero the negative
the employment of john shroud as
a member of the construction
industry's commission for a term
Thank you may not well take it
thank you center morning.
Senator meal mister president I
answered the credentials of
thank you mister president
pursuant to send it executive
letter number thirty four dated
january thirteenth twenty twenty
three I moved that the senate do
ms dural check was race in santa
fe new mexico for family
impacted by her own adoption as
an infant and parents divorce as
mexico school of law and is of
council at cutting and mccarthy
where she works on domestic
relation matters recently a
mysterial cheque also became a
proceedings across the state she
has committed to assisting her
clients and children through all
phases and I stay in for
questions or comments.
Thank you so much if any
Seen them senators to vanix to
close mister president I asked
unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present vote in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
zero the negative the
appointment of alexis shannon's
doodle check as a member of the
children's trust find board of
trustees return comments in a
september first twenty twenty
Center automatical mister
president I asked that the
credentials of stacy renewed
king be presented of the full
senate for consideration to the
children's trust one board I
know yield is under stephanics
appointment of stacy renew king
to the children's trust fund
board.
Here an objection since the
one of the granddaughters of all
asking who actually started
children's cabinet insurance use
and families department and the
children's trust fund so it is
center lobbyist
I thank you very much mister
president and I just want to
echo on first think senator
stephanie sponsoring and
had a vested interest with
regards to children and families
in our state and I know his king
has done a wonderful job serving
on this trust being bored and I
appreciate the governor's
reappointment thank you.
record show the role has been
called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by show hands senators
to your seats we are voting
But I have out of twenty nine
two and expire in july first
twenty twenty six has been
confirmed by the new mexico
senate center thank you mister
president and members of the
senate.
now yield to senator nevil
thank you mister president
percent to eximite executive
letter number ten day to april
mister president tracy has
someone have known for all the
very long time she's worked for
san juan county is up until her
retirement not long ago she ran
the juvenile services department
alternative to detention
programs uh she was she received
a number of national awards from
nako national association and
mexico she continues to be
active in various youth programs
and sam on county and with that
i'd stand for questions mister
president thank you center
interview
and that all those present voted
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
of hands all senators your seats
please we are voting.
I.
on april thirteen twenty twenty
two and expire in april twelfth
twenty twenty five has been
confirmed by the new restaurant
center.
her with your with your
appreciation thank you
center how to mail mister
president I ask that the
send a executive letter eleven
dated april twenty fifth twenty
twenty two I moved up to senate
do here by confirm the
appointment of ronald joseph
lovator to the new mexico
finance authority.
corporation holy owned by the
okay a window state corporation
in the holding company for all
okay we get business including
from the board and became chief
executive chief executive
officer of the corporation under
ron's leadership say in berked
upon a mission to deliver their
to the okay wing a tribe and he
served as the tribal governor
from two thousand eleven to two
thousand twelve and and again in
twenty nineteen to twenty twenty
rona served in a multiple of
name a few mister president I
stand for questions thank you
any debate centers.
of hands to your seats please
if you wish to vote now.
Please raise your hand.
But I voted thirty the
twenty six has been confirmed by
the new mexico senate senate how
to meal mr president randovata
cannot join yesterday but he is
watching via webcast if we could
senator peter worth to take us
to the next order of business
thank you mister president you
need to go there business
announcements and miscellaneous
order business senator peter
worth thank you mister president
continue to knock those out this
week
mister president members
basically this point we've got
some committee reports and bill
introduction and then what call
this president your committee's
committee to whom has been
referred to senate bill one or
three has had it under
consideration and fine seemed to
be germane in accordance with
constitutional provisions and
considered the senate that the
reader be allowed treat all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion the
journal reflect that they were
acted on individually during no
committee senate bill one o five
fine seem to be german then it's
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee.
Senate bill one oh eight five
seem to be german and then
Senator bill one twenty five
five seemed to be remaining
then's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee
senate bill one o two fine seem
to be your main that's referred
to the health and public affairs
committee
senator bill one fourteen fine
seem to be demanded that's
tax business in transportation
committee
senator bill one nineteen find
seemed to be domained that's
referred to the tax business and
seem to be german then referred
to the tax business and
transportation committee.
Senator bill one thirteen find
seemed to be german that's
senate bill one eighteen fine
seemed to be demand that's
referred to the tax business in
transportation committee.
referred to the indian rural and
cultural affairs committee
sent a bill one twenty two fine
seem to be domain then referred
of the committee report senators
we have a motion to that
community report all those in
favor signal fight by saying I
was opposed name the eyes have
at the community reports have
been adopted and the journal
business introduction
legislation the reader to read
mister president I think i'm
seeing some more more committee
reports so we're still on that
business when we just finish up
the committee reports you know
certificate of congratulations
certificate number one to the
following james mountain.
College and career high school
albequirky public school
schools jaul hutchinson last
crucials public schools kevin
dutcher mandela inner in mandela
international magnet school
sanity public school district
belmont sapian saque analysts
and treatment center new mexico
department of health all of them
receiving their national board
certification and directs the
chief clerk to prepare suitable
consent of the senate the reader
be electric all the committee
reports and that we vote on them
with one motion that the general
reflect they were actually upon
individually there are no
objection to reader to read.
desert gold chapter of the
daughters of the american
revolution she has an she is an
exceptional student representing
the best of america's you and a
by the desert gold chapter of
the daughters of the american
revolution she's an exceptional
student representing the best
america's youth and a role model
to each others to other students
by the desert gold chapter of
the daughters of the american
revolution gracey growth for
being recognized as san want
college high schools outstanding
desert goal chapter of the
daughters of the american
revolution is an acceptable
student representing the best of
america's youth and a role model
to other students in this his
number three to the following
brian hand for his selection as
you a united states presidential
scholar m l is beth claim for
friends upon the death of
michael adam chovers
certificate of condolence
certificate number two for the
family and friends upon the
death of former state.
certificate of recognition to
the following in mexico
highlands university for its
service and dedication to the
residents of new mexico.
The.
number three survivors of
suicide day for the the
dedication of the volunteers for
providing information and
support to assist in the
grieving and healing process
their valuable contributions to
new mexico
certificate number five of
recognition to the new mexico
national board certified
teachers recognition day for the
and fifty years of service to
the legislature
the rules committee now fought
high school n j r o t c color
guard in the opening day
ceremonies of the new mexico
state legislature cadet shyan
poland in the open opening day
ceremonies.
Certificate number four to the
following sarah smucker social
smoker for performing in the
twenty twenty four new mexico
state legislature along with
cruise gages harassnet though
raise gold goodman and a garage
and alia peters all performing
for the new mexico twenty twenty
douglas for performing for the
maximum state legislature along
with a should document among
risk and a million paleer
ramirs jacob by the
jamison nash kailey dorgan lexy
taylor dickey and zuri zero
there they lack cruise all for
performing for the individual
state legislature.
andrea zono mir gibs mikayla
arguelad yenna do run ellison
writes is a bill tickerhoof
loy gonzalez all for performing
at the new new mexico state
legislature and directs the
chief clerk to prepare suitable
documents to express the
Move the committee reports
sooners we have emotions adopted
community reports all those in
favor significantly saying I
those opposed need the as habit
the community port has been
legislation the reader to read.
Senate bill one hundred
you mister president I think I
suggest we wait for senator
mccatch and to get his education
on senate bill one hundred
center my estimates who had that
honor last year's going to
explain it to him so which just
The senate billed oh i'm sorry
senate bill one twenty six
introduced by senator soles and
act relating to public officers
been read twice by title is
order printed a referred
to the senate committees
committee then send it health
public affairs committee events
sent a finance committee senator
amending definitions amending
the structure of the new mexico
state board of psychologist
examiners clarifying terms
allowing a prescribing
prescribing psychologists
senator bill one twenty seven
bill on twenty seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed a referred to the senate
committees committee then send
committee that senator one
twenty seven.
Senate bill one hundred
introduced by senator stephen
mccutchen
and act making an appropriation
to the city of hobs to
fourteen enemies eight nineteen
seventy eight being laws twenty
twenty chapter eighty section
one as amended senate bill one
then senate finance committee
senate bill
one hundred mister president
senator michael for the well
thank you mister president I
mister president yes thank you
mister president center of my
sister would you just take it
away and tell our new colleague
here just what is happened to
introduced a hundredth bill of
that stamp by the clerk senate
bill one hundred colleagues in
the house have also introduced a
house bill one hundred so look
the hundreds bill then you have
the honor of throwing a
celebration a party for the
workers of the round house.
Well there's plenty of
breaks the tension of the round
us everyone comes to work the
next morning and and fulfils
their their obligations that
next seven or ten days or so and
it's just a little gathering
Then miss president certain
there so just by sure
coincidence I was a rookie last
year and I got I interview sides
bill as well.
And so mister president affair
send it by the thank you very
much mister president so you
know there there's a whole host
of things that have to happen
for this you might want to you
know get on it about three days
doesn't feel like much of a
lottery here like it it feels
like it's a bit orchestrated but
i'm happy to participate so you
guys tell you you'll tell me
you know share with the body
right now so we can kind of all
get ready for that several
occasion
mister president III sure don't
but like I said i'm i'm happy to
selected for it does have to do
all of the cooking for about
five hundred people so I hope he
did obtain a a rental or
something up here has a home up
here where he can actually
now so you know i'll just do
like said i'll do it i'm told I
did get a did get a house appear
the garage is extremely small so
domino and this turkey and task
that is just landed again on his
shoulders he's very lucky for
where the protemp seated him
because he does have a neighbor
to has left there that can
really help him get this done
thank you mister president
south eastern new mexico we have
both kinds of music country and
western so if if you're
interested in the type of music
at that's a little blues
brother's reference there for
those that were paying attention
goes behind it that's how I
became such such good friends
with the speaker of the house
and so it puts you in a position
where you'll make a life long
friend and you weren't expecting
catcher would you like to have
any closing that
mister president now I have no
closing thoughts just tons of
questions and i'm glad i'm
sitting here next uh senator my
you guys can have a discussion
maybe guys in cocason at the
bill one hundred
and have a discussion there
senator says center worth we can
go on to
act relating to the public
employees retirement act
creating a state fire member
providing a definition for a
state firemember changing the
name of the state police member
coverage plan one including
state fire members understate
public safety member coverage
plan one providing for an
election pertaining to the
adoption of state public health
safety member coloured coverage
order printed and referred to
the committee senate committees
committee than senate health
poverty first committee then
send a finance committee that
sent a bill one twenty eight set
of bill one twenty nine
requirements for public entities
receiving state appropriations
in certain situations changing
the membership of the cyber
public offers committee then
senate finance committee that
senate bill one twenty nine
senate bill one thirty
introduced by senator patty on
act relating to artificial
thirty having been read twice by
title is order printed a
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
rules committee then senate
finance committee that senate
bill one thirty
advertisements commercials and
publicity for the island new
mexico ball via television and
other platforms senate bill one
thirty one and a bill one thirty
finance that send about one
thirty one
senate bill one thirty two
introduced by senator my esthers
and actually public education
health or adaptive physical
education services providing
that school districts and
charter schools include
specialized support services in
is order printed and referred to
the senate committees committee
then senator education then sent
a finance and senate bill one
thirty two senate bill one
thirty three introduced by a
enterprise program and
expenditure no less than thirty
percent of program eligible
federally assisted contract
funds with disadvantage business
transportation committee then
senate finance that senate bill
one thirty three seven bill one
thirty four introduced by
senator compos and act making
senate bill one thirty four send
a bill one thirty four have you
been read twice by title is
order printed referred to the
senate committees committee
events senate tax business
transportation committee thence
stephanics brand career hemphill
maestas and I be so though
an act relating to health
coverage and acting new sections
of the health care purchasing
to step therapy for prescription
drug coverage and eliminated
step therapy requirements for
certain conditions senate bill
one thirty five in the bill one
committee a senate bill one
thirty five
senate bill one thirty six
introduced by senator munice and
act relating to public officers
making an appropriation senate
bill one thirty six and a bill
one thirty six every been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the senate
legislative education study
committee and act relating to
public schools and handset
mandatory training for local
school boards and governing
bodies of charter schools adding
the number of training hours
attended by members to the
school support and
board candidates requiring local
school board and all governing
body meetings to be webcast and
archived senate bill one thirty
seven.
then senate rules committee then
send it education committee that
senate bill one thirty seven
senate bill one thirty eight
introduced by senator my estas
provide grants to counties in
this municipalities to demolish
condemned residential properties
making an appropriation senate
bill one thirty eight senate
thirty nine introduced by
senator monus and act relating
to public finance grading the
medicaid trust fund and the
state supported medicaid fund
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate public and health center
health and public affairs
committee then send it finance
judicial district district
attorney division one have
oversight of prosecutorial
decisions made by the attorneys
of district attorney division
committee thence sending you to
show committee that senate bill
one forty
senate bill one forty one
introduced by senator mulnus and
act relating to recycled.
otherwise receive a catalytic
converter required a record of
the purchase of pollation
platinum or rhodium requiring
notarized declaration for a
catalytic converter beladium
platinum or rodium creating a
daily database to track data
inspection of records of
transactions involving catalytic
converters palladium platinum or
rhodium imposing criminal
then senator share committee
that sent a bill one forty one
senate bill one forty two
introduced by senator munos and
act relating to behavioral
prescribing penalties senate
bill one forty two and a bill
one forty two having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee
then senate health public
providing for a school based
instructional programs for
students who are death or heart
of hearing or require the use of
an american sign language as
an implement school based
disability language
instructional programs to
receive distributions generated
by the disability language
bill one forty three seven one
forty three having been read
twice by title's order printed a
referred to the senate
committees committee events
senate education thence sent it
finance and senate bill one
may be used for administration
business just fish committee
then senate finance committee
senate bill one forty four.
Senate bill one forty five
detain individuals for federal
civil immigration violations and
require in the termination of
any such existing agreements
prohibiting public bodies from
Senate bill one forty five
having been read twice by
title's order printed and
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
health public affairs committee
enacting a new section of the
hospital funding act to require
county hospitals and contracting
hospitals to accept health
benefit plans available through
the mexico health insurance
title's order printed referred
to the senate committees
committee then senate health
public affairs committee then
senate tax business in
strategician committee to senate
excise tax rates on alcoholic
beverages for certain
manufacturers and producers.
Indexing the tax rates for all
manufacturers and producers
the revenue from the the correct
size tax to a new alcohol harms
alleviation fund creating the
alcohol harms alleviation fund
then send a finance committee
senator bill one forty seven
senate bill one forty eight
introduced by senator I be sort
of representative lane and
senate bill one forty eight bill
one forty eight have they've
been read twice by title's order
printer referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
tax business transfers committee
behavioral health facilities
fund act creating the behavioral
health facilities fund
providing for grants to plan and
purchase renovate or construct
referred to the senate
committee's committee then send
it health public affairs
committee then sent a finance
that senate bill one forty nine
senate bill one fifty introduced
administration for quake county
to construct a new
doctor dan see triggered
memorial hospital in the two
come carry senate bill one fifty
Then send it finance committed a
senate bill one fifty
senable one fifty one introduced
by senators coppers would and
brantley and act relating to
bill one fifty one have you been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee then
senate tax business and
transportation committee then
the criminal history
investigation procedures for the
early chaltered education and
care department and the children
youth and family's department
two haven't been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
education then send it to the
short committee that senate bill
one fifty two
public finance increasing the
amount that is annually
transferred to the early talent
education and care program fund.
the early childhood education
and care fund senate bill one
fifty three senate bill one
fifty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
and act related crime amending
the rights of sexual assault
survivors providing timelines
for a line forcement agency to
send a sexual assault
tracking system adding timelines
to survivor notification when a
matches identified between
biological evidence in a sexual
assault examination kit and a
committee then senate health in
public affairs committee then
send it to the shirt that send a
bill one fifty four
senator one fifty five
sourced to any county pursuant
to section seven dash one dash
fourteen NMSA nineteen seventy
eight being laws twenty twenty
chapter eighty section one as
committee then sent a finance
committee that senate bill wants
the senate bill
six introduced by senator saving
opens.
brain injury services fund
requiring brain injury
surveillance making
appropriations senate bill one
fifty six senate bill wanted to
Senate bill one fifty seven
introduced by senator sch
meetings and act relating to
elections prohibiting the
senate bill one fifty seven have
you been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
senate communities committee
then senate rules committee then
sending judiciary committee the
to the constitution creating a
constitutional revision
commission providing powers and
duties making an appropriation
declaring an emergency senate
then senate rules committee then
send it to the street committee
that sent about one fifty eight
senate bill one fifty nine
introduced by senator compos for
the legislative finance
distribution from the trust fan
for trust fund to the program
fund making a transfer from the
tax stabilization reserve to the
education then senate finance at
senate bill one fifty nine
senate bill one six d introduced
by center my stuff and act
making a an appropriation for
Then senate conservation then
senate finance and senate bill
one sixty
seven bill one sixty one
introduced by senator munios and
certain revenue losses how
senate bill one sixty one senate
bill one sixty one have you been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
senator monos and act relating
to public finance prohibiting
the drawing or payment of a
warrant by an employee of the
state agency when there is an
the senate committees committee
then senate health public
affairs committee that's senator
to sure that senate bill one
sixty two the senate bill one
sixty three and act related to
An act related to alcohol
authorizing direct shipment
permits for beer and spirituous
lickers senate bill one sixty
three
committee then senate finance
and senate bill one sixty three
senate bill one sixty four
introduced by senator souls for
the legislative education study
income on pregnant people making
an appropriation senate bill one
sixty four senate bill on sixty
four having been read twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
and brand and actually relating
to legislative retirement
changing the calculation of the
amount of pension pursuant to
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee
that's senate finance committee
that sent about one sixty five
consumption of alcohol senate
resolution one senate resolution
one haven't been read twice by
title is order printed reference
the constitution of new mexico
to allow municipalities and
counties to regulate firearms in
a manner that is more
restrictive than state law
senate joint resolution twelve
senate resolution twelve having
been read twice by senate joint
resolution twelve having been
read twice by title's order
printed referred to the senate
rules committee then senator
disheart committee that senate
Thank you mister president your
name is the second one out of
business announcements and
miscellaneous on that order
business senator peter worth
thank you mister president just
for committee chairs now is the
announcements thank you senator
peter worth we have seven year
store followed by center branch
and center gangles
thank you mister president the
committees committees will meet
today and so we failed to have a
meeting that's try to be there
on time tomorrow ten thirty room
three twenty six.
Thank you senator stewart center
brand nothing was president and
i'm not looking at anyone that
wasn't but
a hundred and seven days ago
hamas attacked israel but there
is some news out as of about an
hour ago
ceasefire
as long as hamas releases all of
the hostages.
So right at this point we're
have a two month ceasefire on
all operations
by israel they will keep some
troops in there to keep the
peace both a ceasefire on all
that offer so
you know fourteen hundred people
were slaughtered and we should
remember that we still have at
least ten americans being held
and maybe we can get some peace
back in the middle east for a
while.
And sent around we have center
eggless followed by send our dc
thank miss president I just
given by three pastures here in
santa fe we'd love to have you
no politics involved it's just
scripture so we'd like them by
the floor probably
unless something comes up
probably the quarter of three
the senate health and public
affairs committee will meet in
there's six six bills and our
agenda and we'd like to have our
first meeting today half hour
after the floor center of the
super senator hambling thank you
mister president a senate
presentation from the secretary
of taxation and revenue and also
here four bills uh senator bill
thirty six from senator morris
senate bill fifty four from
senator pope senate bill fifty
again your tax business and
transportation meeting tomorrow
one thirty or thirty minutes
after the four session room
three twenty one.
Thank you senator hamble in the
center's attacks thank you
six center bill twenty seven in
room three eleven thank you.
Cinema
thank you mister president just
lafan hotel for the chef civil
founder restaurant have prepared
a longer full meal absolutely
free to you it is the friends of
who car dealers as well they
will have beverages and adult
beverages so we'd like to have
each and everyone to be come
over and join us at the lefonda
tonight beginning about five
the union lowball bens
basketball team at a heads had a
great week we can have some
great victories and wanted to
announce to the body that
they've been ranked number
twenty five in the ap in the
santa fe set of finance will
meet fifteen minutes after the
Thank you president and and
today's kind of a special day in
in our family
today are first granddaughter
was born to show each addict
senator harmey hole could uh
leadish in the happy birthday to
airy.
Center how to me or do you
agree absolutely.
Thank you members of the body
ing didn't do it so thank you
for stepping in
any further announcements
seeing no further announcements
senator worth thank you mister
in the senate lounge tomorrow
from nine thirty to twelve
thirty and I will just a test I
see him regularly and he has
done wonders for a number of the
thirty tomorrow morning see no
objection to send it to standard
