Centre guy efforts
centre gonzales.
Center hamlin
center gregs.
sent your ivy sort of
center harmio.
Senator lopez.
The.
Center my estes.
santa neibert
santanaville.
Center on now
central to zipino
Center pulp
centre roddery guess.
Center sanchez.
Senators meetings.
center step onyx.
Center steinborn.
Center stewart
You do not have a car mr
president to the chamber please
we are lack in a corner soon a
birth just entered
a meeting
We are needing one senator to
qualify as for a corner.
that everybody to please rise
for the implication to be led
today by father lucas grabs the
same beats perish here in south
the fenner mexico please remain
standing for the pledge of
Good morning good morning their
friends and my name is for the
lucas scrubs I serve as the
rector of saint beads a possible
parish had to fail it as an
This is the day that the lord
has made let us rejoice and be
glad in it let us pray
god of the nations god of all
legislature we come before you
with hearts filled with
reverence and gratitude
I offer this prayer to you holy
source of all being and seek
your blessings and graces upon
efforts bear fruit that benefit
all people fastering equity
prosperity and peace the name of
the source of our love on then
must present thomas and concord
as one as you know that event
and see I got attitude
they'll force guys to address
your so graduate foreign day the
the us galter above who they
establish the daughter can
always throw us this for whether
source collective then fruit
those kid and if yes and I
thought that's but on us for
montando like you that labels
distinguished guests and staff
please face the flag on the dias
and join me in the pledge of
allegiance to the flag of the
united states of america I
Right.
area.
I solute the flag.
set a majority for data peter
worth thank you mister president
good morning to you and good
morning to everyone upstairs
thank you father grub for being
words and we're here certainly
equity prosperity peace are
things that we all need to keep
in mind as we navigate through
through this very short session
couple of announcements and then
we'll yield to send it to people
after I get done
so we're going to have our
students from ndi perform and
they're walking in now send it a
fair district day and aging well
in new mexico day at the
legislature it is also grant
county day and senator korea
hampile has a certificate which
to be read they're also are two
guests who were getting
certificates from senator money
us and we're not going to read
those separate certificates so
will give everyone time to get
to that point are to
microphones in committee I was
presenting a bill this morning
in its frustrating to all of us
I want to assure you that are in
house folks and the legislative
provision that provides for a
warranty repair services that's
been in bulk so please don't
take it out on the the staff
we're trying to do their best
help legislators with simple
title and registration
transactions to from eight to
twelve today in one thirty to
five there's a memo that
will do is before we go to the
guest to introduce I will have
senator pidea just allow cameras
and then I think we'll get the n
t I dancer since it looks like
they're getting ready to go
we'll do that first and then
mexico mining associations
having its dinner and reception
at the innovator reception six
to seven dinner seven to nine by
invitation the legal women
or the director of justice i'm
not sure gonna get the title
rate he'll be speaking gallop
mckinley county day galler
reception at the elderator hotel
in the honest aussie from six to
center bader and then back to
senator harmeo and will get our
dancers going send her to my
cover there thank you very much
mister president unanimous
consent to allow cameras on the
senate floor and in the senate
welcome n d I new mexico to the
floor of the new mexico states
that n t I new mexico is
celebrating their thirtieth year
of teaching children excellent n
don't with them every spring
their dance based in school
outrage program is to provide in
is provided in ninety public
schools in thirty two
school year they will deliver
over two hundred classes per
week and over two hundred
thousand instruction hours
across all programs serving over
m d a new mexico programs are
effective at improving
confidence health and academic
achievement on average ngi new
participating peers mister
president please help me and
welcoming rustle baker are
executive director of the n d I
new mexico board members
Yes get ready.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
While mr president what a great
performance that was that
motivated me to want to have a
dead southwest senator diamond
baker the executive director my
good friends in the adult gather
government and corporate
relations director list that
neck the artistic director donna
them alexander mainly artistic
And they have one more to show
to take an effort to create a
mile show throughout the support
why
even matter something like this
you have support
us everything I class you say
something
I think the data for forty five
required a confirmation that we
that are remember thank you I
know you could be handing out
certificates
members that guess to introduce
I think starting with senator
baca then sen.
That are brandly senator hicky
center him fill center ivy sotto
so let's go ahead and I would
and out on the floor you will
see all of the white coats in
the medical professionals from
around the state heroes of our
state that cure our sick they
williams doctor angelina via
adams and doctor robert
underwood from the medical
guests to the senate
thank you sir bucket senator
morris
thank you mister president I
also have some it's
being here for a number of years
also of course my wife is here
everything I want to think all
the white coats up there and the
best live issue all have as my
wife who was your pathology
mister president I want to
introduce you to
candidates available you'll love
this when mister president can
assist our marketing director
southern part of state but more
poorly she is in offensive guard
championship woman's football
team she is really proud of her
and she does a great job for us
done so the part of new mexico
and of course I to get to my
good friends here at u and m you
guys know dave williams and and
i'm really really happy about
because we're going to be right
here soon coach
we're we got broken in the hall
back this is our new football
to during the rocky years when
we actually had incredible
successful the nation and a
number of top defense of
categories while he was leading
our lobos couple years younger
than me so we pass each other uh
went to have virginia in my old
neck otherwise in maryland and
is actually one of the hunt top
hundredth winning is coaches
current coaches and nca and so
that that the red about thirty
of us got together we are all
excited to see you come home to
new mexico guys we're gonna be
back we're back with basketball
we're gonna be back with
football coach for a practical
weapon
several amazing people from our
community back home including
yourself you're with us in the
chamber and grant county as you
to have so many amazing people
here in the round house we
always have such a great turn
out for crank county days and I
want the members to know that
then I believe free port mac
moran also helped to contribute
so we want to think them for
those wonderful gifts and mister
president i'd like to recognize
from a platter caitlin monthly
neck roll kiana modio aerial of
I could have the members of the
the certificate readings would
like to welcome all of your
guess I yield now to send it a
brother.
Thank you mr governor you know
but doesn't look like they'll be
able to join us right now in the
senate for but I just want to
recognize all of the school
districts and teachers out there
who to who make such a long
journey here to the capital just
kathy vickers she is a small
business owner there and
elephant view and she's very
active with new mexico wilters
association very good friend of
members you know the whole
reason we're here is for the
basketball game which which
happens on I see the eighth the
look we're in trouble man does
just check out senators sools
bionic arm okay see the bionic
his bionicarm so we need
everybody to step up I mean we
need
you know michael dear to like
give us a quality two minutes
key so this appear in the front
row uh boy we need him we need
him bad.
And then we need a back and we
rehab I mean she's a very
talented point guard
unfortunately of both
senator souls and I are
it's for a great cause you know
the cancer center
at you and it's just you know
it's a wonderful tradition and
again we won last year and and
it's a total team effort
to senator harmeo is both a
cheer leader and a player and so
we just need everybody like all
senator hiki then senator
sender of michael bathia
Here are no objections or center
by the thank you very much
mister president you know
yesterday you might have
observed they were quite a few c
r in a certified registered
nurse synest assists mister
national c r n a day after we we
signed I over here but we want
to make sure that we recognize
them for all of the wonderful
things they do for new mexico
certified registered nurse and
of new mexico new mexico state
university just open new
mexico's very first c r n a
program helping retain our
critical care nurse is after
aton isley and very safely thank
you for supporting c r and ase
members of the senate and
enemies you only mexico depends
on current ace can we give the c
r nas of new mexico a very big
thank you very much mister
president senator center hiki.
it's been twenty
eighteen years since i've been
able to put on one of these
legitimately um but I think that
probably so the only other place
where I could get away with it
is here in the senate and that
so I appreciate your willingness
to allow me to show my true
colors here and yeah white but
in all seriousness I want to
recognize my colleagues who were
hopefully will be addressing
that soon but as they leave
the ones who stay there were a
cloud goes up tremendously and
special these it's about a year
before you can get in now that's
how severe the shortage is and
primary care hopefully a little
bit better but I just want to
recognize them for their
several years since I resulted
thank you very much uh this
president miss president
colleagues are today is gallon
mckilley day we all have
been provided with with a nice.
Part
elderly in recognition in
addition to that the mexico's
oldest early college has called
on the campus of uh UNM gallop
and uh and they
they have a an outstanding
their communities they were just
actually renewed for judicial
five years in their charter with
no not over they renewed
actually for for additional five
years with though conditions but
secretary their success was that
their small and they try to
remain smaller to be able to
have individual contact with
these student the public health
care is commissioner capacity
hunter as well as the
his executive record at the
school and then the the the
press flood the school
gonzales are who's in our twenty
fifth year in education although
from a middle calls high school
center share.
mister president is for all of
us so that we can keep track
what's going on in the world
because well i've noticed that
some of us get lost sometimes
they have the international back
lorian the the the visit places
they do things and when they
leave their they go to college
students and staff from naval
who are I didn't know and and I
got introduced to an in and
everybody knows I can have this
cough and we've been working on
it but I want you to tell you
that that I went to you and
go he held my hand all day
through testing and everything
else and he really he made a
difference in what I thought
about doctors and you and them
and and he's one of those guys
but I I don't think that's where
it came from I I think this
doctor had in his heart he
really had in his heart about a
patient that patient was me for
that day and so I really
appreciate that I want to.
services doctor oscar needs
in in the other guy I think
that's that special in our and I
think he's in our family now
because me and charming happen
to meet him at
father law mother law needed I
services you comma couldn't see
him in couldn't drive and and
the other doctor that here
doctor royal ball stepped in and
mexico so doctor royball who
also had a young baby ignacio
but two or three months ago is a
new father and with the body
welcome here today.
senate finance we talk about
health care throughout new
mexico this affects every single
community and when I don't have
the services in gallup I got to
services in hobs we go to texas
when you have the services in
gallop sometimes we're forced to
be flown to flag staff even as
far as las vegas or you tough
for services
to fix some stuff i'm rather
expert in the health care rely
on these guys to do that by the
new mexico his has got to get a
handle on health care for
population you know the good
president senate and higher
getting up and age she
celebrated a a birthday the
other day and we're headed that
direction and we got to fix the
health care problem in new
from last learners that it
doesn't have a hospital that now
is getting one
two silver city whose hospital
may be in trouble to to
trouble
there's seven other many thing I
got four or five but there's a
tipping point in new mexico with
healthcare so thank you mister
president.
Thank you.
doctors for everything they do
for our state and and thank them
for for the work that they've
helped us with over the last
couple of years and and working
with them to get some things a
straightened out I was I was
the g r t uh tax deduction for
doctors
and most people don't know this
story but the governor actually
called me on the phone the day
the grt or something else that I
really want
and I felt like for the state
that the grt tax was more
important and so I I really
more because we need more
doctors and you know you get all
my care at the
va and so if any of you work at
the va uh
support of our docs I ever just
a couple of brief stories are
actually three I was looking for
a single smarties in uh I know
also recognize center cold
medina that is a dark up in the
gallery somewhere um in twenty
twelve I got to meet him on the
I met him there but to the today
I saw him and I thought there's
really incredible that he still
docks still here in the mexican
and still serving the people the
the docks in I had worked with
his sister for years here in the
capital and she came up to
interdo some to me and found out
the weird cousins his
grandmother my grandmother were
the looks also but I think that
we need to continue to respect
our dark state wide I am in a
rule community it was stated
earlier that we can cross over
president thank you center I
guess
center bucket
and here on the floor that last
year um these same doctors many
of a more here and they needed
our help and we came together to
help them
into this session and we have
controversial bills ahead of us
some of which have already
started i'm hoping that these
so I want to thank you
colleagues
for what we did last year and I
want to present that opportunity
to all of us again that we can
Thank you center back up
are there any other senators who
wish in two share and
announcement
similar to the panics.
you are here if you end up in
the emergency room our docs are
here who want to be able to
share their expertise with you
and it was interesting talking
to them because they remembered
me from a few years back in
somebody said oh yes we remember
we all ran away from your room
but anyway are many many thanks
sending repeater worth tickets
that next shorter business thank
you mister president just before
we go to the next order of
business I just want to follow
up on center back as comments
process and I was certainly
honored to work on that with the
bill last year was senator baca
and senator branch again working
what senator barcassed and we
talked about that coming right
out of the gates there's lots of
places we're going to disagree
first to senator career hampile
for grant county day and that's
certificate will be read and
then after she's done senator
money else will read the
certificate for gallop mckinley
of grant county day and i'd like
the reader to read no objection
the reader to read
county day in the senate whereas
grand county is known for its
mining ranching and art
communities blend of hispanic
native american angle and angle
county is the gateway to the
vast title of wilderness and
whereas grand county's largest
city and county seat silver city
is the only minute municipality
and whereas grand county is the
richest county for mining in new
mexico producing numerous
precious metals including copper
county is home to western new
mexico university established in
eighteen ninety three as new
mexico's only applied liberal
arts and sciences university and
economy and as one of the
original hispanic serving
institutions in the united
states western new mexico
university is the southwest top
of hispanic traditions languages
and whereas grand county is
known for its two west history
that includes prehistoric native
americans that you got a jitty
coward a patchy including
million and whereas grand county
is where in eighteen sixty six
company being of the one hundred
twenty fifth united states
honoured as the home of many
veterans and grand county shares
new mexico's heavy burden of the
members of new mexico's two
hundred coast artillery regiment
friy and thomas foy
Scenic trail at six thousand to
seven thousand feet providing
call summers as well as
healer you mexico's premier
cycling stage race which
attracts national and
international teams and both
awareness and use of the trail
including the catwalk recreation
area city of rock stage pot
state park the trail of the
mountain spirits national scenic
byway bar canyon reservoir and
fiesta emus festival of the
written word in the southwest
print fiesta and whereas new
mexico's current lieutenant
twenty four be declared grand
county day in the senate
senator signed and sealed at the
capital and the city of santa fe
Sender
could have
thank you mister president and I
just want to say how proud I am
of our community and all the
audience so thank you for being
here and I know that there are
several members over in the
house as well but um I hope our
members know what a beautiful
all the beauty that we have in
grand county thank you mister
president thank you certificate
him hill.
yeah I also write a supported
grant county day you know I
don't know if you know this you
may know this because your
family helped us out my sister
lived down in silver city and
was a nurse there for a very
in and great county is is a
great place to visit in a great
place to be in a great place to
live my grandfather who also
lived there in a I think the
our family has a little bit of
history we love to go quality in
there we love to explore the the
health we actually went honey in
the health of the share with one
husband and kids that
that you can enjoy that mean for
those that don't know what
happened there I i'm referring
to center him pill I got a call
one morning and called her and
then reach out and she was
worried about her family like a
mother and a and a wife should
be and so I actually made the
first call the state police in
interhard and everything in you
know to talk to another story
about the good sitting from
silver city is she had a family
issue.
in the list doctors left but
these doctors are still here I
called them and said her her son
who is disabled and needs help
she cares about the people there
to cares about the environment
she cares what's happening in
the economy there and and so
that's what really matters is as
we move forward and I want to
grant county the the monks
at grant county who took care of
my sister when she was elling
and passed away from cancer now
Thank you selling and us center
how to meal
thank you mister president and I
just want to stand up and give
my support and thank the senator
for bringing grant counting
hemphile and I were sworn in
early the two people who were in
the seats before it's resigned
we got to warrant in before
anyone else she is not only a
good friend in an ally but a
county just the way you are
lieutenant governor and what I
see her advocate for her
community and she invites me
every single month from
especially the silver city to
come and join her and i'm going
friendship thank you mister
president you send her how to
meal senator sir want to
figure president with my
colleagues i'd like to welcome
enjoying with my colleagues in
horse back in june in july so
the break would be to go to
great county and get up into the
healing lake roberts that was
our treat as kids was to get up
historic building that still
sits in the old style on top of
the hill over looking the main
streets and the the interior is
still the old wood and just a
Be in in that kind of history
and so I encourage all my
colleagues to go visit the court
house the one of the best
museums in the state is the
historic museum just down from
death march survivors people
that have really inspired many
of us who've been here for a
very very long time and to the
points of my colleague are
commending your senator in your
coffee shop you got to go to
this gallery you gotta go to see
yankee street younger street you
gotta go youngest gotta go to
the i'm not going to say the
names of the bars but there are
for bringing this for your
center servant is
center hambling
thank you mister president thank
you senate body for allowing us
to
things that i'm so grateful for
is that that's truly truly why
senator create him bill is here
you know we came in together as
a freshman class we all had
different concerns and worries
senator create him tell you to
listen to me on the radio and I
used to wake her along with
about forty thousand other
people up every single morning
but yeah super city I think has
supported by the land and water
conservation fund money.
Uh there's the catwalk which is
a child I went to so many times
lake roberts camping with my
and being able to talk about
this is one of the true gems of
our community as the real new
mexico um and for tourism and
truly community spirit in silver
city and it's really just an
honor whenever we go into that
community to be welcome there
because the people in silver
city are one of a kind and what
here with you.
Thank you madame president.
Thank you senator any other
freshman colleague and I it
takes me back in my memory that
grant county silver city was the
third
amazingly we put together an
incredible staff doctors from
the community who moved over and
became va doctors that clinic
became a model along with others
united states and all the rural
clinics are based on that
initial endeavour and effort and
I want to thank you senator for
helping keep that going is
thank you madam chair madame
president thank you senator
center peter worth thank you
madame president I
finance committee when I first
came to the legislature twenty
years ago in the house
senator ban altomorano
was a long time member of the
violent buy senator korea
hamphill who is continued.
Uh to be in a position to really
advocate for a part of the state
rise in support of her and the
job she does
that committee and in our
chamber and just remind everyone
about that history of that slot
Thank you center worth any
anyone else
hitter rodriguez thank you
madame president do standard
strong support here of does not
courier him pill you know one of
the things that have touched my
heart from the beginning madam
precedent members of the senate
is her heart
her
help and need that little bit
it's okay to cry hook I can too
need that needs a little bit of
a tention a little bit of more
work a little bit of more love a
children and adults and I just
have to thank senator court at
him pile for her continued per
severance and her dedication
loyalty and that only because
with you sen thank you matter
president thank you for shared
issue paper thank you.
Can any other comments.
we're done with that let
everyone know where we're going
to go.
Sender minions thank you man
present will the reader read
this certificate please the
reader will read
fifty six legislature second
session twenty twenty four the
new mescow states and it does
here by extent its recognition
and acknowledgment january
twenty fourth twenty twenty four
as gallop mckinley county day in
the senate whereas the city of
diversity of new mexico in
whereas mckilley county has the
greatest number of native
american residents of any new
mexico county is the home of
ceremonial and whereas in twenty
twenty gallop hosted the one
hundredth annual intertribal
indian ceremonial and whereas
gallup assist historic downtown
and his recognized as both a new
mexico main street and an arts
and cultural district and
world renound adventure venues
and trails including the zooni
mountain trail system the dual
of the southwest and whereas the
center of commerce and since the
nineteenth century has been
recognized by the b m s f
railway as a heritage community.
For the railways importance a
only a handful of b n s f
certified sights for economic
development located in the
internal revenue service
designated opportunity zone now
day in the senate signed and
sealed at this capital in the
city of santa fe senator george
k munios.
great certificate but we also
have great people in our
community and as we move forward
in our community we select
systems of the year and in the
legislature and and i'm proud to
is now our judge but don't went
to school and hold brook a
graduated from b y b y u and
provo you took where he got his
bs and justice administration
nineteen ninety nineteen ninety
and and house will held his airs
on the bar since nineteen ninety
one dug has faithfully subserved
our community in gall for almost
grisham to eleven thirty
court
dogs work for mckinney county
since two thousand four the
county attorney and before that
he was with the district
dug is a faithful member of the
community of church of latter
day's christian saints he enjoys
hiking walking in gardening he
also supports local units to the
keeps a special place in his
heart for these trails and
others as he moves forward he's
also played a big role in
assisting world communities in
staff seeing them water and
we're a water districts and
to single you may not remember
this but my son was in the
second grade and he was a
spelling b
person that gives out the word
right
the deal and and we we still
talk about that in our house
today like that second third
grade spelling cleak will that's
a word will never get in and
that's where you know you want
steve raised in will move on to
our next paster and you rise
please
period
past the mike cleaver first came
of the gallop and for first
responders a first men and in
two thousand and two when when
he was with when I was with the
department of public safety he
wanted to join in the first on
officers would attend and if you
if the church could provide
something
he would do that pastor
kleigberg started and he was
contacting first responders
throughout our community and the
several years for the community
of first responders and we're
going back to prior date when
this wasn't popular church
provided special service with
At a kind word and suspect your
guidance for his congregation
and our first responders and
their families past her clear
worked his way back to giving
may have two thousand in six he
completed a forty hour course
and special instruction of
billical law enforcement
correction
chaplancy
has had to be there for several
families to comfort them
families have fallen off as well
spiritual guidance and
counseling for other officers
past your clean rate is very
humble person.
mechanic counter service
department
I don't know how I continue but
pastor kriber you know has been.
Putting pieces in place a twelve
place when covered first came
along distributing fruit
assistant
in during covered pastor
kreeberg and his wife elizabeth
easter carely to bring joy in to
bring hope to community that was
overrun with covered
people heard the music and went
outside of their homes and there
was a connection during that
tough issues often in
challenging he can do that he
does so that he can support our
first responders and our
community so it's with great
department is named after him
but he was the first light he
was the first officer killed in
the line of duney there are old
family tiles in our community
and I hope people are paying
attention because
a month ago we had a special
meaning with our county
They were
forty million dollars in debt in
total cannot meet payroll.
And we had a struggle with that
This is probably going to be the
first hospital in the state that
made clothes.
Forty million dollars in debt.
don't reach around and take
control of the health care
system in figure out how to fix
this problem it's going to
continue because my hospital
senator keys I looked through
the room and everybody's waving
their hands at me
I mean these are the hospitals
that that are providers are at
an and they may collapse.
insure clean work those into the
health care system so that we
survive but I think that's a
point that you know we don't
want to be there but we're
there.
greatly in their city counselors
who are not on our site there on
the other side today stepped up
and said no we're not gonna let
that happen in mckinton county
only closest local hospital even
though we have an access
hospital that is
in trouble so with that i'd like
to drew our counting
who who really stepped up to the
plate and helped us save a
community hospital so i'd like
to introduce them today manager
table in are on your desk you'll
see the the normal corn strand
beads and I had to swap my
senator but centered schendle
because I had yellow and my
famous gallopins are all on your
desk today they're stirling
silver pottery chosen by a local
artist that that's done in
gallopin and we just want to
show appreciation to you for
great people and now nation also
arterson rug masters and rug
weavers in in so many cultures
that we intermikes in gallop in
very different but to
intermingle those cultures
really is a difference in in a
community in we lost our
congressional metal of honor
that today we heard veterans
affairs yesterday which was a
heart breaking story about what
we need to find them correctly
we are the greatest patrolic
community in the world
california's.
most patrol account in america
will have failed and so we did
some things in finance maybe we
should have that we did you can
scale me later but it was for
minutes I know I did promise the
the
president of the senate uh
center perhaps anywhere else
lieutenant governor moralis that
everyone last crucials
albuquerque million last lunas
in so gal appreciates you we
appreciate the leaders in the
uh sitter mores.
commerce doing native american
broadband infrastructure
improvements and this is uh
center pideous expertise i'm
sorry for stealing mr broadband
but my brother problem to be
introduced but i'm really
everyone we have one point three
billion dollars one point four
billion dollars a brand band
support come into us and I would
that's been a huge effort for
our friends from the department
of commerce thank you.
let me just give a run down of
the confirmation so senders can
be ready senator brand lease the
center's defanites has two
through the run of show a with
that matter president you name
is consent we go that our
business messages from the
minimum that we go that our
business announcements and miss
lee is your center but here.
Serup there I thank you madame
president in amazon sent we go
without our business messages
from the government sing no
objection we're on messages from
the governor of the reader to
read.
temporary stewart and members of
the senate pursuant to article
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
providing for the determination
of competency providing a
process for raising the issue of
competency establishing
competitive restoration programs
senate executive message number
thirty six the honourable mimi
stewart president pro temporary
president pro temporary stored
in members of the senate
session submission of senate
bill one twenty one a bill
amending ownership else ability
requirements for the new solar
market development income tax
senate executive message number
thirty seven the outable mimi
store president protemporary
president pro temporary stored
and members of the senate
session submission of senate
bill one fifty two a bill
amending the criminal history
investigation procedures for the
early childhood education and
care department and the children
youth and found these
senate executive message number
thirty eight the honorable mimi
stewart president protemporary
president protemporary stored
and members of the senate
senate bill one forty five a
bill prohibiting public bodies
from entering into agreements to
detain individuals for federal
civil civil immigration
facilitate the terry detaining
individuals for federal similar
civil immigration violations
and members of the senate
pursuing to article for section
five b two of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
the number of training hours
attended by members of the of
the to the school support and
accountability system limiting a
local school board's termination
school board or governing body
meetings to be webcast and
architect archived respectfully
yours michelle to hungrish and
governor.
pursuant to article for section
five b two of the new mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty six legislature second
unclaimed property act repealing
the uniform unclaimed property
act nineteen ninety five and
senate executives measured
message number forty one
the honorable maybe stored
president protemporary president
pro temporary stewart and
members of the senate pursuing
session submission of senate
bill one twenty seven a bill and
mending the professional
psychologist act amending
definitions amending the
structure of the mexican state
administrative minister intro
muscular in sub containers
injections and creating a
committee to evaluate licensing
forty two the honorable meaning
stewart president pro temporary
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuant to article for section
five b.
senate bill one thirty five a
bill and acting new sections of
the healthcare purchasing act
the public assistant that
assistance act the new mexico
prescription drug coverage and
eliminate step therapy
requirements for certain
conditions respectful the ora's
michel du hundreds of governor.
sing no objection we are on
announcements in miscellaneous
center work I think you'll the
senator gonzalez senator
consolace madame president arm
like to request a permission for
to remove our jackets.
But sing objection the gentleman
can remove their jackets thank
you
center pathetia thank you madame
president years consent to
excuse energy city alope as
madame president your
committee's committee to whom
has been referred sent a bill
fifty nine has had it under
consideration and find same to
stewart chair sir worth man
president he names in southern
the reader be allowed to read
all the committee reports we
vote on them with one motion and
the record reflect they were
acted upon individually.
referred to the health and
public affairs committee senate
bill want sixty seven finds to
be german and then it's referred
to the judiciary committee
seemed to be demand then
referred to the tax business and
transportation committee
senate bill one seventy four
fine seemed to be german dense
referred to the judiciary
committee.
Senate bill one seventy six fine
seemed to be demand and that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
senate bill one eighty one fine
seemed to be german the dance
referred to the attacks business
and transportation committee.
Senate bill one eighty two fine
that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee.
Senate bill one eighty four fine
same to be german and then
Center but one eighty nine fine
seemed to be germane and then
referred to the indian rural and
cultural affairs committee.
respectfully submitted mimi
stewart chair center worth thank
you madame president move it
option in the committee reports
the ais have it committee
reporters adopted and the
churner will reflect that they
were acted upon individually.
has been referred senate bill
one has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then it's referred to the
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the general
reflect they were acted upon
individually
seeing no objection the reader
recommendation that it do
passengers refer to the finance
committee
send a bill twenty six
recommendation that it do pass
submitted senator elizabeth liz
stephanics chair centers to
phonex madame president I moved
the adoption of the committee
report as sellers were on
and the journal will reflect
that they were acted upon
individually the reader to
continue madame president your
tax business in transportation
committee to whom has been
committee respectfully submitted
senator benny schendo junior
chair center handle madame
president I move adoption of the
committee report.
We're on adoption of a favorable
is adopted
madame president your rules
committee has approved the
following certificates of
recognition certificate number
seven do the certified and
day in the senate and directs
the chief clerk to prepare
suitable documents to express
the recognition of the senate
respectfully submitted kdm do
hig chair center
Shang objection their reader
will read all the committee
reports
certified of record recognition
certificate number eight
mexico declaring january thirty
first twenty twenty four boys
and gold girls cop dave in
mexico and the state senate
directs the chief clerk to
prepare suitable documents to
centers were on adoption of the
favorable committee report those
in favor signified by saying I
thought was opposed to
the eyes haven't committed
report is adopted and the
amazon's that we go that our
business confirmations and i'll
yield to the
senator firm up north leoner.
The.
Seeing no objection we are on
board of the farmland ran
charitage museum I now yield to
senator souls.
Senator salts.
of matthew peter conrad to the
board of the looks in my own the
wrong one
okay to the board of the farm
and ranch heritage museum.
distinguished career in public
service mostly in the area of
community health but as a chief
operating officer at mountain
view regional medical center
they're in the lost choices area
Thank you since their debate on
the confront
seeing nonsenter sold to close
thank you madame president I
confirmation of matthew peter
conrad to your seats raise your
hands if you wish to vote now.
twenty ninth twenty twenty three
expiring june twenty eight
twenty twenty six has been duly
confirmed by the senate sir
Center had a meal made a
president I asked that the
credentials of larry mays be
presented to the fourth senate
pursuant of senate executive
letter number six dated
september nineteenth twenty
twenty three I hear by move that
Madam chair this is kind of
unique I think in new mexico
the end of their vena dares new
mexico to the fifth grade and
continued to school and miss
master's degree in education and
silver city with masters greece
and administration retired from
grad schools went back home and
years with that organization
uhm
as you can tell
up the spanish language just
thoroughly debate on the confree
saying none center would close
voting and the negative by shore
of hands in our said madame
chair and I met madame president
centers we are voting on the
confirmation of leave where I
maze to your seats if you wish
By a vote of thirty two in the
affirmative zero in the negative
twenty twenty five has been duly
confirmed by the senate center
words
thank you madame president uh
the are sure of a plus thank you
very much
thank you senator words back to
senator hutter me up madame
president I asked that the
stephanics to fanux madame
president pursuant to senate
executive letter number six
dated september nineteenth
twenty twenty three I moved that
thank you man and president miss
mckenzie robbie as she is known
has a interest and works the
the years and four age and f f a
she was active in the new mexico
farm and lifestock bureau the
new mexico carol growers
association us she is retired
Saying none centers defendants
to close
madame president I ask unanimous
consent that the wreckers show
that the role has been called
wish to vote no please raise
your hands.
By a vote of thirty three in the
affirmative series on the
negative
the appointment of reburdan
mackensie is a member of the
seven has been duly confirmed by
the senate singers to panics
madame president could we all
consideration to the board of
the farm and ranch heritage
museum I know yield to send her
diamond brandly.
Center brown thank you madame
president pursuing to send it
Center breadline to discuss the
conference thank you madame
president mister bob maybury is
a farmer in our teacher new
two thousand three in addition
he searches community serving as
the member of the local first
american big board and is a
member of the bridge sober
living home
Thank you is third debate on the
country
soon no debate center brought me
to close I asked unanimous
on the confirmation of bar even
maybe to your seats since you
wish to vote no police raise
your hands.
Yeah.
the reappointment of bob even
maybe as a member of the board
of the farm and ranch heritage
museum for term commencing on
june twenty ninth twenty twenty
three and expiring june twenty
in congratulating mr maybe areas
first appointment
or hotel meal madame president I
ask that the credentials of
stephanics centers to fanux
madame president pursuant to
send it executive letter number
six stated september nineteenth
twenty twenty three I moved that
the senate do hereby confirmed
museum consider stephanics to
discuss the conferring.
Thank you madam president the
gentleman is actually one of my
constituents he lives in your
ranch near and seno and another
rain into south east of all my
gordon new mexico and he runs
cattle on both of those ranches
he has served on several boards
and I believe he's extremely
qualified and I would stand for
questions or comment is there
debate on the country.
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands
senators we are voting on the
confirmation of james marshall
barely a tear seats if you wish
to vote no police raise your
negative the appointment of
change martial barely air as a
member of the board of form and
ranch museum for term commencing
on june twenty ninth twenty
twenty three and expiring tune
let's please congratulate mister
barrelia
sooner hotel madame president I
answered the credentials of
Center compass thank you very
much madame president pursuant
to send an executive letter
number seventeen day to july the
twenty eighth twenty twenty two
I moved at the senate to hear by
madame president very proud of
christina because over her
career very and selfishly what
she's done and she's undertaken
helping to meet the needs of the
under her leadership her
hospital was recognised as a top
twenty community hospital by the
national rural hospital
association in twenty nineteen
of the h s national advisory
committee for rural health and
human services she has also
served on numerous national
rural health committees along
hospital equipment loan council
which is what we're talking
about today in many more uh
groups organizations that are
and actually wherever she goes
people listen because she
continues to show that what she
offers is not only and selfish
new mexico and received her
master's degree and business
administration with an emphasis
are in an unhealthcare
and representative and in true
spirit to serve our communities
this couple along with her
children continued to devote
credentials are in the name of
christine accomplished for
consideration thank you senator
there is debate a senator
of us that served in the house
and I know you did madame
president with former
representative jose compass
peter worth as our leader and
others serve the house with
possess as a representative and
in santa fe and she has been
guiding this hospital in a small
community with all the
challenges that we all have in
health care and that's sometimes
very difficult the small
communities they just don't have
needs of that community and and
they're very privileged to have
heard so I I just I was
important pause for a moment
remember her well remember our
good friend hose well and and to
nomination thank you.
Thank you senator any other
debate.
appreciate that with that being
said madame president I ask
unanimous concern that the
record show that the role has
been called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
The.
negative the following
rearpointment christian compose
as a member of the new mexico
hospital equipment loan council
for term commencing on july
president of the members of the
senate where join me in
applauding christina for her
years of devotion to the people
to the full set for
consideration to the new mexico
hospital equipment loan council
I know yield to sender thomas.
Senator tom thank you madame
president
a b appointed to the new mexico
hospital the equipment loan
council
mry and decker is presidency or
eo of the new mexico bank and
trust the position he has held
since nineteen ninety seven he
has been in banking and mexico
boards of directors for new
mexico bankers association the
association of commerce and
industry
and the greater albuquerque come
chamber of commerce the name
Is there a debate on the country
senator burt thank you madame
president I stand in
the street and dimming the
mexico and
I had several adventures
together all this put it at that
way but i've seen greg
president thank you center bird
any other comments
but seeing nonsender tomorrow to
close
of hands a centers we are voting
on the confirmation of robert
quicker alliand decker to your
seats if you wish to vote now
please raise your house.
By voda twenty eight in the
affirmative serial and the
negative up some sorry someone
By a vote of thirty one in the
affirmative serious negative the
rear pointment of robert cricket
reliant decker as a member of
the new mexico hospital
confirmed by the senate center
tomorrow well thank you madame
president uh mister allianz
decker couldn't be here so let's
full senate for consideration to
the new mexico hospital
equipment loan council I know
yield to senator soles.
Senator soles made a president
mitchell to the new mexico
hospital equipment loan council
sold to discuss the conference
thank you madame president miss
mister
uh she's a servant based
leadership style has personal
integrity uhm done what's in the
business community and would be
seeing nonsenator solest close
thank you madame president I ask
you name is consent of the
record consent that the record
showed that the role has been
wish to fault now please raise
your pounds.
By vote of thirty one it's
permitted sear on the negative
twenty twenty seven has been
duly confirmed by the senate
center of salts thank you madame
president uh curiosity mitchell
a nice warm applause that would
be very good thank you
sooner how to meal madame
president I ask that the
credentials of national sikes be
presented to the full senate for
september twenty first twenty
twenty three I moved that the
senate do here by confirm the
appointment of nodious sikes to
the military based plane
commission.
both live she got her education
from uh texas women's university
in nursing as well as the
university of texas uh in
political science
she has spent several years in
in las vegas nevada which top
alls and then that brought her
to alan gordon
uh she brought the market the
expertise also from there into a
commitment to the community as
the city commissioner from
twenty twelve to twenty twenty
one she currently is the
community rebuild uh coordinator
for the city working very
closely with common air force
Thank you senator is there
debate on the conferring
saying nonsender bert to close
center is where voting on the
confirmation of narthea alicikes
tears seats if you wish to vote
By vote of thirty in the
affirmative serious negative the
appointment of narrative alice
sikes as a member of the
military based planning
commission for term commencing
that I wish that the snow please
rise hand give around the falls
senate for consideration to the
new mexico hospital equipment
loan council madame president
pursuant to send it letter
seventeen dated july twenty
Sender had a meal to discuss the
comfortee madame president jamie
sylvia still has over thirty
eight years of progressive
experience in an academic health
business from the university of
phoenix and moved into
leadership rolls at you in a
hospital in twenty thirteen
minutes of your steel joined u
and unsent of all regional
Is there a debate on the
conference.
A seeing nonsense how to meal to
Centers we are on the
confirmation of jamie's silver
steal to your seats if you wish
to vote no police raise your
hand.
By vote of thirty in the
affirmatives here in the
negative the appointment of
cheney solves steel as a member
duly confirmed by the senate
center automatic thank you
madame president if we can give
a round of applies to jamie
reports the reader will rear
madame president your education
committee to whom has been
referred to senate bill forty
one has had it under
souls chair center souls madame
president I asking them as
consent of the senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually.
recommendation that do pass as
amended and then's referred to
the judiciary committee
and dense referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill ninety two
recommendation that it do pass
And senate bill ninety four
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
committee report others in favor
of sick to fob saying I
those opposed name the eyes have
it committee report is adopted
and the journal will reflect
projection where on that order
business introduction
legislation the reader to read
the senate bill fourteen
introduced by senators stephanic
recompiling sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight to
conform laws to the functions
powers and duties of the health
care authority and other other
So the bill fourteen having been
read twice by title is sort of
printed and referred to the
senate committees committees
introduced by senators duig and
stephanics
and act relating to insurance
and acting the health care
consolidation oversight act
required review of proposed
exceptions granting the office
of superintendent of insurance
and the health care authority
department the authority to
review proposed transactions
confidentiality of trade secrets
assessing costs providing post
transactions over sight
then senate health and public
affairs then to senate
judiciaries senate belt fifteen
senate bill nineteen introduced
by senator munos
motor vehicles amending section
sixty six dash three dash one
Senator bill one ninety one have
been read twice by title
asserted printed and referred to
the senate committees committee
introduced by senator munus and
act making general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures by state agencies
required by law senate bill one
ninety two
finance
center worse
you'd help on senate bill one
ninety two
Senate bill one ninety three
introduced by senator stewart
and act making a transfer to the
reading materials fund for the
the committee's committee tent
to education tenth to finance
and at the one ninety three.
Senate bill one ninety four
respond act and the public
health act providing for
automatic termination of a
public health emergency order or
a public health order that
health order upon authorization
of the legislature or by
particular legislative leaders
in certain circumstances
to the senate committees
committee thanks to senate
health public affairs tends to
senate judiciary senate bill one
ninety four.
introduced by senators munos and
pavia and act relating to crime
providing that it is a fourth
degree felony for a person to
enter a retailer establishment
establishment center bill one
ninety five
sent the one ninety five have
been read twice by time to serve
printed referred to the senate
five senate bill one eighty six
introduced by senator souls and
act related to schools providing
school districts the option to
replace school buses with
buses as our electrical energy
storage for providing grid
services or for use by buses
tasking the board of regions of
new medical state university
business and providing a report
detailing the necessary steps
and costs for each school
district to most optimally
transition to electric school
senate committees committee then
to senate education tents to
send up bonus senate the one
ninety six
Senate bill one ninety seven so
the one ninety seven have been
read twice by title that sort of
printed and referred to the
senate committees committee
tends to senate conservation
the state game commission
altering land acquisition
procedures require the approval
of a second association's
landgrands boards of county
the one ninety eight human read
twice by titles or printed
referred to the senate
committees committees tends to
senate conservation tends to
senate judiciary senate per one
transportation for construction
and improvements to the roswell
air center for the purpose of
hosting air racing events sent a
transportation thanks to set up
finance and about one ninety
nine
then a bill two hundred
introduced by senator griggs and
timber on water and santation
district in timber on in a
terrible county senateville two
hundred so the build two hundred
hundred twice by title saw a
printed referred to the senate
the bill.
And act relating to
transportation terrified duties
for the department of
transportation related to the
department decisions appeal a
bolt of district court uptaking
updating definitions and other
provisions of the motor carrier
act rebuilding sections of the
inspection fees senate bill two
hundred one.
Senate bill two hundred and one
having been read twice by title
is sort of printed referred to
the senate committees committees
dense to senate tax business and
introduced by senator munos and
act making general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures by state agencies
to the senate finance committee
senate built two o two
senate bill two hundred three
introduced by senator thummon
statewide brain injury services
programs senator two hundred
three so two hundred and three
having been read twice by tiles
or a printed referred to the
senate committees committee
introduced by senator iv so an
act related crime prohibiting
the unlawful carrying of a
firearm in a park or playground
committees committee thanks to
senate health and public fairs
sense to senate judiciary thanks
to phyna senate bill to
government to receive disperse
and oversee appropriations for
local governments in their
planning and development
districts senate bill two
hundred five senate bill two
Senate bill two zero five
senate bill two hundred six
introduced by senator coppers
and actually making an
appropriation to the
administrative office of the
senate bill two hundred six
hundred twice by tireless or a
printed referred to the senate
committees committee tents to
senate judiciary that's to
property amending provisions of
the largest tax act authorizing
and occupancy certains uncertain
short term rentals pursuant to
certain short term rental
property from the definition of
residential property in the
property tax code amending form
requirements for notices of
presumed classified as non
residential property senate bill
two hundred seven senate bill
two hundred seven have been read
twice by title the sort of
printed and referred to the
phone at senate bill two zero
seven.
So there were
thank you madame president
unanimous consent we go to that
president so we will be in at
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning
so now is a good time for
committee chairs to make any
center stephanies
manon president the senate
conservation committee will meet
tomorrow morning in room three
four maybe five bills on the
agenda thank you very much thank
you other announcements that are
my estus thank you madame
president very much so tomorrow
throughout the west side they're
cut short this year because of
the lack of drivers so we'll be
arriving a little late they'll
be here from like ten forty five
to twelve thirty and so there'll
you senator sooner or tissy
penalty thank you madame
president two things first the
senate health and public affairs
committee will meet at two
recommended and will take that
at first then we'll do four
bills fairly quickly that are on
a greater simple appropriation
bills and then we'll get to
will then get into senator
brent's two bills on line
enforcement retirement but we we
try to finish all of them today
if we can second thing
on and palestine gaza and israel
and he intend he said the other
day he intends to do that
several several more times I
have three questions for him
that
at the write him down up a bring
him to senator first question is
since according to the newspaper
reports that we've heard of the
media reports almost two
something over twenty five
thousand
palestinians living in gaza have
been killed by the counter
attacked from the israel of
for an eye for an I
will be satisfied how many more
thousand will it take when that
call for an eye for nine will be
satisfied that's the first
will take before they
decide they're not going to seek
revenge they'll just finally
call for peace but what we've
have gone through a bombardment
and who have had their homes
destroyed who had to flee do you
think it will take before
finally a generation will will
if jesus were alive in israel or
palestine today.
The.
What would users do those who
are my three questions and I
transportation committee will be
meeting tomorrow thirty minutes
after we
racist from the floor we do have
a big debate tomorrow morning
arts more afternoon is paid
family medically from madame
Thank you other announcements
centers advantage
thank you madame president
madame president of the senate
judiciary committee will meet
this afternoon and it looks like
we're going to get a little
so we're expecting to see him
all in that last week and you
all can look forward to see them
with us at the time and and
madam president you're i'd like
to follow up on the comments of
the feature speaker he did a
great job thank you for that
representing all of us so well
but going into the event last
night and we had a very large
and talked to many of them they
they were not blocking the
entrance they were not ugly or
hostile in any way it was a very
peaceful group of individuals
moment to maybe all together
work on both sides of the aisle
to recognize that when the
governor's interrupted
repeatedly with protests in her
state of the state when are when
our event last night a
we begin to diminish ourselves
as as a society and his
institution I hope both sides of
the aisle all parties and and
the people that are protesting
last night can take a lesson
The new mexico state police who
were there in large force for
keeping things very respectful I
felt safe at all times saved
enough to enjoy and talk into
the people that were there and
take time with them because
recognize the role of our law
enforcement in in keeping that
to be a great exercise of our
constitutional right our first
amendment right to protest to
speak and the police deserve
because candidately when they do
that I I don't listen to those
people I I don't feel that they
deserve my attention in time
when when they take that tact
and so I hope that's true here
thank the protesters who are
outside for their conduct and
the way they carried themselves
out for the law enforcement who
kept things in in the way they
did but but I want to ask those
who thought they achieved
of the way in which they
approach us in doing so and so
many president again thank you
for the lovely evening to the
party itself into our elected
officials into all of us and i'm
thank you madame president thank
you senator center brown thank
you madame president first of
all I I want to think sooner or
t z p no for the questions
those.
And give you really good long
answers now what I would really
like to do
is i'd really like to see a
memorial on the floor that we
hashing it out but instead you
know the memorial that I drop
isn't going to get her so
I do want to talk a little bit
about
Since the most attacked israel
starting this war before that
israel and hamas had been a
pretty much a piece for about
two years.
They hadn't really had any
incursions and really you know
israel had removed all other
But on october seventh hamas
snack in an attacked woman
children civilians as the only
targets they hit
because I went out just to say
heided the rabbi who is out
there with the other protesters
out there
and you know I got yelled out
but you know they were calling
on a ceasefire
yeah that is also stop firing
israel should stop firing but
there was no mention of the
hamas hadn't attacked them and
murdered their people
there was a ceasefire where I
said there was no fire.
And then there's so there's no
day according to new york times
this morning
not only hamas but hezbollah is
firing rockets into israel
almost every single day but I
fire on you that's what they've
been doing for forty years by
the way
is letting them fire on them
occasionally they go in and
defend themselves so it's not
like it's something that just
reestablished after world war
two
israel the people of israel have
been in that area of the world
in the u n accepted that and
gave them that land right after
the world were too
to reestablish the state of
israel
just them but another group
that's that's involved in that's
the coutie rebels.
If you haven't been following
that their attacking commerce
not the one thing that all of
those
have been common
ran
we send a billions and billions
of dollars
so that they can arm these
groups so that they can attack
and murder
When
we call for a ceasefire of all
sides
that's where our personal side
of this comes in they didn't
just attack israel that attacked
americans
they attacked the french they
or by the way israel already
offered that yesterday now two
days ago
and amosses already rejected it.
Sir brand are you finished
yes madame president thank you
thank you other announcements
singer manuals thank you madame
president you know I hope
to see what happens but I hope
everybody's got that in I don't
see anybody else I probably hear
from adrian my staff up there if
somebody was missing something
so we can get it on the time
hard to make them we'll move
forward and so I appreciate
everybody in this body because
nobody has really hit me hard
about it in in the kind of
appreciate it that's a good
really thank aa I need to think
my staff adrian and everybody
knows the drink marie in and
everybody that's up there in my
office for handling that because
and I appreciate them to share
and to the republicans I
appreciate you guys and
committee into to my committee
members who very few on the
floor center steinborn center
we know wish two hundred million
short and education we heard the
hearing yesterday about the
health care authority and health
care hsd of short of a hundred
Thank you certain renewals
center period
thank you madame president I
will say that senator teasing
people I don't know what jesus
at some of the things he said
and I do appreciate bringing it
up in in the senate floor but I
would like to move madame
introduced by me and it's in
senate conversation conservation
in the morning and I had a
conversation with the chair and
so we've come up with including
myself on their statement
All right are there any
objections to the motion by
center personal to table senate
have tabled senate bill fifty
one
any other announcements
soon none sooner worth present
we have one more committee
referred senate bill five has
had it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended
report from rules committee all
those in favor of significant
saying I
though supposed need
read it quite correctly we're
gonna do that once more one word
time matter president journal
rules committee to whom has been
referred senate bill five has
had it under consideration
report same with the
chair center do they
move and I think we have a
couple more committee reports
furls that just came in so I
will read all the committee
reports senate joint resolution
one
has had it under consideration
and report same with the
recommendation that it do not
Do pass and then's referred to
the judiciary committee.
Senate joint resolution nine has
had it under consideration that
the same with recommendation
committee report all those in
favor significant saying I
those opposed need
the eyes have it committee
reporters adopted
miscellaneous senator servantes
thank you madame president
madame president just a
correction I had indicated we
would meet I think we're going
to meet at two thirty now and
i'm just going to ask members we
hear that we have put on the
calendar for thirty minutes
act based on senator perls
tabling of his and we're going
to try and work together on
something that meets everyone's
expectation so we're going to
we're going to roll over set at
thirty seven on meet inspection
brief and then we'll do a
quickering on a cfd so please be
our time members will be done in
an hour if we're all there on
time thank you.
Thank you other announcements
recess until eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning
if there's no objection the
senate will stand a recession at
