Yeah.
Senator brantley
santa bert
senator compos
center savantes.
Centre gonza less
center gregs.
Sent your hand len
center happen
sent to my yesterday
center mechanism.
Senator mckennah nowhere center
morris.
Central tco.
The.
Centre video.
sent a router I guess
center sanchez.
The.
Center smeaties.
The.
Center city all of us nowhere.
Center steinborn
center stewart
center tomorrow.
in the chamber and all of our
guests in the gallery please
rise for the indication to be
led to name by chaplain rachel
donovan former alvocated police
chaplain current new mexico
so the olympics and the solution
to the new mexico flag to be
there today by senator birth.
The.
knowledge to build others up
teachers to build others up to
speak to others with the
feasions for twenty nine as our
guide let no corrupting top come
in the tongue it honors you when
we honor others in our words and
this isn't always easy however
you created us for relationship
and working together in unity
I pledge allegiance to the flag
the united states of america and
to the republic for which is
losses started suddenly those
the america the allowed
republican get representative on
a nasty one and they also in the
receiver could leave that
He may be seated and welcome
once again to the new mexico
senate
to start things after they are
yield to send a majority floor
miscellaneous seen no objection
we are in that order business
announcements are mislenious
senator peter worth and thank
you mister resident just before
I go through my little run I
want to yield to senator pity a
right up front for a unanimous
constant request.
Is many unanimous consent
request seen or objections ca-
cameras are allowed both in the
senate chamber and in the
gallery center michael with them
thank you very much mister
see no objection so ordered
center but there and mr
president are I do want to bring
everyone's attention to this
very beautifully
Seen our objection sorter
pressure president we can all
please rise.
Show
I know that he
the e a n has naive me no
they should decide hi
kitchen.
He.
mail.
The
nak
Thank you center over there
thank you similar to pinto
senator worth thank you mister
president what a great way to
start the day and also chaplain
our mouth and our tongues could
not be more appropriate for all
of us in this building we always
say you know your word is your
can see today as american indian
day and we are so thankful to
marlene black well for singing
the national anthem a senator
legislature the blue cross blue
shield van is in the east side
of the parking lot from nine am
until noon if you need to get a
senator correct hampile has a
certificate for the cental of
the health of wilderness that
will be read and she's got some
guest introduce and finally
senator rodriguez has a
events to night uh the chihana
hate nation of new mexico
meeting greet is at the hotel
stanifa a six thirty to eight
up.
Date on that event he and
representative castiano are
hosting that's at the elderada
are due to day at the
legislative council by five pm
as of earlier this morning
they've only gotten five sheets
out of the forty two sheets so
forty six hundred and they can
help you with completing the
spreadsheet we just need to get
those all in today so with that
mister president I would yield
thank you mister president I
would like unanimous consent to
excuse leader back except for
the purpose of a call.
sorted we do have several
members who would like to
introduce or guess i'll start
with sender do hit follow my
senator
and center how to meal the
center souls
graduates she's a new mexico
native board and raised an album
as the members helped me welcome
her.
also they are here to represent
teach plus new mexico teach plus
new mexico's mission is to
empower excellence experienced
and diverse teachers to take
christie southern gabriel begay
and kelly peers and I asked the
members to please welcome my gas
to the chamber this morning.
guests does have to go center
print off thank you thank you
mister president in the union's
consent to introduce one of my
guess here here in objection
proceeds and thank you thank you
She is going to be catching a
plane here in a little bit too
go ten unity so thank you mister
president.
represent along with our
dignitaries from the heat
cutting a nation who are also
part of my district I also want
to welcome the native american
culture club from the solomon's
in the new mexico senate and
mister president I have a lot of
queens behind me today who
proudly represent the he got the
n seven i'm proud to not only
at the university of new mexico
majoring in nursing a little
misbeaver she loves that she can
meet new people and travel out
of state to represent both the
junior apple goes a high school
because the springs high school
and is planning to continue her
education in clinical child
psychology focusing on the young
being best he could I also have
with me mister president haley
thomas who's a junior at naval
prep she is missed on nasa she
learning the naval home language
and living her culture she is a
residential student and lives in
the gareth house on the naval
prep campus five days out of the
week.
last queen with me is toy letter
also is little miss rodio she is
part he got the year and nava
hole in israel dual said the
mexico she's a fifth grader
joining us she is the royalty
coordinator in the he got a
nation i'll be joining her to
judge the next page mister
president and maybe we can get
you to come and judge with us so
that you can help us select one
Thank you center had a mail just
for the members purposes we do
have
announce my guest this morning
jerry bennali he is from
becklabeton in mexico he is a
former chapter fisher for the
bureau of indian affairs the
radiation exposure compensation
act so if the could the members
of the senate and the guests
I have a few guests with me here
this morning it's still morning
yes mister I have adding of
coffee mr president so I think
it's still morning
umm I would like to introduce
here's it descendant from the um
mangos colorado's and james is
currently serving his second
term with tribal leadership
this is his first term on the
business committee and he too is
a descendant of the monges
colorado if we could please
welcome my guests with me today.
stand also his name is mate be
hill he was born and raised in
las vegas new mexico he attends
highlands university and his
Thank you certain countries
before I go to couldn't read my
own hand right in a while ago
educator of
strong advocate for early
childhood education program sees
the the executive director of
engaged new mexico and the
communities if you'll help me
party was in jeopardy but we
were really fortunate the
hundreds of bill passed made
through committee so the party
is back on and we're gonna have
it tonight it'll be from seven
center catch and we do have
several questions for yourself
yield to senator lop as first
and center by the
I think you mister president
also was that your bill may have
passed out of committee but I
think
if my fellow committee members
would maybe back me up on this
senator when she think that's
something.
That we could talk about center
michael
mister president yes III think
that is I I think that's a fair
negotiation there i'm i'm all in
president and you settle up as
center for there
thank you very much mister
president I just want to make
sure that the good senator who's
hosting the party this year does
know that uh one of the duties
that is one of his duties for
this event center catch and are
you were there
mister president center but he I
was not wear that and I would
really hate to put a damper on
Thank you very much mister
president thank you senator
mccatch and well since you don't
want to seeing it at the party
maybe you can sing it for us
right now
mores maybe over here singing it
for me so maybe we could get
unanimous consent for him to
sing the song currently
senator catch in our US consider
more as to yield mister
cinema's deal this mister
president I will yield if you
can tell me and school house
rocket the famous song i'm only
a bill there was a laugh behind
a law I will see the song.
Senator moores were you asking
the president where you ask in
center in the cutting I will ask
anyone see if anyone the chamber
floor at the moment I am still
waiting on the good senator in a
cution to entertain us with i'm
just to bill on capitol hill the
same account in its own
Center by there mister president
thank you so much to the center
I do want to let him know he has
approximately I don't know five
to seven hours to prepare in
See no objection sorted send him
catch in year further
announcements
miss president I do not i'm
hoping I can sit down and know
on elsewhere budget
set of a catch in
remember the constituents told
the congressman low icon popped
up above his head and he that's
when he exclaimed you're right
that i'd be allowed as a matter
long journey to the capital city
it's a long long way while
republican bills die and
community but i'll believe a
laws on
still just do the bill voda
and thank you mister president
without a move that the senate
talents we have center store
next
thank you mister president I
have two great students here
today as my guess from november
county he's a residential
student and lives in arthur
house on the naval prep campus
five days a week he's a fourth
generation ranching family and
also is marisa mollen junior at
another prep she's from bernaly
or county she's a student leader
at another hope prepared serves
pursue a career in journalism
please help me welcome my never
prep student
mister president I have one more
worth is going to receive an
earth science achievement award
it'll be at ten thirty in the
road the but then the senate
going to be recognised by the
new mexico bureau of geology and
mineral resources incorporation
in cooperation with our state
energy minerals and natural
but we wanted you to know you
don't need to bring lunch on
monday and we will have the
ceremony in the road tunda and
then we'll celebrate also on the
floor of the senate thank you
former colleagues that sitting
in the senate gallery senator
former senator clement the
sanchez served in this chamber
for eight years mister president
he's a good friend of all of us
former senator climate the
sunships thank you
thank you center
center pinto
have my sister came alone pento
to stole this granddaughter out
of our group on both my mother
and my father's site so super
spoiled
and then with me I have some
joining me today as a we move on
to american indigenous day and
they also have a bold future
denay do learnth they do
in bit sydney and shall be
skiing and I also have bold
futures and digit is child
welfare leaders that are crucial
and passing the indian family
Does center had a meal
thank you mister president I
have just one more queen to
introduce and I promise the next
one won't be till next week when
we see misnew mexico on the
floor with me but i'd like to
welcome dryer colono who's
missed he carrier she's also
from dules there she loves in
her role meeting people from
other tribes and building
welcoming miss he could hear to
the round house
center of these if you know.
Thank you mister president
yesterday afternoon I spent a
some young people who had
uh aged out of foster care and
we're now part of an
organization called new mexico
can there works with faster kids
i'm i'm just going to list their
names and have them stand up in
wave so we have shakira asberry
call martin and el mira garcia
if they would stand up and be
recognized by members of the
senate there with us today.
proceed senator thank you very
much mister president just
wanted for
our guests and for my colleagues
on the east where we convene on
the east side of the round house
and did the actually rental beat
take place to the rotanda be
getting at two o'clock thank you
president in your house
considered to make another
number
no objection proceeds to you
thank you and thank you for
senator lopez for talking about
wincenter to shender has on
there moving maybe it's from the
same quibblo but that's from new
mexico negative vote and then
also we have a survival kit from
for our communities and move
things forward and also their
ears are out there too listening
to the issues from our people so
i'm growing grateful to all
announces misleading it's an
ideal to send it i'm sorry
center schendel.
Thank you mister president in
enemies consent to
visiting this morning first is
our second lieutenant governor
shaunching and a
deliver history many of you may
or may not know
Went to hamers and join hames
and depobled him as welcome them
since then you know we've
integrated an internally
the second antenna governor is
also
also with me is last year's
governor from hamas dominican
twelve twelve twelve years ago
when I became a my senator of my
first year I started the
tradition I have my associated
big bread for all the senators
and lieutenant governor and I
think believe some of the staff
and and so forth so enjoy the
day hames over in and we have
some cookies at george already
before georgia stashes them all
the way or or start selling them
in the rotanda
and i'll yield to send everyone
else thank you mister president
with the body welcome some
guests here today and will go
through one by one and then kind
of just applause at the end so
charlie
marlin charlie carol you can
stand as as and go through these
sakaria george and tidesneers
darylson began in sarah jackson
I also recognize a few other
people up there now basically
going to give that to you in in
but I want you to take one step
forward and I want you to look
on her shoulder on her shoulder
is.
A horning towed
towed with his shield on his
back told the lightning to
strike him in quick killing
people and so the **** told is a
culture and if you guys really
want to go to squad
that should something that you
everybody should see will lease
once in their life
but she is one of the most well
spoken
one in so for those you don't
know that's number one mexican.
And so it in the now hose
thing governor richardson always
had a special place in his heart
for native people right in a
month before governor richardson
that passed away we have a bad
habit of going to the horse
races
you're going to take care of the
national people you're going to
take care of the native people I
i've done it but somebody has to
fill my shoes and and so as I
listen to that and then he
and what's right and they're not
greedy they have a lot of issues
and they're really good people I
consider a lot of them my family
and think why j t may talk to my
wife more than I do
their people well so without
mister president where we
welcome them here today.
Send anyone else no mister
president we did a taste test
they are but we are doing the
taste tests back here with our
public governors right in so a
we've concurred that senator
pinto brought her bread in her
thank you several minutes
center period thank you mister
president I believe that senator
Thank you thank you
thank you mister president
members of the body so we do
have the draft for the
since I can remember an even
in my grandfather's office
coming on this particular day
to feed the people that came up
the return that we had this
morning some beautiful dances
from singing a lot of our
leadership that are here
and
you believe right now to there
making sure they're fed and now
know that that opened or policy
in that sense.
But today I hear two recognized
retired this past year to a had
you high school.
Her name is fern spencer
and for those if you live until
the athlete to coming to the
cougar dent it was for medical
because back in the day as a mid
school student it was the place
really comment out combinating
too like threatening our
violence it was really
it was interesting that the
pride in the spirit and just
and those who are some of the
girls that I was teaching at the
midst level and also had the
pleasure of coaching too that
they have got to high school and
be you know but that's the first
but after that i'd expectation
does rise and they've been able
to kind of keep going in that
even have one of the the former
gallot players from the gallup
state basketball chapter and
shipped team back in the day
so one of the clans that I lived
italian house claims so somehow
were related.
Um but when you are from to
hatch your practical related to
and I think the other recipient
here also uh with much of my
grandmothers and grandfathers in
my father in my mother that
galloped high school was
but I understand it existed for
those that had to commute over
there so getting your education
was
we at the snow was this high
there as a priority but this
lately is particularly lady for
inspencer
she actually coached me too when
I was a senior action to high
teacher that many many of the
tidget students
they have their stories and
going through her class there
was another another gentleman
one of those people too if you
were.
You know being the story you
should be
having her call on you are bring
kinga I guess monitoring are
students because it was a while
I got to go to foreign class to
finish this can I go because
they would finish the work in my
class and I would email her
students that could that's how
we kept track of making sure you
guard there
so she was there for a very long
time
she was named in a mexico
crossed country coach of the
year she was also the girl's
cross country coach too for to
hatch you back in the day to or
even
career and many years of service
to to hatchy high school in the
detached community will be
inducted into the north american
from us with the other gentleman
that it's here that's also being
recognised by the same at that
call of them is mister lerry
foster
late naval code talker harold
wife.
Foster senior
he attended windor at high
school where he also had old
league and the native american
legion baseballing he played
based ball for two years ago
junior college and must get you
he was named iraqi mountain
athletic conference batting
chaption with eight point four
four two average
he played semi professional
two nineteen seventy six he was
in all time nine time
alternative outfill and badding
champion competing in the all
pleblo indian league southwest
sociation fastball fast pitch
softball earning trips to the
national all indian american
amateur softball association
statement to me sixteen and a
twenty twenty four he will be
inducted next this year and to
the native american digitness
the education of the bachelor's
degree in sociology.
And associate of arts degree
from the university of
california los angeles he
She's also navigate that has
called me and really gave
showing that late when I stepped
into this role and or to
trying to steer them and I
appreciate that aspect and they
think that's you know the
recognition you receiving
congratulations it's an honor
they think some of this exists
now but that you were also one
of those pines that also opened
those doors into those into
deserved for all the work you do
so they are with the body please
congratulate have but spare now
spencer in larry faster on this
recognition
center pinto thank you mister
president and it was one more
thing that um they talk about
education and lifting the bottom
from element to stick goal off
and on they received in a word a
national blue ribbon award for
the scores of their students but
the thing that was special very
get strong got a list about the
teachers and administration that
were working there at that time
and had that sent to them
congratulating them on it
because I was unable to be there
when they had their school
recognition.
that really to fall through
those gaps that we do advocate
for him we see them and when I
have seen my royalty that was
could have to advocate for for
a people in the position she was
in so we may trade recognizer
Sending me us mister president I
willing to help people
he's one of those guys you see
everywhere in any just so
appreciative
in and really wants to help
Thank you center minutes.
suicide day which will be read
after that senator career
hamphill has a certificate for
centennial for the healer
wilderness that's also going to
be read and then senator
and this certificate is it's
read
that there's any discussions
that you take place that we can
just step outside the chamber
center
thank you very much mister
every year and i'll talk more
about that after the reader does
his his task this morning and I
will at some point yield to
senator on you when it's
appropriate but mister president
session twenty twenty four then
you mess go state senate does
here by extend its recognition
and acknowledgment to declaring
february second twenty twenty
loved one by suicide and whereas
survivors of suicide hold
foreign meetings per month two
monday evening meetings and two
saturday afternoon meetings all
of which can be attended in
in approaches to lost through
suicide and whereas meetings are
also frequently attended by
mental health professionals who
dedicated to providing
information and support to
assist in the grieving unhealing
process now therefore be a
resolved by the senate of the
stated new mexico that
site day in the senate signed in
sealed at the capital in the
city of south afraid senator
michael barrier mimi stewart
reader and I do want again
remind the chamber that this is
one of those moments in our time
that we serve here where we.
day was brought to us by our
former senate majority leader
senator michael sanchez back in
two thousand ten so this really
becomes our fourteenth year
where we are taking note of this
of her brother and he had
requested that every two years
we celebrate and we pay
attention to this because it is
a celebration it is a
communities the attendees today
or survivors of suicide who
either have attended or are
attending meetings that are very
helpful as they continue down
the journey of healing and
reminds them they are not alone
from my sister just beside
yourself.
grade and just a vibrant hard
working young man and we did not
know the things that he was
dealing with and will never have
an answer to that and
And though we do have some
visitors that i'm going to
recognize but I just want to
take an out of my nephew daniel
as well and I do want to yield
are you able to send our nail
then senator thank you thank you
colleagues senator padia and
thank you mister president that
this is a solemn solemn occasion
in a a real tradition here
chief was it's just so
long lasting you know they're
just it just as a big big wound
as that that recovery you know
i'm so glad that there are these
these groups that that are
really committed while they meet
a lot for good reason and it's a
you know the comes to mine for
me and and it's really important
that we as a body
recognize that that
lips so thank you and thank you
and thank you again senator
pader for continuing this
tradition thanks thank you
center nil senator brand thank
you mister president
I have a family are love one
that is.
Admitted suicide and so no money
my heart goes out to you
as being someone who spend
diagnosed with ptsd it can be a
very difficult got time and
sometimes you feel very long.
And so I just hope that all of
they need we have great suicide
heart line can be called you
call that
sign and end talk to someone and
listening whose ever considered
committing suiciders considering
it now.
Two don't wait reach out get
that help
they can change your life
saying it you have no idea why
sometimes.
Sometimes they're signs
sometimes there's not.
And.
being part of it and I I just
hope that if anyone out there
can hear me that's considering
it that they would get on the
phone right now and make that
phone call thank you mister
sponsoring the certificate my
young niece and are early
twenties just died by suicide a
month ago
and it just shows like how are
are young people are really
struggling and part because of
cover trying to get back on
track but the world is just a
of us and the family i'm it
inspired me to want to sponsor a
mental health initiative
appropriation bill and suicide
prevention appropriation bill
poverty and tramma and we need
to recognize the long term
consequences of that and really
prioritised investing in that
prevention so thank you again
for me colleagues thank you
mister president.
in strong support of this this
certificate and I think the
senators who stood up to speak
in in the center who brought
this forward um
for programs for help
and one of the things that we
know is that many people who
have serious problems with
preventing suicide
I also want to know that there
are individuals who receive no
help when they have problems or
facing in human conditions
within I believe it is the last
year or two
um we've experienced at least
one suicide in the torrents
hard to see what we can do has a
public policy body to help so
thank you mister president and
People who
who survive suicide and turn
this into advocacy for others
I just think that's so
and our disappearance followed
by center lovers senator
disappear.
Thank you very much mister
president and thank you senator
may seem on the surface not to
need any help but who underneath
maybe hurting
I did want to mention mister
president of members that
Shockingly high rate of suicide
one of those is breaking the
silence a group out of
albuquerque that that speaks to
the community groups and the
Santa fe community college and
they work with the
community schools around the
country and and around the state
they organize support groups uh
there are a number of things
going on in this state to
respond to the needs of those
who were considering uhm
phone ways it's it's greatest on
the floor here to to talk about
how we really feel this is an
important issue and how we
really can miserate it and how
struggling and that that that
they'd need they will put the
these are not programs that are
lavishly funded they're all
shoot shoes ring operations then
we translate our fine words into
even more important actions
thank you mister president.
Thank you center disappearance
senator lopez followed my center
hampling and centers meetings
To say diro for what my
colleagues have said but.
This is an issue that he has
many of our families across new
mexico mine included.
um
been through this journey and
are here with us to continue to
advocate an educate many of us
not just here mister president
What support individuals name.
The.
Mister president I went with my
son on monday to a funeral for a
class mate of his.
Um came home for a brief time
and committed to a side two
weeks ago.
And when you try and have a
conversation with family of
course it was it's it's hard
breaking.
With any look at his fans and
talking to the young people.
How do we educate mister
president a letter we we talk
about it here mister president
but how do we really do the
outreach to let our young people
know that we're here.
president of young people who
will commit suicide in this in
this country.
The.
We talk a lot but we're are we
doing.
Suicide numbers are there but
why do we do mister president we
have to continue and keep
conversations like this is going
on not just here in this party
but in other governmental
entities in our schools in our
And mister president I again say
thank you and also thank you
just senator michael sanchez who
brought this in front of us.
It's the conversation that we
have to have.
Thank you.
I do appreciate my colleagues
for bringing this forward and we
talk about this every year and I
think we have to still continue
to talk about it a senator lopez
also talked about according to
the traveler project member of
And there are a moment number of
reasons in a family lack of
support
personal threats feelings I have
not been safe where you live
where you work.
almost five hundred into
transbills were introduced and
legislatures across the country
i'm very proud of the results in
the the actions of this
legislature to make sure that
new mexico is one of the
whether or not there's access to
employment whether or not
they're on house
mental health issues
and so I feel very honored to be
with my colleagues here in the
things and being their voice.
And it's when they don't see
people like them
they don't see that there is
hope
senators to panics for paving
the way when times are very
difficult
because I saw myself.
And I saw I hope
that you can go to the trevor
project trevor project dot org
where you can chat you can call
or you can text with somebody
when you feel that you have no
society it may not be evident
yet but it will happen.
Thank you mister president.
Thank you center heaven.
We have senator hickey followed
by center doing center hicking.
One of my worst nightmares
turned out to be not a nightmare
but true.
And that's waking up in the
middle of the night.
In having one of my children
say.
Thank god he felt he could come
and wake my wife and myself up.
The.
The.
You probably have an experience
like that somewhere in your
family.
And.
To lose a child.
can I work in you know maybe.
Maybe you can do but there is
something I would plead with my
colleagues to do
and that's around the stigma
That weight that we just feel
that we can't talk about to each
other it share those experiences
I have shared the experiences
over and over again of my two
children.
but what's really important is
that they feel it's okay.
They have got to feel okay and
so rather than getting into a
And that we can all start
talking about this and we're all
going to be okay as you've heard
And the ability when these
ideations come up to connect to
someone in feel it's gonna be
okay we'll do so much to stab
daughter is ltq.
And.
God I worry about violence in
that I worry that she may get
into a point where cheap
that this is not that kind of
community here it's just not
that supportive so I also want
to say.
Part of the way to stop all this
Individuals who are lgpt q and
love them and make them feel
secure so I now have covered a
lot of top expected tell you
this is so personal but I can
president thank you senator
hicki center gig
thank you mister president.
I lost
A bill that were I think gonna
hear later today so you're
surrounded as as well
there's sixty nine which I see
and so much present thank you.
Center for there.
Well thank you very much mister
president thank you to the
members of this body for over
the years the twelve years i've
that in these fourteen years the
key word in this certificate
mister president is the word
survivor is also I wanted I
don't want to lose track and
lose sight of that
nieces my own sons and
you know just is if you lock
across in what we heard today
the majority weapon a minority
where both stood up on something
that I must never happens mister
nephews nieces this that and the
other and family members in this
is a very very important day for
all say I do also want to once
again acknowledge former senate
majority leader michael sanchez
but once again
I don't want to lose track of
the word survivors.
Because we do need to left every
one of them are by spoke earlier
about my nephew daniel and I
lifting him up off the ground
sometimes and then he was so big
he could live me up off the
ground and I don't want it to be
last again the word survivors
because I think of my sister I
sure that we continue to hard
love and left up the survivor as
mister president cause that's
just as important
so with that mister president I
say that the impetus behind this
day for now fourteen years later
it really is the person i'm
recognized right now her name is
romy back I think she's sitting
to your left mister president
and ask her to please stand
I'd like to ask about it please
stand and recognize these folks
for their hard work in keeping
similar disappearance
thank you mister president
asking him is consent to be able
to introduce some guests of ours
of the lend program at the
university of new mexico that's
the new mexico leadership
education in neural
social work cell psychology
nursing speech language
pethology education nutrition
and rehabilitation cancelling
other line participants include
developmental disabilities and
the number of legislators
uh typically will meet with the
participants uh in the lead up
process so it's great to have
them here with this today and I
hope the members will join me
and welcoming the lend trainees
and their faculty who are with
this in the gallery also with
Thank you senators have been on
apologies to sit in on the early
that that that they were guessed
it would be introduced for their
joining us on the previous
certificate center only out of
at and brandy remarrow and if
you couldn't stand up and be
recognized and they want to to
remind everyone of their last
And at the same time they want
us to to recognize their
departed son brandon christ for
ripley who passed away at age
seventeen so would would that
body please stand in and
Thank you mister president
mister president I was going to
introduce some guests in the
gallery as we moved on from the
last matter we have senator
thank you thank you mister
though today we have for
sanitaries a high school the
uh band members who placed
recently second place in the
state among band participants in
academically in athletics and in
this case with music and band
they had a nice opportunity this
morning to visit with the
governor who shared her own
experience in I think marching
high school today and their band
successes in the state of new
mexico
center of the healer willness
and that will be read.
Senator could I have
thinking mr president I ask you
now as consent that the reader
read their sertificate.
Fifty six legislature second
session twenty twenty four the
new mexico state senate does
here by extent it's recognition
elect knowledgement to the helo
wilderness whereas the healer
land within the larger greater
healer bio region in southwest
new mexico and is the world's
first designated wilderness and
whereas the helo wilderness in
refuge for wild nature in an
important part of both tribal
and the non tribal community
values and whereas the healer
wilderness in the greater heala
and flood continue to function
and uncommon plant and animal
communities continue to exist
and whereas the members in
utilising the plant mineral and
animal resources and land forms
for sustainance as well as
cultural medicine
and ceremonial activities
anniversary of the designation
of the healer willingness now
therefore be it resolved by the
senate of the state in mexico
that the past one hundred years
of conservation achievements
Eight hundred eighty nine
thousand two acres of protected
lands across the country these
communities local communities
visitors students scientists and
the global biodiversity
protection and conservation
movement be recognized and be it
resolved that the collaboration
come management and code stores
stewart ship of the healer woman
is and greater healab by a
region among responsible federal
cultural landscape be encouraged
signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of south of them
senator saia korea him bill
mr president I just want to
share that they healer
welderness released
has a special place in my heart
it is the birth please of the
movement in the early nineteen
hundreds and to this day at such
an important area for myself and
my family my husband and I often
to find p centre and quality of
outside of the the craziness
that is our data lives and i'm
proud to champion the efforts
counties and beginning and march
this year the anniversary events
are going to start events like
guided tours and hikes
county and be part of these very
important events to honor this
incredible area in our state and
president with the senator
please yield there could I have
yes mister president center
thank you mister senator mister
mister senator mister president
and senate body
memories of the health
wilderness uh my mom was a
single parent and trying to keep
her two children active and busy
is we would stop by dock
johnson's general store
which like roberts is in the
heala wilderness and dock
johnson's general store had some
wasn't necessarily a fond memory
there was a point where I was
twelve years old my mom was
still trying to figure out how
to be a single parent and i'm
sitting on the edge of lake
not the really the smartest move
because my feet swelled up like
candle opens and it was not very
pleasant but other than that the
is still one of the best things
to do in the health of
wilderness
and so I recognize it not only
in terms of protection of these
agencies that lead the gateway
communities that lead into the
worldness so i'm grateful for
this this recognition today i'm
grateful for the sponsor for
doing that and thank you for
sharing for allowing me to share
president thank you center
handling.
Send it a gray handful thank you
mr president and I just want to
end with how proud I am of new
welderness and then in the world
and we read really late the
world and conservation movements
and i'm really proud of that
historical facts so think you
up will be senator rodriguez and
just to give the members a kind
of a little road maps well we've
what before we get there we're
going to do a confirmation
senate rodriguez for a
certificate for cathy steven
it's not going to be read but
she's got some guess here thank
you yes thank you mister
certificate fully red but I want
to say a few words about cassie
many of you may know who cathy
stevenson was and fortunately we
the director yet many of us may
know her as the director of the
disability uh divisions or
division at the department of
developmental disabilities.
And um she has served thirty
years of dedicated services of
help those that needed more help
and could do lease for
themselves where the least rate
than a cell say should say those
of us that have family members
or have had family members that
director of the developmental
disability support division
county she served their thirteen
years actually and was
instrumental in creating the
was very much one of the authors
and continuous if not the author
and continues to arm to support
an advocate for that program and
county was a big partner and
legacy continues in the lives
that she touched helping those
were special needs and asked in
teaching us what to do and how
Center love is.
Thank you very much mister
president and thank you senator
rodriguez for bringing us
recognition
over the years she was always I
think very thifa a person to go
to if you had questions whether
it be about the dd waiver or a
host of other issues that affect
interim committee and kathy was
always there with us i'm
answering questions but also
I think informing us about some
of the changes that were
to say cathy where ever you are
I know you're listening to us
we thank you for your service to
the state of new mexico and of
course sending condolences to
the family thank you.
of recognition instead because
I don't know that we were quite
ready to do a certificate of
condolences we miss county so
honour her recogniser and thank
her and or heartfelt condolences
to the family
and we I would like to introduce
if I may mister president five
mark if you can stand up loo
phillips gem colbland and duty
camel thank you very much and we
honor you to thanks for being
with us.
Do you have certificates for
them mister president.
president so what we're going to
do is just read in the one
committee report from the rules
committee on secretary designate
president and that we go that
are business committee reports.
Here in no objectional around
that order of business committee
reports the reader to read mr
president your rules committee
following appointment gent paul
schreyer as secretary of the
aging and long term services
department for a term commencing
on august eighth twenty twenty
senator katy do high chair
center hotel mail I move
adoption of the committee report
and because we have a motion to
adopt the community report all
those in favor significant
saying I
thought was opposed name
unanimous consent we go that are
business announcements in
miscellaneous and I yield to
senator gonzalez see no
objection where in that order of
business now just misleading us
and i'll start with
request a phone we may be able
to be allowed to remove our
jackets
unanimous consent request that
jack is maybe removed seen
concerned to excuse senator
stewart until to return to the
chamber except for the purposes
of other call see no objection
sorted senator billion
go that are business
confirmations and I yield to
send it out of hotel meal where
in that order of business center
how do you mister president I as
at the credentials of jan paul
senator peter worth thank you
mister president pursuant to
send it executive letter number
twenty two dated november
twentieth twenty twenty three I
moved the senate to hereby
president I am honored to
present
secretary designate tryer again
on this floor i've had the again
has done a tremendous job
in tourism and navigating
through
the turbulent time that we all
coming from santa fe where
tourism is such a big part of
our economy and so this
appointment to move as director
of aging and long term services
different folks older folks have
dealt with this agency in its
incredibly important for our
state and so again I just
transition and step up in its
consistent really with what
you've done since may have
twenty twenty which is also be
kind of a special assignments in
the governor's office which
so mister president i'm happy to
present secretary designate
shryer and would stand for any
comments or questions thank you
senators where debating the
for bringing this forward our
majority leader a couple of the
words that he said ring true
with me as well sometimes you
have to look at an up if someone
in and the true testament to
always been a great golden
experience most recently had a
constituent that was dealing
with a a very dire issue the
entire neighborhood was involved
in this trying to help this very
and this person just took it
upon herself to chase the issue
all the way down to its most my
new part and get solved and I
think that just says a lot about
who this person inside just want
to say thank you and I stand in
our rules committee hearing this
morning with the uh nominee we
we had a great opportunity to
hear what she's done in the
short time she's been there
new volunteers in that program
with good plans a foot to expand
that to several hundred so that
every nursing facility in the
and and the ombudsman and the
patients and the ombudsman to
great plan she also has
developed.
Something that the the governor
up with medicare but the
governor came of the new
mexicare which is a
away for training personal care
people who taking care of a
up training programs programs to
let people know this is a way of
helping and we have helped
paying some stapens to them to
keep it to make it possible for
thank you center disappear
center hotel mister president
dystanded full support of this
confirmation as you know our
nursing home in reary but county
closed there was an uncompetent
residents who are moving to real
rancho when you take them away
outlet and the cabinet secretary
designing has said she will
continue to help us and advise
us as we look at opening a new
facility and rear ever county
thank you mister president thank
that this secretary designate
goes there's success and it's
because of not only the work
that she provides but also the
team that she has with her so I
can only tell you that as we go
are going to be really renewing
the most help
they're going to get that help
because we're going to offer not
only the resources but this is a
very much mister president and
a I apologise I wasn't there in
time as secretary to be you're
almost there
forward as we get closer to that
magical age um but
excuse me
there's a concern in I know
you're aware of this mister
these persons as so call mr
president doing angels work
sometimes they don't want to be
call mingled with cyfd for a
whole host of other issues.
grandchildren in our state of
new mexico
and I know that there is a
proposal I think that you've
been working on a loss of most
foundation also has been working
who could use support knowledge
of services in such a cross the
state of new mexico and of
course within our tribal
communities so mr president I
look forward to having more
that infrastructure the supports
that our families need
in I think the aging a long term
care services is the perfect
department to begin the process
president I too stand is trunk
support of jan I know in her for
a good while now in her capacity
formerly and I have always been
more as a woman in a position
like this is to know that you
are deeply caring about people
specially or elderly and are
senior citizens that need so
much help and and so much
our seniors what they need thank
you mister president thank you.
See no further debate sender
word to close thank you mister
called all those present voters
in the affirmative except those
voting at a negative by a show
of hands senators we are voting
tear seats please
The.
services department for a term
comments in on august a twenty
twenty three to be served at the
pleasure of the governor has
been duly confirmed by the new
mexico senate senator orth thank
you mister president thank you
Send a majority authority to
peter or to take us to that next
president so just we are going
to go to third reading of
legislation senator brand item
number one senator soles number
two and senator stewart item
number three if she's back in
senator brant for item number
one we are in that see no
objection aware on that order of
business
third reading legislation center
brand thank you mister president
committee substitute for senate
bill eighty seven we put on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
but it's it is a return to work
bill very limited in scope as
far as
the time frame as far as what
level of jobs can be taken
with I have worked with the the
unions the countries just about
everybody the governor's office
do have a couple expert
witnesses if they're needed
thank you senator rent we do
have a floor amendment the
reader to read
senate floor amendment number
Thank you mister president and
the amendment
fixes a title error in about
apologize it should have
substitute for senate bill
eighty seven and then a brand
texting uh miss president sent
the the amendment fixes a title
error
on page eight and then adds
peace officer and then a
definition to piece officer
which means a person who is
appointed by the attorney
generally district turning and
who is a certified law
bragment from the a's office in
albuquerque came to me about
this situation where they you
know they have investigators
agents in the distortions
Thank you send a brand centers
where debating senate floor
member number one to send it
health but the first committee
for senator eighty seven and we
do have uh those selected debate
we have sent to worth followed
you mister president so i'd just
like to understand how many
people we think this will expand
the bills to the amendment how
many how many additional folks
ten slots for investigators and
the ag has some investigators
that might fit under this and
those are and not really sure
on how many are empty and they
still have to meet that ten
percent thrush hold that we have
in the bill of having at least a
ten percent.
does just damonstrate that the
more we open this up we're gonna
have every single
group morning to come in and
take advantage of this and
having been here when we finally
am sure there's multiple other
folks that are looking at this
going well yeah the same
argument applies to me so why am
I not in here and that's the
challenge with these bills so I
appreciate it thank you mister.
going to need the sponsor well I
do need a sponsor yield if you
wouldn't mind please center.
Big ideal.
Thanks and recently the
amendment defines a peace
Mr president center i'm not sure
although I I remember voting to
elect an attorney general so I I
think we must a i'm not sure how
Well in in thank you center
right yeah if we can start
changing our title after we've
been elected I can think of
other titles that i'd like to
have so good thought to that but
general and what that job would
involve and i'm just curious
whether you gave that any
thought in preparing this
amendment whether a peace office
and I would include an
investigator appointed by
present senator I didn't get
that any thought because like I
said it's a it is as far as i'm
concerned it's still attorney
general so.
Since mister lander thank you
mister and one of the thing too
At miss president paramedics
were supposed to be in there
already um and that under the
medical
emergency medical personnel I
can't remember exactly what it
throughout the committee
processed include paramedics.
Yes sir.
And thank you mister president
in center for you to my
questions.
Thank you standard servant as we
because I I think your estimate
of a hundred his way way high
senator brand if berlier county
has eight I can't imagine
there's more than in the whole
is not a a major I I don't think
this opens the door very widely
and I think a case could be made
as was done with a sea personal
which was an amendment we made
assured by the by people
representing the unions that
they've taken a look at this
amendment and they don't feel
that it opens the door to white
so they're they're in support of
it as well thank you mister
opening the door I do want to
commend the sponsor of the bill
for all of the work that went
into it I wanted to say that a
is because of the need the needs
that we're seeing in our
communities for folks in the
narrow area that the sponsor has
focused on so this isn't an
well I guess i'll ask the
senator to yield for just one
question
in a randoo I do center city of
office.
And
that's all I have mister
president you sent us to the
lovers.
See no further debate senator
rant to
member mister president I moved
that the senate
adopted senate floor amendment
number one to send public
affairs committee substitute
force and at bill eighty seven.
advertised committee subsidiary
percentability seven are those
in favor signified by saying I
was a bosnia the eyes have its
in a floor remember number one
has been adopted we are back on
out senator if you can it's the
sure who you're expert witnesses
are carter bundy in grace
philips.
Who's.
Sponsored by senator munos send
bill eighty substitute first
senate bill eighty seven as
amended.
Seen objections to anyone else I
will explain what you have to
learn and attempts to do
mister president in discussion
most in need of return to work
issues uh so this was not put in
there I didn't have enough time
to really talk to the sponsor
because I forgot we're going to
do this this morning but it it
thank you mister president and I
I my concerned a little bit
after what certain were settled
a while ago about how it keeps
I don't know where we draw the
line or where we stop
in so i'm unneutral on the
american but I think that the
body is going to have to decide
where we stop there's also
but
so i'll leave it at that and
allow those who have questions
to ask questions but i'm neutral
See no one wishing to debate the
sender when you also closing
came in minister president I
knew senate for number two
decent public fairs substitute
for senate bill eighty seven as
vis have it stand up or member
number two has been adopted to
send it health in public affairs
committee substitute for senate
bill eighty seven as amended
See no debate i've i'll do send
someone else to debate on the
bill thank you mister president
will the sponsor yield
yes
good senator from a bernard leo
force has that been addressed in
in the issue and the bill is if
they came on return to work that
they would automatically be the
first one is they get fired or
want to do that and effort the
good center from albuquerque
it's next to me if he didn't
show up to work and he was on
full time and in senator
sarantus was actually a return
Certain brand thank you mister
president and
you know III remember you bring
so if we had cut backs in the
budget or something like that
they would be the other the
first ones to go I think that's
pretty much standard in
procedures on most businesses
had a return to work they have a
very limited time that they can
come back to work and they would
be laid off
first and that was something
that was negotiated with the
unions as well as the must
are are really better and
sometimes you may that are
better than the ones you get and
so with more experience the work
ethic has changed these days and
sold I just want to make sure
that if they get a good
amended the first amendment you
put on center could you explain
to me on speech seven nineteen
twelve in in this section ten
the district attorney or the
justice league to they enforce
warrants do they do warn round
ups or weren't rest.
language was taken out of
current law that that already
defines what their role is.
Mr president center I don't know
then do we have an estimated
number
and maybe your expert witness
and know this if a department is
funded in a hundred ftes and
it's not a bad thing how are the
agencies going to handle those
those overfilled vacancies and
corrections could be a good use
fully funded how was the agency
going to handle false and
there's this big enormous and
maybe that goes to cities and
counties too because as we've
increased pay across the board
and counties can be able to
handle that influence influx or
increase costs when there they
didn't budget for him this year
or next year how they're going
to handle that.
don't have the funds to do that
they'll stop where the funds run
out so if they have a hundred f
t and fifty slots were open but
they only had enough funds to
hire twenty five that's all they
but in my city or county they
budget by an annual basis if
they're not on the same scale
that we are we in our budget
ends in in june and no one
whole gaming of what's inside
this bill but how are they an
adopted in budget that because I
think we're still you know the
someone could someone show up at
a door and say well we have
returned to work but we don't
have any vacancies that we have
the vacancy which is high the
money or are the counties going
to be able to adapt to that
quick enough.
the best one and be glad they
had five people apply for it
they would overspend if they
didn't have the money to
actually pay for them
I mean that's what would happen
the opportunity to hire anyone
that's returning and they'll put
him in the the
the vacancies they have and if
they can afford them.
it's coming from so thank you
mister president thank you
senator minneas.
fancy senate public affairs
committee substitute four senate
bill eighty seven as twice
amended do now pass and ask you
now it's considered the senate
the records show the roles being
We have send it a worth voting
now.
Send them in your body now.
The.
think it's very appropriate to
do this on ground hockey thank
you said we are going to the
next item on the calendar that's
going to be senator bill seventy
six i'm sorry send a bill one
twenty six and i'll yield to
to where my under on final
passage has been taken and that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
See no objections senator soles
are feel explained your bill
services of agency and what
they're rates and numbers are
rather than some of them being
on the I r s some on general
the checks for us but so that
everybody knows and it gets
updated automatically.
Senator is rear debating senate
bill one twenty six anyone which
is a debate.
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the senate that the
record showed that the roles
being called and all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
negative by a show of hands.
Senators are penalty
senators a painter did you wish
to vote.
The.
The.
on to item number three in the
calendar that senate real
seventy six year to center
stewart
thank you mister president I ask
in animals consider the senate
that the record show that all
centers store it will explain
your bill thank you mister
president last year we passed
senator one thirty one it
districts the microdistricts
where it was lowered to fifty
percent
so we ended vertally then
few million dollars and that's
not enough to build a public
school so this does that error
in the bill last year and
senator stewart centers where
debating senate bill seventy six
see no debate center store to
close on the bill
thank you mister president I
except for those voting in the
negative by a show account i'll
send it just your seats please
if you wish to vote on these
raiser ann.
firm and have zero the negative
senate bill seventy six as
delivered to senate center
stewart thank you mister
president members of the cent.
You'll now to send a floor of
majority theater peter worth to
take a set next order of
mister president I am directed
to informed the senate that
helped the house has passed
house bill one or one as amended
by the house and requests the
in front of the senate that the
house is passed house bill one
seventy one as amended by the
house and request the
concurrence of the senate
Senate majority thirty per world
takes an extraordinary business
and thank you mister president
unanimous percent we got that
our business committee reports
four has had it unconsideration
and fine seem to be german
pursuant to senate executive
message number sixty and that's
referred to the judiciary
those in favor significant by
saying those opposing the eyes
have at the committee report has
been adopted
reader to read mister president
tax business in transportation
committee respectfully submitted
senator katie do hig chair
senate joint memorial one.
Mr president I ask you now it
was consent of the senate that
the reader really treat all the
committee reports that we vote
on them with one motion and that
the general reflect their acted
senate joint resolution to
recommend recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary committee.
The.
and that's referred to the
judiciary committee.
Yeah.
Senate joint resolution sixteen
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the judiciary
committee.
condolences certificate number
three certificate number four
certificates of recognition
certificate number twenty six
number thirty number thirty one
number thirty two
number thirty three
number thirty four
number thirty five.
Senator
mr president move the community
parts centers we have emotion to
that committee reports all those
in favor signified by san a
the reader to read mr president
your education committee to whom
has been referred senate built
to eleven has had it under
consideration and reports same
with the recommendation that it
reader be allowed to read all
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
that the journal reflect that
they were acted upon
individually no objection the
Senate bill two thirty five
recommendation that I do pass
and then referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator william peace old's
chair
thought supposedly the eyes have
its
the committee port has been
adopted as journal will reflect
that they're acted upon
individually the reader to read
mr president your conservation
that a dupass as amended
and then referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator elizabeth liz
that the journal reflect they
were acted upon individually no
objection the reader to read
senate bill to thirteen
recommendations that are due
pass and that's referred to the
submitted senator elizabeth
listephannics chair
minister president I move
adoption the committee reports
and there's we have a motion to
adopt committee report all those
in favor signified by
the reader to read mister
president your tax business and
transportation committee to whom
has been referred senate bill
sixty five has had it under
consideration reports same with
I move adoption of the committee
report.
Mister president I ask in
animals consent of the senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all of the committee
recommendations that are do pass
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
The senate bill one forty eight
recommendation that a due pass
and then refer to the finance
committee.
and then's referred to the
finance committee.
Senate bill to seventeen
recommendation that I do pass
and then's referred to the
finance committee.
committee substitute for senate
bill one fifty one do pass and
then refer to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
senator benny schendo junior
think it was a posenay the ice
have at the committee report has
been adopted in the journal will
reflect that they were acted
upon individually
center majority florida to peter
worth to take a set next order
Where that order visited a
directional legislation to
reader to read.
behavioral health and acting the
firefighter and emergency
service provider peer support
act allowing state local and
regional public fire agencies to
support services making an
appropriation house bill one oh
one house bill one or one having
been read twice by title is
referred.
Thus bill one seventy one
introduced by representatives
changing graduation requirements
for students entering ninth
grade in the twenty twenty five
twenty twenty sixth school year
preparing students to graduate
with the diploma of excellence
Is referred to
senate education committee
that's house bill one seventy
one
senate majority plurally
be in tomorrow at one o'clock so
now as the time for chairs to
make announcement their
committees we will not be in on
sunday
and jester and one heads up I
that so I would yield any chairs
to make announcements and I
think also center city of opens
has an announcement she's gonna
ask for unanimous and sent on
thank you said worth we are in
three eleven we'll start with
center mujoses bill on lottery
scholarship changes that was
rolled over today and then I
think we've got two or three
thank you mister president this
is not about a committee I would
like to personally thank my
intern for the week cameron
taylor while he was here he not
drafted a memorial that i'll be
introducing in the future and
i'd like to thank him very much
for it
committee will meet uh twenty
minutes after the floor session
concludes.
We have a a pretty long agenda
for today and a couple of the
serious bills that that will
two more bills by senator
myesters we will look at the
that bills by senators hambling
to get rolled over from this
afternoon will be considered
then but we will also be looking
at the criminal competency act
the
busy busy couple of days in
senate health and public affairs
members if you could get there
by let's say by two fifteen or
twenty minutes after the florida
on monday at eight am to do
confirmations they just end up
doing what room number will that
be
mispresent room three twenty one
yesterday center servant thank
for those watching three twenty
one thank you service around as
we have senator is watching
pinto.
Thank you mister president you
know it's consent to make an
an albertricky to share their
beautiful artwork on your desk
and it is very important because
the cut discourse court values
are to develop this strong
the teachers of the kindergarten
to five miss arvie so miss
martinez mrs romaro this will
kinda in the cares teacher and
president thank you senator into
senator
thank you mister president
senate finance will go in let's
try to get there can say five
after two this quickly as
to keep ticking up
mispresident it was interesting
I drove through santa fe I think
yesterday was thursday and I
didn't
thought it was in the wrong
to do that food inflation is not
the number one issue I think on
people's minds the cost bread
the cost of eggs I think that's
an inflationary pressure we're
schedule you may have another
one will let the sponsor know I
think there's one that come over
that we can get out but we do
have the budget.
If members
doesn't know about so we need to
make sure that we're
coordinating what they want that
there is a sheet yesterday that
it had three different requests
from the same agency and sell
little bit of clean up left to
do as we move the budget around
and
so we'll see in the next couple
of days but senate finance will
meet today
thank you mister president the
committee's committees is no
longer meeting on a regular
basis we we don't have bills to
thank you mister president I ask
unanimous consent of the senate
to be listed has a primary
response to a vesby one forty
five instead of senator
called an act relating to public
safety prohibiting public bodies
from entering into agreements to
detain individuals for federal
civil immigration violations and
requiring the termination of any
individuals for federal civil
immigration violations.
So there has been a request to
change the primary sponsor from
of the week i'm in a since
that's going to be tomorrow i'm
gonna see my thanks to everyone
tomorrow after our session so
just a reminder one o'clock a
unanimous consent to the senate
