The senator decided to mexico
will come to order to the clerk
to call the role.
Center birth.
Senator compos.
Center servant is.
Santra do hig.
senator hamlet
center hamphill.
Center hickey.
Yeah.
center mckenna
no way.
Senator morris.
Santa men yards.
Santor to the peanut
center to padea.
Center pinto
center perton.
Centre city a lot best.
Center share
santa shando.
Center stewart.
Senator tom in
here senator worth.
The.
Center words.
please rise for the invocation
to be there today by revering
kimberly odel paster crosswords
cover church of mazrine and
grady method is church please
remain standing for our
solution mexico flag by senator
greeks
thank you for the privilege to
being there this morning and I
don't like to especially bank
senator pat woods and his wife
Lorges as you well know are stay
slogan is everybody is somebody
in new mexico and this was
adopted at the legislature in
nineteen seventy five and today
thousand two hundred and eighty
square miles of your earth which
we call new mexico we are aware
that you owe god are the
ultimate supreme authority over
twenty one thousand square miles
and to protect the welfare of
its citizens we know god that
you are on this trust were they
and true you know what has
govern the people you gave him
and the old testament where by
the bible to note him as the
wisest man in the world and we
call upon you holy spirit for
the same guidance as the
your supreme authority of
justice mercy and grace poorly
spirit may you invoke unity and
compassion among the people and
women here who accepted this
businesses and families to
further the future of new mexico
as this session at the twenty
twenty four legislature convenes
may your guidance and influence
Amen.
lot of established and needless
the america.
You may be seated once again
would like to welcome interview
morning everyone uh unanimous
consent to go that our business
announcements in miscellaneous
hearing no objection we're on
that order business announces
misleading instead of worth
had a smile thinking about how
all of our district accept fifty
thousand people living in those
districts and yet senator woods
district in terms of square
different parts but I just
thought you're invication was
particularly appropriate to
touch on that this morning so
thank you for being here
so a couple of announcements
language in hearing day and
senator brant has a certificates
to be red and guest introduced
so in senator branch gets back
in the room will get him working
pope for some comments about
african american day so just
before other members introduce
guests I would yield to senator
padia thank you center I got but
there thank you very much mister
chamber center for the thank you
very much mister president I
think I got a new microphone it
sounds a lot better it really
does sound clear
Unanimous consent to excuse
I yield to send her woods
followed by citizen greek center
woods
thank you mister president today
I have in a great honor to
kimberly this is travel so dell
came in from clovis uh two make
this service to us and I want to
thank you for all you do for me
thank you
celebrates.
Thank you president and I have
millies here with this from uh
signal mountain tennessee and
million is a thirteen year old
eighth grader and she's almost
to tad but millions there almost
kind of the middle of four k
she runs track and she runs
cross country and she plays
and her younger shablings as
well so uh that is my shaking
dash my third year is my oldest
sixteen year old just the other
day and senator harmey hole did
a great job of leading happy
from new mexico so we're pretty
much safe by you know she will
do a great job driving their
intention she's the oldest and
united states this past summer
adding went to scotland
where they played soccer and
they want all the games against
those teams over there.
france and you know get the
visit more over there she's a
she's my favorite oldish
granddaughter
The.
Thank you center green exited a
couples thank you very much
her aspirations as she goes
along the courses to attend the
university near mexico and study
political science she's
currently a senior graduating
community of modern las vegas
and so in a little while we'll
probably go ahead and make the
rounds and visit with several of
you because in the long run as
she goes forward she would like
esteem senate if you just join
me and applying kindly the hill
for her visitation of course our
commitment and the long term
commitment to the state of new
senator credit hampile fell by
center lovers
thank you mister president I
have bree hockens with me today
she's an intern from unm she's a
we're hoping that some days
she's inspired enough to come
back and run for office and
during this in the state
legislature sorry just to ask my
colleagues to please welcome
thank you very much mister
president and I think it's still
good morning yes good morning in
animals consent to introduce my
guests and proceed similar I
thank you very much mister
a community organizer and she
serves as the chair of the
southwest coalition for
palestine
I also mister president have mr
jeff hos he is jewish american
fans justice in palestine if we
could please welcome my guests
thank you mister president units
community cheese and a mexico
highlands university student
dual major majoring in master
and social work and mastering
business administration
expecting to complete her
apply academic education to
actual legislative experiences
resulting and professional
community growth so thank you
and members please welcome I
guess
had a working on bills having
them drafted working with
council service following me to
committees and actually doing
some analysis it has been
wonderful having her here with
me and she's ready to come back
to make some comments about
african american day I had that
on my agenda do you want to wait
a minute and do that just a
minute okay so we have that to
do and i'm not sure senator
had that certificate to read for
new mexico speech language
hearing association day just for
the members let me give everyone
a sense of what we're going to
do today and how we're going to
committees and come back at a
six o'clock for an evening
session this morning we're gonna
do items one through five in
that order and then item number
eight
so that'll be the morning
leaves so give everyone plenty
of time to get amendments ready
on that that's the plan it's
possible we might do one other
bill if it gets read out and
heard in senate finance
branch for his
his certificate so mister
president you know say we go
that are business messages from
the house hearing no objection
senate respectfully submitted
lisa martin's mccutchen chief
clerk
the journal will show the
message from the house has been
received.
sent a majority floor leader
peter words to take a set next
door business thank you mister
president you know mister said
we go without a business
announcement misleneous hearing
no objection we are in that
association day you ready to to
do that one center bread
yield center.
Center brand you have the floor.
session twenty twenty four the
mesco state senate does here by
extend its recognition and
acknowledgment to declaring
february ninth twenty twenty
four new mexico speech language
adjustment for those who not
receive effective treatment in
whereas these communication
disorders can be president at
birth or can be caused through
access to quality treatment and
every opportunity to lead full
and productive lives in whereas
with the help of dedicated and
skill professionals most people
achieve their potential and
where our speech language
pathologists and audiologist
treat all types of speech
language and related disorders
and work in a wide variety of
health and education settings to
help improve the quality of
be a resolved by the center of
the state in mexico that
february ninth twenty twenty
four be declared new mexico
speech language hearing
association day in the senate
luhan chief clear new mexico
state senate.
Thank you to read our desk all
members if we can just keep the
volume to a minimum as senator
rent discusses certificate
it'd be greater if we could
actually let them hear
but you mexico speech language
and hearing association has been
a stay wide authority and
support services to audiologist
and speech language pathologist
throughout new mexico
nmsa
associate advocates for
improvement of speech language
pathology and audiology services
through the state to protect the
consumer I believe that we have
some people here with us from
floor if if we need to but
probably specifically to send a
gregs and server a guy goes.
Thank you.
thinking mr president I rise in
support of the certificate and
think senator brant for bringing
up forward my son with diagnosed
with hearing impairment when he
hearing flectuated and they just
were night very helpful for him
ultimately but i've also worked
with a lot of children as the
school psychologist who have
it forward thank you mister
president thank you center could
I have we have sent her goes
followed by center stewart
center gagas miss president
marie I appreciate the
I go due to the same test she
did when internationality
facility and I sat there while
they gave her test and they
would say horse she would say
was making words because she
couldn't hear so I have been a
good son did my test right after
her and got out and the lady the
my mother actually never did
receive hearing aids because she
couldn't tell she was having
problems but my wife really
appreciates.
Everything they do an audiology
because I actually live this now
and I appreciate the technology
and what they do force statewide
thank mispressed and get center
gave us center stewart
teacher for twenty five years in
new mexico I taught and the
maturity the time special earth
and I always have speech and
language bathologists in my
team taught with this a speech
and language but thought just
after two years we had accident
all of our students in that
us we were historical it's just
so wonderful to work with her
and what we did for those
students was amazing so thanks
to senator brand again for the
stratification thank you center
stewart.
See no further.
Hamming on this are you to send
a branch you can introduce your
guess.
Thank you mister president um
young my wife often accuses me
of not being able to hear
of hearing people in our state
you're not being able to hear us
is very very difficult than with
my head being all clogged up
there's right now I got I can't
thank them for being here and
and for the work they do in the
state new mexico thank you
senator brand and thank you to
all of your guests who join us
in honor of this certificate.
Senator thank you mister
president today as african
american day here at the
legislature and we have the
opportunity to honor one of our
former representatives lent
september thirtieth nineteen
thirty one and keep the old
louisiana to james and mary
malrie he graduated from central
colored high school in nineteen
forty eight and received a bs
administration from the
university of new mexico in
nineteen sixty eight in nineteen
fifty two maurian listed in the
US air force and was set to west
rate in to work in the basis
teach at canalia school in
arizona he was in transfer to
gallop me kennelly county school
district and in nineteen fifty
principle of john martial
elementary school in nineteen
sixty four after earning his phd
he was promoted to principle
elements elementary school in
reelected for more terms serving
as last in nineteen seventy nine
and then he was named the equal
opportunity to director by
Marry then retired from aps in
nineteen eighty seven the same
year he created his affirmative
action consulting firm mauri and
ninety one he was made director
of new mexico's human rights
division and remain there until
he was hired by window rock
unified school system in arizona
making himself he was the top
sells for three of those years
in two thousand seven mauri was
presented with the living legend
award from the university of new
honored with the university of
new mexico's black and I
chapter's trouble is reward and
twenty twelve and he was also
the winter the twenty seventeen
new mexico areas on a book
albuquerque with his wife joy
and they have one adult son
lenton lenny mauri junior who
was a really a good friend of
mine
so if we could if I could have
They just enterprise
yield I you'll miss present
thank you mister president thank
you for that presentation of
representative malaria center
that was fantastic the ub as
recent struggles with regards to
early childhood education and
funding it but in nineteen
seventy three uh new mexico went
to a half day kindergarten and
in the late nineties there was a
lot of stress mister president
between
the young activists and the uh
the generation that proceeded us
but he was not like that he
didn't he didn't follow that
listen to this this recording
with his family he made a
tremendous impact in the mexico
is very very blessed in very
well love thank you mister
president thank you very much
meet maybe over in the house
right now so folks do want to
drop by to speak with mister
maria then I have that
opportunity just wanted to make
folks aware thank you mister
president thank you center by
the air thank you very much
have had fifteen and every
single life that he had.
And every single thing he
inserted himself into it was
always for the right reason and
you know he just made such
tremendous impacts on new mexico
and just whenever you're in his
presence whenever you're around
him there's just always a very
positive or about this this this
very kind and loving new
mexicans I just wonder stand and
say thank you to him and thank
to the chamber except for the
purposes of a call.
See no objection so ordered
we are still in that are too a
business announcements visiting
his senator stewart
sammy in the many years I was in
the house and he worked with us
he said four words to me
more money for teachers every
a back then i'm sure glad that
we've been able to change that
and that they are now making a
more professional salary and a
shut out to the oil and gas
his parting words to me more
money for teachers.
Thank you
center how to meal mister
president I just want to remind
you about the beautiful village
my district and our village is a
vacationers paradise and those
who are proud to call travel
home say that it's god's country
trauma is a fine year round
destination for the whole family
fishing game hunting and hiking
and just over our sight thing
real chamber in real brussels
offered challenging whitewater
with the cumbress and toltex in
a crowd road station which is
right in the center of our
village so mister president in
the gallery joining me if they
can stand when I introduce them
Thank you center how to meet any
I do I didn't hear you quite
correctly earlier when you
search from here to introduce my
guest and I do have a couple of
guests with me here on the floor
rebecca murray but she actually
lives around the quarter from us
and we've become really good
friends else we've met in the
neighborhood you know it's one
of the nice things about living
back in a neighborhood yeah I
and but this has been really
nice we've gotten to go no
really good people and and
become really good friends and
and I even like her husband even
though he's a lawyer and that's
if you're a lawyer whether
you're one of the three.
Thank you senator rand any
further announcements
The.
See no objection you know we
talk about the basketball game
last night there's a lot of fun
they believe over thirty five
work together in a bipartisan
fashion and then we came out
with no serious injuries on both
sides of the the chamber both
to to take a look up at the
screen once you're able to get
that ready to
is the next clip that we're
about to show you
give it up for disability
thank you so much for allowing
to see opportunity to be able to
share some highlights senator t
my last shot in the legislature
but unfortunately I then miss
the free through and also miss
two other shots later on so one
for four in the night was not
too bad but I really enjoyed the
amount of support that that uh
annual game generates is amazing
i'm sorry that was going to be
my last game but i've I I got
esceland's consensus senate that
that first clip be made center
hotel meals official picture for
whenever he's presenting a bill
just on a continuous loop
to cut it short and just bring
the energies that we could try
to win the game he said to me as
sender pertale and thank you
mister president really over all
in all I think it was a a good
running on repeat in my head and
both of them had to do with win
when house members would just
put up the weakest lay ups
you've ever seen and and I had
the opportunity to show him what
out they can miss resident thank
you center period center cities
would you like to make comment.
that that are in the last night
thank you
senate majority florida peter
words take a set next order of
business thank you mister
president we're just going to
finish up the work on the table
and then go into third reading
Mister president gerald's
committee to whom has been
referred senate memorial five
has had it unconsideration and
report same with the
recommendation that it do pass
really treat all the committee
reports that we vote on them
with one motion and that the
journal reflect they were
actually upon individually
hearing no objection the reader
to read
senate joint resolution three do
pass and that's referred to the
judiciary committee.
Certificate number seven of
condolence.
Sir different number eight of
condolence.
certificate number ten
and certificate number eleven.
certificate number fifty.
Certificate number fifty one
certificate number fifty two
certificate number fifty six
certificate number fifty seven
respectfully submitted katie
duhig chair.
was opposing the eyes have at
the common report has been
adopted and the journal
reflected they were acted upon
individually the reader will
read this president your finance
committee to whom has been
submitted senator george minos
chair.
Center steinboard move adoption
in the community report centers
reader reading this president
your tax business in
transportation committee to whom
has been referred sent a bill
one fourteen has had it under
senator bennie schendo junior
chair center hambling mister
president I asked unanimous
consent of the senate that the
reader be allowed to read all of
the committee reports that we
vote on them with one motion and
and that's referred to the
finance committee.
Senator bill one seventy nine
recommendation that is due
Senate bill seventy two
Senate bill one forty six same
with recommendation that it do
center hamble mister president I
move the adoption of the
committee reports and there's we
have a motion to do the
community part all those in
favour significantly saying I
majority for leader peter
worth's figures that next order
business thank you mr president
in amazon we go that are
business introduction of
legislation hearing objects
where that order business
introduction legislation.
Hospital seven introduced by
representative to spend ski
and act rerange of taxation
eliminating an upcoming decrease
tax business transportation
committee then send it by an
answer committee's house bill
seven husband twenty eight
introduced by representative
garrett senator rodriguez
public project revolving fund
declaring an emergency house
bill twenty eight us bill twenty
eight haven't been read twice by
title is referred to the senate
senator rodriguez endorsed by
the new mexico finance authority
oversight committee and act
making an appropriation for the
public project revolving fund to
infrastructure fund house bill
twenty nine.
House bill twenty nine haven't
been read twice by title is
referred to the senate finance
act related to public education
creating the criminal education
trust fund providing reporting
requirements creating the tribal
education trust fund
been read twice by title is
referred is referred to the
senate finance committee that's
house bill one thirty four
the technology enhancement fund
require an assessments of
benefits for economic
development rural and tribal
communities and work for his
education and training making an
Set
center majority authority to
peter worth to take a set next
order of business thank you
mister president in amazon said
we go that our business
announcements in miscellaneous
afternoon's early session items
one through five and item number
eight will then take a break I
think the democrats probably
which is the paid family medical
leave
and as I mentioned that front
it's possible we could do one
other bill i'll visit with
senator back about that when we
get to that point so with that
mister president you know must
legislation served available to
present the bill thank you
mister president mister
president I assume the success
of the senate that the records
show that all action for placing
See no objections sending
available explain the bill thank
you excuse me thank you mister
president um as most of you are
aware we've been messing around
monopoly uh administration we've
moved insurance out we've moved
corporations out
for a couple of things this is
goes into effect they've had a
transition year and there to the
point where they're cleaning up
a few things and that's this is
a long bill it looks complicated
but it's all mostly just
just gets the terminology in
line and the procedures in line
and so forth with the new new
home and dot it's the various
transportation that includes
sea no debate sound available
close on the bill thank you
mister president mister
president I move that senate
bill to and in our past as that
the regular show that all those
if you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
By vote of thirty five the
affirmative zero the negative
deferring to him for comics
thank you mister president
available we're going to item
number two on today's challenger
that senate bill one seventy
five as amended and i'll yield
to senator how to meal
one seventy five as once amended
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
here no objection center how to
made explained the bill mister
president the bill will
recruitment investing in their
equipment as an important
component of protecting an
improving public safety across
our great state and i'm
confident that this bill will
also improve vacancy rates.
And thank you mister president
senator is this too to bring up
pay for for local shares
departments and and
municipalities.
senator is this in any way
trying to help with an issue
that was brought to my attention
within the budget of the pay
raises the state police that
that a lot of the local
at at state police is going to
be so high mister president
that's a great question that I
would ask for help with the
unanimous consent to allow my
two expert witnesses into the
chamber if you're identify who
there's any consent request seen
no objections sergeant are you
please escort the expert
witnesses into the chamber and
provide of some seeding.
recorded it and played it up on
the big screen just that to help
us out but my question is is is
this to help local communities
be able to compete with state
Mr president the recruitment
funds
for a senate bill one seventy
five as amended
will assist any of the local
boost state where we're gonna
start seeing a revolving door
where we're going to lose our
sheriffs to another department.
And thank you mister president
and senator for that I I figure
out in the field protecting us
insuring that that
criminals are put where they
they need to be put but it it is
a concern of of you know my
local share of in my local
departments so I do appreciate
the effort I think you know this
will help alleviate some of
their concern and I think that's
a concern that we should all
people they they like to live in
the larger larger municipalities
more urban areas so hopefully
this will help real reba county
chavis county and some of the
Thank you mister president with
the sponsor yield center had a
media mister president dialed.
Thank miss president senator so
position.
Similar brand so much present
they wouldn't need to be
recruiting from outer state or
Center out email and mister
president of that necessarily
the recruitment is trying to get
more boots on the ground in
ensuring that we get the next
generation in.
school so how are they doing
that.
Senator had email.
Mr presidents in addition to
doing recruitment fairs and then
targeting those who are going
into our majoring in the
criminal justice we're also
looking at those who are looking
The figure is president or they
are recruiting at the military
basis as people get out
is that part of where they're
looking because near a lot of
will then target where the
recruitment efforts will be.
Thank you mister president
I I appreciate it I I hope this
helps
finance for about three weeks
now
that would have allowed us to
recruit from out of state and
allow those officers to buy
play political gains then
actually do his work so we did
not get about that bill to the
floor it's just sits there and
never gets heard no financial
and it's it's very frustrating
so I I hope that this will help
but
any you know it'll have a
limited effect but you know
thank you mister president with
the with the sponsor yield to a
question center to me I do
mister president I ill to the m
b p senator disappear
mr
finance is there any money in
house bill two for this.
Mister president there is money
and it's to my understanding
that we asked for thirty five
million it would be in the
ballpark of twenty five million.
Okay thank you senator him hill
thank you mister president I
just wanted to rise and
supported the bill and thing
center handed me mister
president dailed thank you
mister president and senator
hottenio how many law
enforcement officers do you
anticipate the current amount of
touch out more than just law
enforcement it's also going to
include correction officers and
probation in parallel.
Exclaimed ok well it'll go a
long way to filling the much
president thank you senator
current handful.
Seen offer the debate center
automated close on the bill
and all those present voted in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hands we are voting all
senators to your seats please we
are voting.
I have a lot of thirty nine the
firm it is you're on the
negative senate bill one seventy
five as amended has faster
because that we go without our
business announcements and
misleads no objection senator
worth mister president I
understand we have some guess
Sergeant arms to identify the
guests who have entered the
chamber.
Sergeant arms of your identified
Yeah.
mr president we have honored
guests from the house of
representatives representative
vincent representative castiano
representative romaro and
will pay your message.
You want right to resolve last
night.
Up to the house.
Yeah.
I didn't know the lieutenant
governors could ball like that
you did good and I think the m b
p out of go to that man right
there send our teasing you know
you thank you as well point of
order we do have to do it out on
the senate floor
if you're going to come in a
senate dress up
we do have members who would
like to speak before you do
right but next year is another
year and we were minus some of
several of our stars I mean this
senator soles over there but
honestly you you made those
in discuss of made because
whatever just debate it half
time that was that was a bomber
okay so anyway uh fair and
such a nice touch anyway and and
we fought hard and it was a
great cost thank you thank you
senator nail senator burden
thank you mister president and I
jerry or teasy pino wasn't quite
nice they're at the end when i'm
pretty sure they got his wallet
so if you guys could return his
wallet so at least you can have
his id I think that be good but
said I was at the thank you very
much mister president mister
president you know we've been
trying to figure out since last
night what's difference if we've
pretty consistently for the last
ten years
are used to be represent of
neighborhood and now sadly
senator neighborhood i'm not
really sure what the correlation
much for the observation sender
my stuff thank you mister
president want to welcome the
guests with at director reflect
a but want to congratulate them
was so afraid they triple team
them up eight with a minute to
go the triple team and should
have been a file should have
been a intentional foul they
stole the ball if they hadn't
it was just so much fun for all
of us watching it doesn't look
like a lot of fun on the floor
it looked painful and hurtful
that's the only time I got mad
as that it was like just you're
going to win stop piling it on
pile did in the last man at all
There senators had a fantastic
out there we just had we had a
lot of phone very proud of them
but congratulations to the house
senator disabinable senator
mister president I want to
congratulate the house the
congratulate on that but I think
they're brought home the cheer
trophy with that I see what
you're cheerleaders could do
about the house side next year
that I should have been the mbp
because I made one basket but in
fact senator just sanctions made
many baskets we would have that
we wouldn't have had a dozen
last night thank you senator
penalta
center cells thank you mister
president again I want to
congratulate the house on a
great game last night you all
they were in their fixing my
elbow I did have them sharpen
them up a little bit so next
year just be aware thank you
thank you centers
any further announcements
the dagger for the senate was
when representative but a horn
hit the jumper for the two
points that was the attorney
point of the game so want to
congratulate the representative
five thousand dollars for the
UNM cancer center
and with that in the spirit of
good sportsmenship the senate
doesn't welcome our guest into
Bigger out of applause for house
are representatives.
The.
Thank you senator
peter worth a digger sat next
order business
thank you mister president we go
that are business third reading
of legislation and I yield to
center my assessor for item
number three centimetre one
seventy six as amended thank you
these identified your experts
thank you mister president so we
have a richer espeened also the
executive director than my
school at least a commission
under RLD and well south mister
witnesses into the chamber I see
that we are to have seats
provided for them.
Thank you mister president I
asked unanimous consent of the
senate that the record show that
no objections and my assistant
will explain the bill thank you
mister president horrible
members were also joined by
representative art dela crues
who was a former member athletic
commission before he before
safe safer amateur safe for for
folks under eighteen and making
sure it's fair to all spectators
to gain credibility in the in
the art of of a boxing and m
senator one sam six as amended I
yield to send their brent
thank you mister president when
the sponsor yield center masters
deal mister president yes
mister president senator I had
first of all this this sunset
they are talking about you know
we went through the roads a
couple of years ago I think in
in looked at all the sunsets and
actually believed that this
commission should be sunset we
believed that this should go
away
you say it's to make things
they regulate the the boxing
matches so for example if you
look at it's not in the bill
cause it's not amended.
But the uh but the atlantic
commission
and if you look further down it
regulates head gear
that it regulates insurance for
the boxers it represent
regulates the length of a boxing
match to fifteen rounds uhm
can it regulate the license
all those under fifteen and then
it's encompassed by all head
gear required by all amateur
boxing and that you must be
eighteen years of age to turn
professional.
to each of these boxing matches
and make sure all that's being
done.
Mr president a center band
exactly
the executive director is there
but also at least one board
highly regulated just because of
the the history of boxing and
things that nature but they are
they essentially
need referees judges that are
Miss president dumb can sell it
last about their at.
the revel the revel uh entered
dimension are there in the north
valley available about a week
ago.
Senator brand negative president
was this in america fighter was
again
so as present center most of
these are actually held on on
the
but but there are some that are
held at the casinos in fact in
statute there's a there's a
status story framework to for
the athletic commission to work
that's interesting because as
far as I understood maybe a sar
pento could help me out with us
and stay done how many
jurisdiction over
branch and senator aren't my
estus no they don't.
Senator rate almost president in
our pento would any of the
tribal collaboration act at some
statute if that is something
that should have a current
before this was brought forward.
Cause I will not speak
meetings with the tribal council
about
trying to regulate this on
tribal end center my stuff
voluntary it's voluntary and so
it's sixty dash two dash eight
point one.
To get this as current law it's
not being touched in the bill
but i'd still be reads the
exchange of information and for
the reciprocal joint or common
direction management or control
of professional contact contest
conducted held or given into
an agreement between the two
party governments
and shall not alter or effect
and i'm reading from the law
mister president center brand on
paragraph three
puddle so it's not a
jurisdictional issue but it's a
voluntary joint agreement when
this when there are fights that
are current on tribal end that
are regulated by the commission
lands that the commission
actually regulated.
The.
with three travel governments
the last fight was in read also
uh in the month.
In other man guys about a year
ago.
and it decided to go off like
screen so
thank you mister president thank
you senator.
But it's just allows to lose
are held on on the on the tribal
land
if those fights actually count
towards you know qualifications
travel venues without an
agreement with the advertised
commission no question about it
whether those fights count so to
speak with the depend I suppose
still have a lot of concerns
about this bill I still think
it's completely unnecessary
in fact the fees that are in
the boxing association
the world wrestling association
you know whether you like that
whole thing or night I am
wasting years but they have
rules.
Is to when the national title
you don't fight unless that's
what you think you're going to
do
unless you think you have a
chance gas the main goal of any
other
without it being something
that's going to qualify them to
take that risk
this commission don't do
anything to help that they don't
group was specifically left out
on purpose
it wasn't an accident
it was purposeful
it was a decision that was made
were confirming them for
where you know what they do
this would be one of them
it's not needed
do not need a commission
and I need a council to make
sure that they happen because
anyone that's involved in those
And no one's
then they're not going to call
the commission if they don't and
illegally but you gotta pay huge
fees.
that fees like seven hundred and
fifty dollars now as if perotors
five hundred dollars if you pay
five hundred dollars
no that's a annual fee.
Senator to be a foreign co
promoter whatever that is seven
hundred and fifty dollars
you gotta pay the commission
seventy five dollars to be a
referee in the state in new
mexico to referee one of these
fights.
announcer voice or serious birth
he'd have to pay seventy five
dollars
just to be a loud
seventy five dollars
managers seventy five dollars
booking agent suggest you can be
an agent to book a fight you've
got to pay the state of
just to be allowed to book a
fight.
for it for me
an organization
that the claim of the committee
was is going to keep these
because we know that if they're
going to go up in in higher in
the ranks they're going to have
to
fight in qualifying fights
qualifying matches and they're
we can be twenty five thank you
mister president in center we do
have further debate senator
bucker.
fit melbourne kirky and you know
so I knew a lot of these guys
you know I spent some time with
them on the matt and and a lot
of him didn't have a lot of
money
of these guys went on to compete
in king at a cagen and then
ultimately the ultimate fighter
and and those in those types of
things they don't get paid money
until they get to the point in
their career that hey if you're
it's internatively like anything
else like running a jogging like
lifting weights being
participating across fear that's
what most people are doing and
I think it incourages people to
stay out of organized sport I
think it also encourages
participants and to the
officials and the the other
thing that I really disliked
about this I mean we have look
at the promoters of mister
president of three hundred
dollars and and the other part
that really he disturbs me is
twelve
on p g
nineteen through twenty two we
add.
somebody that isn't isn't
competing for money isn't I I
mean I don't even know how you
define that as I mean if you're
if you're having a wrestling
they'll take a matter and and
there are training in the park
does that require a licensee fee
um I think senator brad had it
right I think this thing needs
state and this loss like this
it's just another **** in armor
you know mister president where
we just strip people little at a
little bit more difficult to do
it by stick in our nose where it
doesn't belong mister president
sirge the body to look at this
and and think about that think
about the thing that you like to
anything you can make you can
make this type of law built
around any type of activity that
you have interested in pretty
you know further and slave our
people with we need to stay away
from this sort of thing and
let's let this one go by the way
site thank you mister president.
See no further debate senator my
assistance to close under excuse
me i'm sorry senator I didn't
see saturday many of us is armed
back there serving us i'm sorry
have short moms but did it sim I
to pay the cost of the
commission on that one fight.
Center masters to yield.
Thank you mister president
observing yours it was a paper
view fight had over a million
during
though one of the fires made
court of a million dollars that
In the minutes mister president
how many of those have been
generated in come off in the
last year and what is the cost
the recent commission has
annually.
Thank you miss mister president
certainly I was not great
question and and just a reminder
this is solely this agency is
solely funded by these fees
that's the problem that's the
hundred and ten thousand dollars
annually and that could be
offset in house bill to and we
could restructure this hole this
whole arrangement
presented in in the sunset
thousand costs amount or ten
thousand year how much are we
subsidising them currently.
The thing in this president
on a shoe string budget with
these fees that the fees were
twenty five dollars in nineteen
eighty with inflation that would
be about ninety two dollars
today this raises them for one
in mister president center how
many more scheduled fights is
this commission going to have
our cards are whenever you want
to call them and how many more
Thank you mister president so
center I mean I paid for my
ticket there's a commission pay
for their ticket at the bottom
rebel.
Senator masses mr president
Mister president that person
does not pay for a ticket there
was three or four of them there
I seen these car there of what
is regulation in licensing what
are they manage at the fight.
across the parking lot and see
vehicles that thank you thank
you mister president ceremonies
all in addition to all the
health the health things
preceding the fight away in that
the blood worked out the health
president what is that cost us
from regulation and licensing
for them to oversee that for the
day three days coming up to the
financial how many days.
Thank you mister president
certainly also doesn't cost the
other commission the judges and
referees fees are paid by the
promoter mister president but
were there for I know that what
didn't say boxing commission on
it said RLD on it so what is the
cost for to manage that and in
oversee it.
someone you're so yes there is a
a full time ft through RLD he
has other duties as well but
he's a executive director that
of the other commission said I
would be the salary and benefits
Mr president ceremonies
executive director
of of the new mexico at a direct
not there blinds commission in
the
post recommission and the design
design commission I mean what
The.
Thank you mister president
in terms of being the ed of the
letter commission
uh he overseas all of the make
all of the unarmed combats
boxing wrestling mix martial
where do I get an application
for that job only go to one or
two events a year get paid
eighty or ninety thousand get a
retirement
in oversee that i.
this fight at rebel which I
thought was a pretty good fight
you know people like boxing pill
people don't like boxing but I
think this is one of those
commissions that we shuttle at
sunset
and I am pretty sure I remember
their testimony on the sunset
committee that we were going to
have these giant paper view
events we had that one that I
know of that I went to that was
vents and it just hasn't
happened this is probably going
to come back to love seeing but
I have a good review of sunsets
again in and see if we can just
enjoy boxing enjoy boxing they
set next to some of the family
that had a young lady boxing and
it was very entertaining to to
be in their corner and they
enjoyed it and that's what that
any white now thing it'll cover
them anything in the corner
maybe by a chair or something at
the end of the day the fees
aren't high enough to to make
having are they receiving
prediant for travel to
commission meetings and how many
commission means a year do they
have and how many commissioners
show up
and sell.
Thank you mister president thank
you ceremonies so the is that a
commission uh as a board meets
about once a month so at least
ten twelve times a month they do
in statue get per deal and
Mr president ceremonies yes in
the only two fights a year but
they meet once a month that I
don't what are they talking
three months they meet once a
month they oversee over a
thousand licenses and it's just
to to review up coming up
applications and and deal with
word miss mix martial arts is
not in statute
the the commission has done an
excellent job of rule making and
provided leadership with this
realm but we need to update the
for for tourism and for economic
growth or do have abandoned it
and essentially be an outliar
nationally I I would um so that
they got to become independent
they got it we have an f full
time fte who probably really
doesn't do much maybe go to the
the fte hundred fifteen thousand
for the operations you're not
covering your costs your
expenses in a five year period
you're running a million dollar
whole
Any further debate centers we
have said it or disappear
thank you mr president and would
commission what do you think
that the the values of this
commission are for the state of
new mexico and why would you
support
extending the sense of provision
be the only state in the united
states that does not regulate
this growing sport we have over
twenty five thirty events a year
they're legitimized there
of sports entertainment
wrestling the the neighborhood
that I grew up in that that you
represent companies two world
champion boxers from the north
allen from wells park and of
economy and be and be the
mechanic of me and other types
of fights frankly we just don't
have a modern venues we don't
have a modern indoor
locally and then go on the
national stage and thank you
senator and mister president so
if there were no commission it
would be possible for anybody to
just.
commission for regulating mixed
martial arts very knuckle
fighting wrestling any of those
activities senator masters.
Thank you mister president is if
you know that's that's really
not never been contemplated one
is national promoters wouldn't
touch us with a temporary pole
theoretically local promoters
fight like three hundred and
twenty bound guys but every day
would be while they would be
completely unregulated it would
be just unprecedented
thank you senator I think that's
and of of of letting new
mexicans be taken advantage of
by by fly by an a promoters who
would come in
not pay off the fighters and we
listening to this debate and one
of the arguments is that uh uh
you're charging way too much
money the other argument is
you're not raising enough money
to support it it's hard should
the state supported
raise the the fees somewhat but
still within what inflation is
caused over the last forty years
forty five years and I think we
increase those fees I think the
the the fees are not exorbitant
and I think that that this
commission is needed uh unless I
hear some effort being made to
We do have further debate
centers time for thank you
mister president so with a
senator yield for some questions
mister president yes okay so
topic I mean you could go back
this is this is a
this is new mexico has a long
tradition of uh raising
champions and you know you may
garden took on cannella I mean
an awesome guy in the last
cruise and he just wanted a
championship that was held I
believe in florida but in fact
that same promoter is has come
industry that attract these
activities have commissions.
single state has what was called
back in the boxing commission
obviously new york new jersey
las vegas
california and hopefully new
athletes safe I mean they
regulated activities they look
at who's being matched up they
ultimately responds before
putting out judges so that
they're professionally done is
that they're not injured or what
not but also safe frankly from
promoters there's good statutory
language in here that the
contracts need to be
given to the boxers they don't
statute other things that are
put in here to further define
the activities that are included
and kind of my final question
for you mister president senator
is yeah you do raise fees and we
bill will do um and what senator
or t p no sad about in l if we
recognize the importance of this
commission we either have to
appropriate the funds or we
this bill compared to the fee
structure in other states thank
you mister president center
chamber I don't know that
question but the fees were put
in saturday to nineteen eighty
three hundred to five hundred
if it was tracked by inflation
that three hundred fee in
nineteen eighty would be
approximately thirteen hundred
dollars so I don't know about
the other states I think
president to what we're
proposing here that same fee
center my mister president
search time weren't currently
their twenty five and fifty and
we're bumping a mall to seventy
structure that needs needs to be
modernized but it it's not gonna
be modernized in this bill but
we do need to we do need a bump
that fees a little bit and keep
the commission alive till in
is a a little bit of a
modernization so I support the
bill if you support um
professional fighters in this
state you perform supporter
events come into the state that
it forward and incudos to all
the all the great people here in
our state doing it like jackson
way in cost and trout carlos
kind it and there's holly home
thank you mister president thank
you for the debate and the
concerns I think they're all
remit they can be remedied in
the next year we got a protect
going into a certain fight that
all the fighters are safe as
well as financially secure with
that mister president I move
that
that senate bill one hundred
president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands mister president
thank you mister president has
consent to excuse center to him
for your point senator thank you
mister president he had closed
on the bill so if in the future
we get those in a little bit
sooner I think you know we want
Senators to your seeds please
have you wish to vote no please
raise your hand.
Senator backer body now
senator brant voda now
serena ville vodino
senator share voting now senator
bert rodino
senator neighborhood vodino
when yours voting now senator
stephanie's volume now
senators are month this morning
now.
Buy a lot of twenty for ever
sixteen negative senate bill one
item that's going to be item
number four in today's calendar
and that's going to be
send the health and public
affairs committee substitute for
senate bill fifteen as amended
committee substitute for senate
bill fifteen and final passage
has been taken and there is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution here no objection
center do have to explain the
bill
talented providers who want to
serve their patience but dignity
but it also means that there is
a lot of money to be made and
profit maximisation can be put
over the needs of patient health
president a major driver of
changes in health care in the
recent decades as consolidation
of health care entities through
transactions that result in a
change of control such as
mergers and acquisitions and
in fact mister president I was
shocked to learn that new mexico
has the highest percentage of
private equity owned hospitals
currently has no oversight of
major transactions they have
significant implications for
helping well being
and mister president the purpose
control when changes of control
occur we need to make sure that
the availability accessibility
affordability and quality of
health care is considered
yesterday we passed senate bill
seventeen which leverages
medicaid to net hospitals in new
mexico an extra one point three
billion dollars annually are
bill that's intended to give the
the office of the superintendent
of insurance osi notice of major
transactions that could have
impacts on the availability of a
including health insurers and we
have and I have the critical
infrastructure in experience
that's needed to provide this
oversight
and mr president what we see
well documented data that can
solid that when we have health
care consolidation consolidation
we also get increases in price
Um here new mexico we spend
significantly more per patients
or per person on hospital care
than our surrounding states
consolidations are who are after
a hospital was acquired by a
private equity group
they had a market increase in
hospital acquired complications
there was a recent study that
found that merged hospitals were
more likely than independent
hospitals to eliminate maternal
neo natal and surgical care in
rural areas
ensuring that new mexico
patients aren't going to have a
reduction in the availability
accessibility affordability and
quality of medical care then
provide some oversight for these
transactions as be fifteen is a
is a compromise that is a first
step
discussion with the medical
community and over the next
interim all the stake holders
are going to be getting together
to come up with a comprehensive
long term approach to this issue
The.
We do have a floor moment the
reader will read senate floor
amendment number one to senate
health and public affairs
think you mister president I
move the amendment.
The.
See no objection center feel
explained which amendment
given that that was a defined
term this was just one extra
instance of that where we had
entity and so we're changing it
to person to be consistent with
the amendments that were made
and senator dishearing.
Thank you mister president with
the sponsor yield saturday yes
thank you mister president thank
throughout.
Center doing so mister president
senator that language was
changed in the senate judiciary
that includes an entity
and so this this amendment would
just be would make the rest of
the consistent with with those
changes that were made.
substitute and not a judiciary
amendment.
Sanity and minister president
center i'm not sure why that's
senator debate and send a floor
amendment number one.
america and they're they you you
can't have a hospital open
unless it has money to pay it's
employees.
they come in and the other they
cut whole classes of of people
just as the sponsor said I see
that all the time at my work and
it it it hurts our medical
so do you want this bill or do
you want them to lay off their
nursing staff just for
clarification we are on the
moment only amendment all right
well that's all my stuff for the
bill so you you got it all right
thank you as a time saver right
there thank you finished me to
see enough for the debate on the
immense senator do hate to close
senators has been a request for
a voice vote on senate floor
amendment number one adoption
are those in favor of
significant by saying I was a
pose
Thank you mister president i've
did vote against this and
committee i'm so not sure i'm
gonna vote
for us or dense it on the floor
impact private practices and
other business round states I do
applaud her for working with
that and working with providers
for run state me I just again
heck out of medical malpractice
i'll give me started on that
once again all the other things
we do to hurt businesses and
then we just try to then we
wonder why there aren't doctors
and buying the hospitals here
and there are monopolies mister
president center do you know
it's their sign almost for her
but have their percentage on the
in it is impossible for small
practices or miss I practices a
computer against these
monopolistic organizations and I
appreciate what senator said
about that but we've created
competing and and they're going
to be sucked up by even larger
monopolies and regard to fixed
health care in the state and
more government regulations the
more government programs and
telling doctors are not welcome
fix us and stop driving
practices.
In met doctors out of this state
thank you thank you center more
we do have senator steinborn
senator neighborhood center
Centers thank you mister
president just some clarifying
questions for me does this act
only apply the hospital
acquisitions and mergers.
over the interim will be brought
here as well but this only
applies to new mexico hospitals
ok thank you mister president
well I think that's important
because we had heard earlier
that's important in a good place
to start
second question mister president
center does this
new
act give the superintentive
senator so this gives the the
superintendent of insurance the
ability to review the merger
when a pro if appropriate in
merger or in the very rare
circumstance I she could block
the merger
okay
well mister president
would be worth watching if
you're interested in this about
a health hospital consolidation
company in california that ended
up consolidating all the
found the attorney general I
think of the saving california
maybe in the sector of humans
are health and human services
for the country.
I know I actually the same
person a former representative
and actually hurt consumers and
so they were abusing their
market control where customers
had less competition less
options and ultimately were
center yes you you had the nail
right on the head yes that's
that's exactly what we see
happening and what we're trying
to to avoid here in new mexico
with the spell and mister
president center I also
center to him miss president
senator yes.
So mister president center I
support tests just like I was
we're talking about looking
after consumers yesterday and
is another great bill in my
opinion to
make sure that we're looking
after consumers and if these big
companies very profitable
companies want to come in in
mexico and certain consolidating
you and the office of the
superintendent even insurance
Yes mister president
mr president
we discussed in committee
life regulated utilities that
are given a franchise to be a
monopoly they may be a monopoly
because there's no other entity
legislation on the ability of a
private business to engage
what i'd consider normal
business transaction and part of
and so i'd like to
explore that a little bit
so master president
Senator ding
mr president sen yes a
transaction that will change the
control of the hospital will
require approval
Senator mr president sary so yes
assuming that that that sale is
is changing in the control of
the hospital then yes it would
number of items are found by the
superintendent.
Including
Senator
so mister president sen
expect what we've seen in in
long as the analysis shows that
there's not a reduction in
essential services there's not I
there's not a reduction in the
access to affordability of
transaction would not be
approved because mister
president senator I the the
superintendent will also have
the ability to place conditions
that's always going to be the
first step if there's a concern
about those things
and mrperiod president were
there ever be a case where
company was desiring to sell
financial objectives
and the only way to make that
hospital viable is to sell it to
another entity who may curtail
to meet some of the requirements
in this bill and I would presume
in that case the superintendent
would not approve that
specifically for an emergency
situation like the one that
you've described.
If there is a hospital that is
is about to go believe that
that kind of situation it would
be approved
president what what if we have a
situation where it's not
necessarily going belly up it's
just not meeting financial
that are being currently
provided but that the buyer does
not want to
continue those services and and
that negative will impact a
being sold to a person who
says we cannot make this work
with the same level of services
are the same breath of services
So
mister president senator I think
what would be more likely to
happen is that there would be
think we need to consider the
spelled bill in the context of
sp seventeen that we passed
yesterday where hospitals who
are in financial trouble will
have access to now an extra one
going to buy on the condition
that they can reduce services to
new mexicans but walks away that
that's selling hospital isn't
just left an alerts then they
potentially another buyer who
would be able to commit to
maintaining central health care
services for new mexicans
and mister president I might
companies if you will to look at
new mexico as a as a place to to
do business but I hope that uh
the government over reach and
really getting into the business
practices of a
any entity but particularly
Here i'm i'm afraid that we're
having to go
as permission to engage in a
point do people believe that the
line of taking of their real
property uh is reached and and
then we do make it a
property for taking it and that
concerns me greatly I
I think there's some ways to
these these funds certainly that
should encourage entities to
continue the breath of services
continue to serve the public at
the level that will benefit that
the same level of services and
and not have any degregation in
those services up on that sl
sell it to party a who then
can't maybe account buy it under
those conditions or do we simply
close a facility down and we
certainly don't want to see that
Mean if you don't mind roll back
yes.
So mister president while i'm
scrolling through here.
In in the year analysis we have
one start with osi the
implement overseas and review
the process did we put one point
five million dollars to do this
anywhere.
Mister president sen so the
community we now have such a
narrow bill that we we have such
withdrawn that appropriation
bill because they don't need it
i.
built into it so I can't give
you a number of page number line
number but it says the office
shall consult with the authority
What all of that means is money
for one thing so you're gonna
to have to have staff you're
gonna have to coordinate this
In that generally isn't free mr
president so how are we going to
pay for that that's that still
is in the bill even though
there's no appropriation center
holding company act so this
process is largely modeled on
why the office of the
superintendent of insurance is
doing already under that act
with the outside experts to help
with that analysis and the cost
of those experts is born by the
company that is submitting for
review and so we've taken that
we're going to have more
business to take care of which
means more people to do more
stuff which means more money
still and there's no
appropriation still.
to build out build out an entire
infrastructure to cover this
next year.
Were there going to work through
work out a comprehensive bill
with all the stakeholders over
those experts is born by the
entity that is submitting for
review not by the osi justice is
done with the insurance holding
company act so mister president
gasport.
Next on here it says the health
care market share
of a party and whether the
transaction may for close
reason not to approve it is that
is that the way I read it and I
do mr president senator and you
know i'm looking for that
amendments in contacts context.
Page ten
item three and mister presidents
banapolis reduce competition
they reduce consumer choice and
they generally are not good for
what we've done in this chamber.
And have been signed by the
governor I guess the other
chamber had participated to.
We have chosen mister president.
it so that so that are health
care providers are a terrible
risk of losing everything
because of what we've done with
with the
health care providers
selling their business to the
hospital because they cannot
stay in business because of what
to the rango or they've sold to
the hospital there's none.
Because of what we did here
which certainly has a greater
effect here
so in essence what we've done as
Because they'll be docs cannot
afford the insurance
and they get a little bit of a
cover if they go to a hospital
and so now we're saying we don't
want we don't want
or in fact monopolies because
there's only one in the
community
they're not too
in most places in some places
going to open a second one there
for any reason or if they can't
at least makes a little bit of
money.
And so I think when we talk
But in this particular case.
Most places aren't going to have
competition anyway
it just because they're they
don't have multiple hospitals
beaten them senseless by not
paying them medicaid rates at a
minimum we've beat them
senseless with insurance we've
been them senseless with
regulations and then we wonder
So we have lots of attorneys
we have any doctors who were
here trying to save health care
by making sure that there are
hospitals
If our doctors could participate
in small communities.
Then we would have this problem
at all
our hospitals wouldn't be going
they could take the the the
the greater
medical issues that needed to
happen and it was all local then
then we wouldn't have this issue
over everything because it is
more expensive to go to the
emergency department in any
setting then it is to go see
your family practice doctor so
vicious cycle in this just adds
to the viciousness of the cycle.
there's no real future there
they can't expand they can't add
the the things that the
community needs
those other things that lead the
hospitals even thinking about
wanting to sell or all the
things that we ought to be
addressing before we even come
In while in our in our latest
budget we've increased medicaid
rates.
The.
A big part of the deal here is
half of our population is on
medicaid.
stock
they have to have what they call
the payer mix that makes sense
and so commercial insurance
generally makes up the
difference for the not getting
paid for medicaid.
bill okay so as we destroy our
small businesses later on today
so we don't have any.
Commercial insurance or or it's
new mexico we take away the
funding for our hospitals.
We don't fund them through the
medicaid system appropriately to
make up the difference and when
hospitals who are looking you
know i'd really like to add a
cardiologist to my staff but I
can't because when I mean enough
money to add a cardiologist.
Or an ob dog
expand it makes sense to our to
our customers to our neighbors
to the people that we've been
serving for fifty years
to sell to somebody else that we
can.
cancel to if if they're going to
expand services.
But then.
This company comes in they buy
it
although i'm not sure that our
health care authority can handle
this either since we've turned
that into
I don't know how big a twenty
billion dollar colors
in then it turns out they can't
do that
so all the certain we're going
backwards and I see this bill
that but they're not going away
because
because black rock is out there
buying and just for greens
health care it will stop beat
them up
i'd be one thing
let's just start beat them up
the anti competitive effects in
circle here and the fourth floor
were the people that beat them
up
in now we're saying well nope
you can't take the action
Towards reading that right now
and if you want mister president
i've been given permission to
talk long enough so that we
could all read in fact I could
this is in a solution this is
one more big brother ordering us
to do
or not to do something that big
what happens in their hospital.
It's big brother.
In the problem with big brothers
You know I have just had enough
of putting big brother in law
it's just really annoying me
We're punishing new mexicans.
In that's what so much of what
we do in here does just just
punish his new mexicans more and
hospital clothes anyway
and we've punished new mexicans.
Some hospitals look at this or
not going to go above that but
right now the hospital says
there above that but the only
above that'll just barely hang
on by their fingernails
or maybe they still they want to
The investments company can come
in it's okay we'll keep you at
an emergency level.
But not above that but now
always I was going to look down
to well they cut services so
they're obviously or an evil
One more layer of suffering that
we want to put on the people of
new mexico mister mister
president.
And I think we are look at this.
medical providers
not because investors have
bought him out it's because we
beat the snot out of them.
i'd like the sponsor of the bill
please to yield a couple of
questions please deal yes as
present.
Senator do you guys heard some
of the debate from my colleagues
and concerned about private
hospital association by
presbyterian by loveless
and someone else I can't
remember
again the word repeatedly are
using committee and i'll use
again here the floor incredulous
that the hospital association
would not be strong we oppose
this bill
which would allow the
of you make sure the one
individual particularly the
superintendent insurance with
what I would are you pretty
limited background experience
Lowless presbatorian not opposed
this i'm incredulous and had to
ask myself why
how could this be.
a sale a merger and acquisition
of a hospital.
Candidly.
I believe it.
looking out for me as a
fiduciary.
So I remain incredulous.
Now my colleagues have straight
should have suggested as I might
the right to veto that sale.
And yet a hospital association
does not oppose this.
On behalf of their members and
Why wouldn't love list not
opposed to state of new mexico
having a veto their assets why
should ask ourselves and tell
folks why.
Yeah i'm gonna ask you for that
number here in the second
they've got a better deal by not
opposing this and not giving
away that authority the statute
of mexico and why because it's
about the money.
invariably involves a claim
against the hospitals.
And what the hospitals cleverly
do is they create shells and
hospital.
And they don't know the answer.
They can't give me now drive to
pose doctors who work for the
hospitals and i've asked who
mexico.
Because it wants to argue that
it's a mune from suit in new
mexico and the way that it does
that is by creating shell and
subsidiary corporations that are
Now they create these local
public
citizen advisory boards and they
suggest that these boards have
like me to represent people have
been killed in injury.
Now does this directly relate to
your bill senator I think it
does.
And here's why because we're
we're putting this veto
authority we're putting this
in turn use to settle or not
settle more often the case not
settle last suits
and take cases to judgement
Mr president may ask the chair
of finance to yield to a
question centre many year.
Present center yes.
a lawsuits.
Mister president center I do not
know that number right now off
the top of my head there's a lot
of numbers in my head
In thank you mister president
center thank you for your
question I did mean to catch you
off guard I should have alerted
you i'd ask you that question
but in some we've been putting
thirty forty fifty million
dollars into patient
assess the hospitals in the
providers what would be required
to keep that phone solvent.
Word put tax payer dollars into
that which then in turn benefits
the hospitals and the doctors.
room we're hurting private
enterprise were heartened to
private sector were not pure to
capitalism
I heard the argument made about
my son and law who began married
to her in a month it is
finishing his residency at u and
m
in or the pedex.
But it's not malpractice it
concerns them.
And so the arguments that we
don't have providers and
hospitals are going under and
having a hard time ignores the
will not assess them what is
needed to keep solvency of the
patient compensation fund we are
subsidising multi billion dollar
When I get to ask him about
these issues so
let's continue to ask ourselves
why the hospitals are not
It's all about the money.
So let's not be too pure about
the fact that this is anti
american orange a contract I
taking your taking an asset and
you were impairing it's value
by this law.
The.
But the people whose value on
whose assets is being impaired
and being taken here.
We do have further debate we
have center hickey volvo centers
there local center hakey.
The.
lot of things but I think one of
the wisest things he ever said.
Oh health care it's really
complicated.
take they both make good points
the implications of actions in
health care aren't just to one
unintended consequences is
probably largely there than in
in any other place.
And I point that out because
when I questioned the potential
merger of one of our large
systems where they
larger system there really is no
such thing as a merger and
completely on a line
with new mexico.
And as I opened that box in
And they need to be clearly
thought through I agree with the
sponsor in this comes out of the
school of business at the
be some savings in uh
reducing some of the centralised
work loud but the data clearly
shows
happens I won't go into that but
this is something we clearly
need to to look at there's
there's no question
mister president I I don't think
he's trying to stone you but
I guess this is play ball anyway
looking at the large
transactions which is where I I
fear most about in new mexico
and the impact and why I raised
issues this summer and I will
the entities to pursue
their transactions as was noted
by senator serving taste and the
market and so forth.
Because of the implications a
sponsors and the the plans and
and I believe the hospital
much within the implications
that need to be tested in
multiple ways
before we get something that's
permanent that wow well
senators here for his for his
absorption of information about
health care and as it came out
and taking the time to work this
route during the interim so that
we do it at the end of the day
it's about doing our best in
again well we will study that
over the interim but we need to
look at at all pieces of it and
uh but I just I want to be clear
working with all the parties to
work through this complexity uh
the question should it be in the
o s I it's actually not in forty
other states have these but it's
To be sure that anything we do
doesn't inhibit access so I look
forward to it but I come in the
mister president I I don't need
to ask my question anymore thank
you center similar when yours
you know I I also rise in
support of this building and
before I can member which which
was about one point eight
billion dollars and funding to
save hospitals throughout new
mexico
that was taxing them and then
year with an additional hundred
and eighty million article
sitting in there.
And you look at cross and we had
a bill in the house today in the
rolled the bell on center woods
moving in increase their profit
margins where is the easiest
pray in the most money I can
make in the corporate world i'm
the exact same way.
The merger that was discussed
this last year that kind of blue
things up in the good center
from album you helped us
enlighten us about that right we
another state barrier expenses
in the state where you're not
going to show your profits
margins showed the losses and
take your profit a less tax or
less
they're shared to the
shareholders so they send you a
w two or ten ninety nine through
the year for your corporate
income or your turn on your on
your certificates that's where
dollars a year and fifty percent
and income may come from new
mexico it's not taxable.
You look at my hospital and i'll
beds they are not eligible for
the patient's compensation phone
the patience conversation fund
is corporate welfare again so
my hospital who is about to file
bankruptcy in the next couple of
days has one point five days
worth the cash on hand.
in a judgement in the sanity
court.
Is broke
they're not eligible for the
patient composition phone
if you really want it no way the
hospital association probably is
not against this is because one
point eight billion roughly two
billion dollars is a very gonna
I don't know any other business
model that like that in in the
world but
would I like to be a part of it
sure.
Is there.
Insurance we watch hospitals
fail probably in the next year
to throughout the state cause
in seventeen is the biggest
corporate well for a cratch
you're going to see in the us
while it saves some rural
hospitals mine is a non profit
but has been managed by a
And so we keep done bail out
after bail out of to bail out
and until you get some control
and put you to firm foot firmly
it's if it's good for new mexico
not good for new mexico but
until we do that you're going to
see one company move into one
area make some money and then
they'll be gone.
margins that services out of the
hospital and now left the
hospital not having available
where the money is going and
what's happening and how their
sheltered are shelled and one
corporation to another nlce I
mean in the corporate world in
available protection as you move
forward and you have to make
sure you follow that veil
protection they're doing the
same way but they're doing it
with income too so you need to
pass this bill thank you.
mispresident can I talk about
the amendment now this meeting
well a couple things call these
came up I thought I just want to
add briefly to the discussion I
where what I would consider dead
weight
in that fund so what happens
on the attorney side of things
what happens if you use punitive
damages to threaten.
that's that way it's not justice
it in the case if someone didn't
do anything wrong like a like a
provider hospital but what if
they just gave in because of the
as should the injured be
compensated get that that's one
scenario and we we've got to
have that balance to but let's
not forget the dead weight
people that are settling they
didn't do anything wrong that
are
you know that there are pulling
money out that fine too so and
But we are such a such a a
litigious issue going on here in
new mexico
that that we have to have that
find just in order for people to
So unfortunately we have to
subsidize that find
just a get people insurance
and there is a common interest
there's a state interest in
having a basic
just a a very basic service that
that's a very basic two to all
of our humanity to this common
And so we're in the unfortunate
situation that we do have to
subsidize it for now just
practically to just even have a
work health care work force here
debated the the amendment and so
here here's the deal.
Hospitals are having a hard time
and they're selling and trying
to change their business just to
bit payroll they're staffing
that's it
hospital has to be about fifty
percent to survive understand
their overhead and their their
expenses if you can be around
fifty percent for your staffing
we are causing this problem
ourselves where it worked we're
we're having you know these big
payroll taxes for hospitals
and yet that's their major
reason that they are having
tend enrolling these big payroll
taxes on the major cost that
hospitals are having
I just pose the question for you
I I don't I can't reconcile
we're not doing them instead
we're doing this.
And and I I just think it I
think it's wrong to just dig a
hole and then fill it up again
and think we got work down it it
move there senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for senate bill
fifteen as twice amended with an
emergency class do now pass an
asking enemies consent of the
senate that the record show that
Senator sanchez already know
senator an availability now
sender birth only know.
Sandra words volume now.
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution no
objections senator could I have
products named the bill mr
insuring guidelines are in place
to set them up for a success the
main changes include changing
the definition of full time for
to legacy students removing
credit hour limits to the
semester prior to graduation and
allowing students with
disabilities to have their
there any debate conversation or
any statements to be made
senator pavia please.
except for the purposes of a
call see no objection to
disorder thank you very much
center by the overmoving along
going under center stephanic
center stephanie's please thank
very much thank you very much
center is the phone extending of
the discussion.
See no then going to send a
recorder handful to close so
never handful please mister
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands thank you very
much senator senators to your
chairs if you vote now please
raise your hands explain my vote
Senator pedal votes now senator
meetings votes now.
duly passed the senate center
could him fill and then i'm
going to go ahead and go to
center money else to explain as
well thank you mr president and
thank you members at the body
thank you very much senator
that's only eligible for thirty
credits under lottery can now go
year round
they can go to summer school
they can get done earlier and so
And had more credits then he
would be eligible for to receive
opportunity or lottery he had no
eligible there's another kids
seem kid the group with my kid
aerospace engineering degree is
in eligible because he had too
it was captain in so you need to
think about the big picture when
we when they do these how do we
get more graduates
you allow the flexibility
next daughter business we're
going to send a joint resolution
number five and that's going to
be public employees retired
health care phone going to
for placing senate joined
resolution five on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to it debate amount
Oh mister president and now
member soft
center joined resolution five
would amend article twenty of
retiree health care for any
purpose except for the sole and
exclusive benefit of the trust
beneficiaries providing for the
protection to the retiry health
care act which was established
in nineteen ninety in a self
december the another fun has one
hundred and six and the active
participants contribute in his
ninety three thousand five
hundred and ninety five members
Thank you very much and everyone
service any questions are debate
going through the debate we're
going to senatority simpino
senator or tc pino please.
Mister president I will leave to
yields thank you going to
senator or t c penalty please
mister president and senator
goods also this is a
constitutional amendment that
authority with the other
public employee plans that the
state has and the that would
make it a very difficult to go
you know I would like to have my
expert witness so permission to
enter the chamber so before we
proceed then we're gonna there's
witness before we ask for
unanimous concern
mister president that is mr neil
coffee executive director and
come in to the senate chamber
they'll put a seat out there for
the expert witness and
we're going back to scenario
going so less than I don't know
priority simpino please thank
you mister president thank you
senator gonzalez yeah the the
question is a this this measure
is a constitutional amendment
potential problems one of those
is that would this if we adopt
this amendment in the voters of
prove it would it make it
impossible then for the retiree
uniting and their purchase of
health insurance does anyone
service.
The health care is that mister
president the senator the and
your expert witness the health
care authority noted that.
of of twenty of twenty five in
purchasing
if if this authority if this.
Retire healthcare fund is
continue to purchase insurance
jointly with the others.
Oh mister president I know where
senator it it makes its own
decision about how to spend its
own money and it's not
collaborating with the other
entities in purchasing insurance
different public employees to
pull it all together into one
better the
if this phone this administered
by the retiree health care
authority
Center evening service.
Mister president dinner biced by
my expert witness at all that
are
But he would not make a need
change to that part of the
authority.
Mister president instead of a
It could limit the ability of
the legislature to make changes
in an airmark.
That exist currently regarding
the diversion of personal income
these diverted income tax
payments uh but in the future
could be a lot more
this could handy cap you
couldn't you wouldn't be
Senator concerned mister
president being advised that on
to senator dc being over there
that we have five sources
disallowed in a two make this
happen as far as so what were
the concern of for senator
recipient
so mister president senator do I
The.
about this is about protecting
the trust
you know after.
Members what it us for the
retiree health care.
If we adopt this the legislature
which is currently made this
decision to ear mark those
that there is a different way it
would basically tie the future
legislature's hands.
So.
I know that this constitutional
you'd be locked into that figure
that we couldn't go up the
legislature couldn't reduce it
or add to it it it just
essentially you would you would
it it it it doesn't really deal
with the legislature's
authority.
from my witnesses are saying is
that on that adjustments would
be able to be make.
The.
committee eight I just had
concerns about the possibility
that this would become a a
barrier we adopted this who
become a barrier to
So i'm gonna ask the senator
gonzalez one last question
Why do we need to put this into
the constitution.
Mister president senator
gonzalez says the fund ever
been rated
but we're would have recall it
selling mr president center to
support yes
but believe the year was a two
thousand two shortly after that.
replace the money later or or
mister president senator
gonzalez was was the
read on the phone.
Restored later on.
So no one sellers oh mister
president senator just support
and ever since you know there
has been this concern of a
possibility because it does not
have a protection.
time that we have allowed to to
be rated are not rated and only
rated when there's urgent need
for the overall
debate but i'm a little
skeptical of the need for this
particular constitutional
amendment thank you thank you
very much and early penalties
regard at the center and when
you ask and then we're going to
Center of one sellers please
mister president and the senator
roughly a one point
or they have one point four
billion dollars in assets three
hundred and forty eight million
The.
Does anyone know president and
does have enough old sufficient
funds to me to the needs of the
fund.
So mister president if we're
forty four percent funded in the
top of your financial statement
on the front page so this phone
at forty four percent under
funded what's the total
difference between
So were one million and refunded
but the voters were never been
able to tell that there were one
billion under funded but i'm
looking you guys may not have
well twenty thirty this fun goes
into the negative in thirty
three
so the state would have roughly
voters are going to know that
they're
voting for a phone that's forty
four percent in the negative
that's a big issue
sheet at a negative billion
dollars which is increasing to
on the left seat chart
you know and in the
ipark who he's incentive the
good centers the chair you try
billion under water and put
anything the constitutional
makers pay for it right off the
top and so it's a big cost I
understand there are workers
As we do that a four billion
dollar deficit in a couple years
is pretty hard for the state to
handle
year's budget but i'm looking at
next year budget I mean I I can
not support this knowing what
the for it affects are going to
and I I had some questions now
and I think sender when you
really raised a lot of those
questions putting in the
constitution a huge liability of
of the funds and actually
I think we had different figures
but the the the liability of
which is pretty significant and
enshrining it in the
constitution um.
values and what we stand for his
estate and I feel this financial
phone is something that we the
legislature have a
um and only this fund and there
are many funds that we talked
about in ipark that i'm sure
would be happy to be
constitutionally enshrined and
the the the
here it is the language the
board of the public employee
retirement health health care
contracts the legislature shell
not enact any law that alters
the funding formula for retiree
health claim health care plan
unless the legislature preserves
requires sacrifices on the part
of the state the employer the
the employee and to have it be
so one sided.
contributions just it seems
problematic to me and I had the
same problem in in ipark and I I
have those same questions today
and I I don't feel
mister president so I asked the
sponsor to yield thank you
rumours in recent center concern
is do you yield a year please
proceed center city all office
and and the provision that
doesn't permit altering the fund
unless the legislature preserves
benefits and provides adequate
funding.
that you have opened it is the
same provision that is in place
for erb and for pera.
understanding is it allows it it
requires the legislature to
fund and that's why I always
insist in iparked and in in
shaker in any other committee
that we ask for the report on
two provides for this is this
goes a little bit further
mister president.
Then I asked the
again out of courtesy I ask the
sponsor if that's correct thank
you very much center instead of
Center point sellers to respond.
The.
Mr president and with a senator
city a lot better some
the system in any manner or
changes but on this the funding
formula for the retirement plan
on less adequate funding is
the many members that belong to
it in also with them maybe like
all on a parallel system to what
is to power into erb.
system in any matter changes the
funding formula for retirement
plan unless adequate funding is
provided which requires an
analysis of
the the way this bill is is
drafted it says alters of
finding formula unless the
legislature preserves benefits
funding formula unless adequate
funding is provided this is more
permissive and this is a
requirement in the constitution
question or is this oh I
apologize III would be happy if
the sponsor would like to
respond thank you very much in a
city of op center gone service.
thank you the language in the in
the proposed uh
what is this in sg are five says
and provides adequate funding
that language is different from
what is in our constitution
article twenty two and
not enact any law that increases
the benefits paid by a system in
any manner
or changes the funding formula
for retirement plant unless
adequate funding is provided
this in their constitution
legislature justifies what is
doing and provides the funding
it can alter the the formula
this week and that there are
says the legislature must you
know unless a legislature
preserves benefits and provides
adequate funding so has has a
are but I don't believe that we
are so so if you would like to
respond to the fact that the
language is different mr mister
chair and why that language is
enshrined in the constitution
mister president thank you very
much center city a lot person
before we continue uh just uh a
note to each and every one of
the so we have forward please
all discussions and so that's
just again a moment of
taking a deep breath so we can
continue with with this debate
going back to senator gonzalez
citibank's almost please.
you know with it with our public
employees and this has brought
up to me many times.
Is this.
is probably even a higher
priority than the actual benefit
of retirement.
And always looking at you know
it never has had the full
protection and with a
discussions you know trying to
bring it to the level of
health care and so this is what
it is itself a protection to the
fund.
Thank you center even service
going back to center city all of
constitutional provision
protecting health care for
everyone in the state of new
mexico I would be extremely
enthusiastic however this is
because it is requiring that no
changes be made no changes being
made unless the benefits are
prese- preserved
apologize for not looking for it
it is because
the sponsor of the bill is such
a different and I know that his
his heart is is in exactly the
right place and I know that's
do I would always vote to
protect these funds um I
understand how important health
care is I just don't see the
need
respect the fund and I would
always support it
and I certainly respect the
sponsor for bringing it thank
you mister chair.
Thank you very much center is to
the other best removing allowing
Thank you mr president will the
sponsor yield everyone's let's
do you ill.
Mister president I eal his
proceed center neighbor uh
mister president my question is
into s from the state funds
and mister president uh since
there are state funds that are
going into this.
understand why we might place a
property right on the employees
contribution but I do not
understand why we would plays
and back to i'll read it.
the if the fund has some state
moneys in it.
Better not associated with the
compensation package but are
just there to prop up the phone
phones that some future time and
the employees or the retirees
should not have a vested
property right in in those
That
uh rise
raise a lot of other questions
some other funds but I think
that we better
carefully look at whether or not
we're going above and beyond
concerned that we're going uh
further than we should
with respect to this bill and
that it ought to be specifically
center neighborhood next we go
to senator steinborn and center
stable in place thank you mister
president
will the senator please heal for
a few questions.
know i've been involved in
probably two or three different
pension sovereign sea.
Pieces of legislation where we
do that to preserve benefits and
unfortunately that also affected
tweaking things
so
I guess I have three kind of
concerns with the bill senator
respectfully in a welcome you're
your response but number one I I
think.
But you know
i'm very concerned about
the fund meaning that parents
self would no longer be able to
give input on its actuaries
concerns in the legislature even
from the parable word from the
paris staff and we're giving it
exclusively to the board of my
reading that right.
The.
Okay and so just for my own
education as president senator
so the retarian health care find
Oh mister president senator home
it's a contracted firm and it is
part also the sac.
constitutional moment will
change it to as we'd say we be
we would actually be
relinquishing and giving the
exclusive actually
you know it's a contracted firm
that does the actuaries.
And so the sic provides the
funds.
And thank you mister president
senator it also says that the
the board itself shall be the
sole for due sharing.
And
We traditionally have been that
as well as it sounds like the
state investment council and
this constitutional member would
be delegating that also to the
board.
So it's a
and my concern I guess has
expressed by others is how does
that impact current current
public employees who are going
to be retiring our ability to do
preserving benefits but we I
think need to i'll remain the
fiduciaries of that money and
have the flexibility to do what
we need to do in order to ensure
See no further debate we're
closing on the senate joint
resolution five
century when sellers to close
been going out or quite some
time some years there now and of
course we want to make it as
right as it is for everyone you
protection and there was one
part that was brought up that
home that I I just like to
explain may be a little bit more
I am here today and saw many of
our other members
but do you never know what the
future brings you know in as a
members then everyone in the
insure you know that there is so
avail there for protection to
the fun and with that mister
president I move that senate
affirmative except those would
in the negative by a short hands
thank you very much senate going
solid senators were voting on
senate joint resolution five two
year chairs if you vote no
centers modes now
center period votes now.
Senator brand well it's now
senator birth wells now
senator share words now
senator woods
senator greggs.
Well snow.
Center is advantage would know.
Words now
senator brantley modes now
senator pino wells now
center is defanix modes now.
Center to handful boats now
Center moores votes no.
The.
By vote of fourteen and the
affirmative twenty five in the
negative senate joint resolution
five has failed to pass the
were mentioned and the world
continue working hard on this
thank you very much center
coincidence we're going back to
our majority leaders under peter
worth for the next order of
business senator worth please
and i'm directed to informed the
senate that the house is passed
house bill one forty one as
amended by the house and
requests the concurrence of the
senate respect please submitted
the same market his mechanic and
business introduction of
legislation so you know
objection is soared were on that
order of business introduction
of legislation and the readeral
read.
requesting the energy minerals
and natural resources department
to study and recommend
legislation for establishing
setbacks for oil and gas
facilities send it memorial
committee send a memorial
fourteen the read all read house
bill one forty one introduced by
representatives hochman vehicle
increase removing salary
formulas for magistrates making
an appropriation house bill one
forty one aspect one forty one
hundred twice by title is
please excuse that house bill
one forty one going back the
return doesn't have anything
else on the on the regions table
that looks like alright going to
majority leader peter worth for
senator peter worth please thank
you mister president so just in
terms of timing up for committee
chairs we're going to be back on
the floor at six o'clock just
food and that'll be at about
quarter of six so it'll be out
front here some members can grab
some food before we come on the
floor at six o'clock
to send it or a t c pino and
they were going to senator pops
and her dc penalty please thank
you mister president asking
animals consent to remove senate
bill three o four from the
viewing i'm despite her of that
bill and the title is
well it's the same old related
to the public health safety and
welfare making an appropriation
two two eight oh nine two point
one thank you very much there
has been a request for unanimous
consent is there any objection
see no objection it is so
ordered moving along then to
senator soles will be posted for
public viewing the referrals
will be will be sent an
education committee and tenth
senate finance committee the
title of the proposed substitute
program a sam one college the
proposed committee substitutes
two o two number is two two
eight one zero seven point one
thank you very much in is there
mister president I moved that
the committee referral to the
committees committee to senate
bill two fifty eight sharing of
certain way d info be removed.
Thank you very much senator
senator yes mister president
okay if you will please explain
what that bill does and then
we're going to go to the
committee's committee chair.
often in committee it was
brought up this morning whenever
we did a senate memorial that
there's certain information
that's been redacted that I
think for this body bill do his
thank you mister president I yes
the confidentiality statute that
we have for cfd is more than
likely unconstitutional and fact
our
for appropriate transparency for
issues were surrounding thank
you very much i'm going to the
protemporary protemporary
store please thank you mister
president and
or this issue about german so it
needed a message I want the bill
to
I was not happy hearing this
got sixty days next year and
it's just that something that
that I think we should be doing
now thank you very much april
temporary stewart so there is an
Okay so we do have a motion then
to go ahead and remove senate
bill to fifty eight make that
doing is where voting on whether
or not to consider a senate bill
to fifty eight and mister
president
senator said renters for what
so what we're gonna do we've
moved back we're gonna go ahead
and also entertain some debate
and discussion before we go
ahead and we'd take a vote by a
the sponsor of senate two fifty
eight we deal to a question or
two please senator do heck do
you yes mister president please
proceed thank you mister
president as bonsor center doing
I let the governor's office know
with it should they decide to
give any cyft messages I would
like one on this one as well but
that my understanding was that
serve on communities committee
of spent a lot of time trying to
follow a procedure in process I
want to support that at the same
time this is such an important
issue see why disclosure
I just wanted to know from the
sponsor whatever it's had been
made in what response you got to
getting a message in my
understanding as you you made an
effort with the executive and
was unsuccessful.
because we're trying to ensure
that we understand what we're
doing and within the
conversation of the debate that
information will be brought
forward so we're moving along to
send it a barclays center of a
during this thirty day and you
know even though i'm inclined to
agree with the chair of
committees committee it's
important that we have this
And that effort has to be made
by other parties to allow us to
do something about cyfd so this
discussion needs to happen
but this appears to be one of
those items ending the crisis at
cyfd and so I am going to
support the motion with the
knowledge that maybe this is a
action from the executive in the
form of a message thank you
mister president thank you very
much center I hear the senator
michael by the place thank you
very much mister president can
consider a senate bill to fifty
eight germane and if you vote
yes of course you won't raise
your hands if you vote no you'll
raise your hands and they will
ahead and vote on that one
particular emotion to your
chairs if you vote no please
raise your hands.
Senator is advantage boats no
center I be sort of well snow
etcetera hambling worlds no
senator rodriguez bods know say
hamful well
you.
Senator schendel words now
center by the boats now.
Center of thomas worlds now.
Affirmative twenty two in the
negative the up.
that the vote would be nineteen
and the affirmative twenty two
in the negative the motion by
senator perel to move senate
bill to fifty eight along and
majority floor leader would
yield thank you very much
senator majority leader peter
worth do you yield I do and and
thank you mister president i'm
Depends what day you ask me mr
president and mister president
in center that's what's given me
a little concern I know the the
end of the sessions coming up
and and our telephones seem to
myself so if we could get these
adjusted so we don't actually
accidentally stand our longer on
thursday I would I would
appreciate it center per point
will take it in center in
business service are we going to
a senator peter worth we're on
announcements in misleading
thank you very much center so
we're going to send it to more
how I can very vividly see
this year club for sending us
these petroleum based bags on
our desk today and and I was
looking at I notice that they
are made in vietnam and so they
our club helping out the
children and vietnam with these
jobs and shipping these economic
ecologically friendly bags
across the ocean to us so we
could use them so if great job
see our clever really appreciate
taken the lead over china so
another point well taken and I
totally understand senator
moores that you understand and
you love that stitching please
process children are vietnam
appreciate the c r club helping
mister president we'll have to
discuss when we're going to be
incentive judiciary in a moment
but you know mister president
little while earlier today the
chairman of the senate finance
mister president and so I want
to suggest to the chair of the
senate finance me that he too
can use letters and verbs
Oh you're right boy forget mr
president I should have let sir
pope and now second has first
thank you very much center is
advantage so i'm gonna go back
thank you mister president we
will be having a majority
carcass beating immediately
after the floor session in the
senate loud once again
immediately after the floor
session in the senate launch
public affairs committee is not
going to meet this afternoon we
are scheduled for a meeting
tomorrow morning at nine thirty
to actually only four or five
bills on it so it's a pretty
have also had a chance to
confirm briefly with the caucus
chair for the democrats so just
will meet that at four thirty
after the caucus that should
give us enough time to caucus
time and amount that later
tonight when we come back to the
floor and depending on how much
work we get done this afternoon
thank you mister president will
meet at four thirty thank you
very much in his advantage next
we're going to go to senator
the over under between the math
i'm not on senate finance but
that's a fifty five minutes over
under are the bedding pool
starts at about an hour and
twenty five minutes for the
democrat card because I think
that.
I'm good mister president I knew
you were good thank you very
much center poke for moving
having one memorial because the
house seems to not be moving
very quickly and the bills that
we come to conservation but
members we do have a breakfast
proceed please proceed the the
room has been changed to room
three oh three for the senate
conservation committee to mall
morning at nine am.
Thank you very much senator now
senator morris I have just heard
from this here a club and they
wanted to remind you that the
bags are made from recycled
that means that plastic was
shift across the c crushed in a
factory made into bags by who
someone in the ship actor so
yeah I did I do point out that
they were petroleum based back
senator more shield senator
morris do you ill.
Estatically for what purpose do
you want him to go ahead and you
think of a spreadsheet I can't
more mister um president I we're
going to soon I mean they're
they weren't sale so they
weren't point power going across
specific i'm going to assume it
was diesel fuel
and mister is this disalful
died.
clean field standard for sure
and mister president senator
does does new mexico res-
receive any tax off of this
rediesel that that goes into
these ships.
president thank you very much
center per l I don't see any
other announced senator money
else please thank you mister
president center finance are
going right after the caucus got
kind of wrapped up tomorrow may
have a hearing and and pass
house build two outside members
uh couldn't be aware of that
it's a call the chair we do have
a few more bills to get out in
it'll be an interesting game as
we move forward so thank you
mister president thank you very
much senator money us it sounds
like asia but here we go to
Mr president I yield but I do
need a question repeated.
Please proceed as senator gagos
would you repeat your question
we can move our start time to
ten o'clock so I can sleep in.
Thank you mr president the issue
Those other committees mister
president center start at ten am
so that's why we're starting at
nine am senator gagos as
president center it goes back to
the change of daylight savings
is that it happens to be
miscellaneous
see none then we're going to the
majority leader majority leader
peter worth for the next order
of business please thank you
mister president so that's it
consent we go that our business
message from the house say no
objection run that order of
business messages from the house
the reader will read missed
president directed to inform the
senate that the house has passed
you very much reader the uh
journal shall reflect that the
message has been received
going to the next order of
business and a repeater worth
please thank you mister
president and was considered we
introduced by representative
small for the legislative
finance committee and actor
danger public finance creating
the government to accountability
expendable trust and the
government accountability
will be evaluated by the
legislative finance committee in
consultation with the state
budget division of the
department of finance in
administration and the state
transfer the excess revenue to
the government account
accountability expendable trust
house bill one ninety six house
business on the table i'm going
back to her majority leader
majority leader peter worth for
the next order of business
please thank you mister
president you know must consider
we go that are business
announcements in his lanes see
Members of the center we shall
stand and resess until six pm
this evening and at five forty
five don't forget there is just
a moment please just a moment
please please please
from temporary senate stewart
i'm sorry in the senate please
if everyone just leave what you
want on your particular stations
and then members of the sergeant
