Center birth.
sent your guy across.
Centre gonzalez present.
Center gregs were sent her
center low best
center my estes.
Center mccatchen.
Center mckinner nowhere santor
morris.
center o nil
center to the penalty
centre pedea
center pinto.
Center period.
Central city a lot best
essentially nowhere in here
center share.
Center shandow.
Sent her souls.
centre woods.
Center thomas here.
You do have a choice to
president thank you we're asked
today by senator michael by the
the pledge allegiance in spanish
relatively by senator him pill
and a solution to the new mexico
almighty guard who is above all
powers and principalities we
seek your wisdom may those
gathered here today all we got
it by your grace and see each
remembered and the sometimes
forgotten all voices that make
up our beautiful state much to
celebrate is also much work to
be done blessed this senate with
your strength your patience
I pledge all agents to the flag
have the united states of
america.
You may be seated
once again would like to welcome
everyone to today's meeting here
the new mexico state senate and
start things off today i'll
had a meal mister president I
want to thank
uh pastor bridges for being here
today and for being a true
champion for new mexicans
leading one of the largest
regional pantries in the state
The.
So i'd like to give a reminder
mr president that the deadline
for having bills drafted as five
at five thirty p m and today is
also the new mexico food and
farms day in the lectures
legislature center composed has
a certificate to be read and
rodriguez has a certificate to
be read and guessed who also
introduce today is also he done
go county day mister president
and there's a reception at
chinese restaurant and lounge
general mansion from the
legislative council service and
this is how we're going to start
off this morning.
Thank you soon animal.
michael they are going to yield
to you first please.
Thank you very much mister
president you know it's consent
capital
i'll go on to next we have
senator rant all by senator
neighborhood and senator greg
center brant thank you mister
president and I would just like
gallery for us
this is the school that my wife
used to teach and just really
think that i'm stands up there
and and the mandates there
teacher so we thank them for
bringing them up here and and
or something you know that we
can have a really good debate on
the floor there'll be a lot of
fun
thank you sinner neighborhood
well these big roundabout plus
thank you mister president uh
i'm not sure they've gotten here
in the gallery but there is a
class from sydney gutiers middle
school whose roaming the halls
my son jeff uh mister president
I also would like to
direct everyone's attention to a
package of materials that was
compiled the industry's annual
contributions to the state's
budget and in that report you'll
have your individual county.
Or your home counties
for new mexico this past year
the state all and gas industry
generated a record thirteen
point nine billion dollars in
revenue for new mexico this past
figures the total general fund
revenue from oil and gas
production reach seven point
five billion which I might know
it's about fifty percent of the
state's general budget
and gas industry set record
production in twenty twenty
three fueling the increase in
the state's revenue while
meeting stringent environmental
severance taxes royalty and
rental income as well as
indirect income through the
state which is rooted and a
variety of of other professions
personalized packet as to the
county from which you reside and
shows the impact of the old gas
uh industry to your county and
organizations as well as
providing money for highways
health care capital out the
projects.
In many more and so with that
hot bays and very cold days to
make sure that we not only have
those jobs but access these
resources that are views to our
that industry and appreciate
their efforts thank you mister
speaker I mean mister president
hey thank you center and I read
members of the body note on the
in front of them is a a packet
containing a card for three golf
couple of quick facts about
about golf is that
new mexico seize more than four
hundred and eighty one million
in the state and pays out more
than four hundred and thirty two
million dollars in wages golf
tax impact on the state of new
stated that brings that to us
but I want to talk one more
on the golf course but mr
president others this is kind of
a point of personal privilege to
me there are certain things you
marks in golf if you can break
par if you can do some things
shooting your ages one of those
things that that kind of stand
earlier this year I played
eighteen holes in shot sixty
nine and that sixty nine beach
my age by two stroke show if I
opportunity one day to do that
because that is certainly kind
of a cool experience he was for
me so much present today's golf
day I hope everybody can take
advantage of the card and see
almost all outside and you can
enjoy the the scenic beauty of
almost any golf course in new
mexico so thank you miss
president I hope everybody can
do that thank you senator gregs
have a healy thomas you know
probably going to mispronounce
your title but we're going to
give a shot anyway hos joe nasha
she is the cultural ambassador
from now the whole prep.
cultural ambassador from navigal
prep and navigal prep is been
around here for a couple of days
and I just want to make sure
that you're all a recognize them
in welcome them to the to the
senate.
thank you mister president
unions consent to introduce my
guess there and objection
procedure thank you mister
president with me I have some
never hope preparatory students
then one nito wilson martin
who's also an eleventh grade and
they believe their shopper owned
are been the gallery up there
along with the leadership and
here to see how we are doing and
senator share also is a great
contributor to helping us move
forward with the school and what
they're moving forward with and
guess from nabol preparatory
school
center rentally
thank you mister president I am
honored to introduce some guests
that we have that have drove six
at least piper lila cj limb
david mccale jenna keekin in
april with them staff from
animals public schools or sandra
state budget in history thanks
to a very strong oil and gas
economy the great senator to my
left here senator the cuttings
represents eddie and leak.
has gone directly to your county
alone just in oil and gas so
although it is far removed from
our corner of the state we
certainly recognize the value we
think you guys for coming down
Center gagas
thank you mister president I
wanted to go and appreciate
center rentally bringing up on
gas but I want to go back to
and his note about all gas I
just wanted to uh continue that
few years back here and I were
able to go with them lieutenant
been signed we could actually
help china reduce their carbon
footprint we didn't do that we
wanted to keep on gas here in
our state but I just wanted to
schools with our area being
fifty eight million dollars kit
was school funding we depend
on all gas in our sector and I
around the clock there was a
difference mispresident is
alaska had a hundred and one
days a production
guy goes center civil office
thank you mister president and
has we celebrate er the revenue
the oil and gas industry the
grateful for for that um but I
also think it's important and I
do this this was my cue when I
heard the celebration that we
the protection of the state's
beautiful and helpful
environment is here by declared
to be a fundamental importance
to the public interest health
resources of the state
consistent with the use and
development of these resources
for the maximum benefit of the
people has you know that was
added on november second
Thank any further announcement
centers we do have several
masses and i'll go back to
senate but there for a second
time center my assessor mister
thank you mister president
moving out of its consent to
introduce my guests objection
and parents who are here with us
there are seven hundred thirty
one students from albert
turkey's west side from thirty
two schools and we're going to
maintain the coronber of
students from these schools are
west may so high school middle
schools earning pile jimmy
carter john adams truman we also
have some case through eight
alamosa aramiho a trisco
barcelona and then some other
schools as well academia there's
elector officials on the website
for making this day happen we
did the math mister president
and over fifteen years of doing
west side day we have brought
over ten thousand students from
senator due high senator lopez
and center by the week welcome
all europe we thank all the the
staff's work and and all the
wonderful headaches that seven
hundred thirty students bring to
Any further announcement
senators
seen answer but there for a
second time thank you very much
mister president I also have a
effort for west side day when he
was a member of the house of
representatives got a promotion
coming up to the senate did not
miss a beat he's been a
phenomenal job to make wesiday
for this city of albuquerque a
Thank you mister president he
was actually up at two in the
morning sending us text messages
and everything was really
beautiful so mister president I
do have some guess here that i'd
like to recognize uh we have the
albuquerque school
superintendent scott elder he's
with the someone ask him to
stand and he did bring his
leadership cabinet of students
with him and they are really
remarkable i've talked to couple
of them today already and I
And we also have from
albuquerque high school kaley
twelfth grader to land here
early college academy career in
richmond center in eleventh
grade emma torrell
we also have elder auto high
and as I mentioned mister
president we do have
superintendent scott elder here
also a very good friend of
almost every legislator from at
least albuquerque and probably
all over the state we have
more kids can we give the
superintendent in his leadership
cabinet uh a hand please.
later but I do have from polk
middle school I think they might
be in the gallery there's about
fifty students that are here I
do want to let you know mister
president this is located in my
environmental science and earth
storeship magnet score one of
the few in the nation mister
president this is a pretty
remarkable accomplishment for
this very historical middle
school here in our state polk
mister president say that one
twenty seven times fast and that
you know I I have to say I have
visited this this farm and i've
spent some good quality time
there the only words I come up
president.
Thank you very much mister
president thank you members of
seen no objection
they just want to say that
looking up at all the students
how well behaved how they
respected the corn of the senate
motion can you state the motion
please the door the acting floor
leader say make a motion for the
items also not do not make a
motion I had made a motion you
thank you mister president thank
you
go take it to that next order of
business we have senator leo had
a meal mister president of the
council services followed by
that will hear from new mexico
food and farm day which will be
senator stephanics and will
round out our certificates with
one for sanify county day with
I want to remind the bodies that
I think was last week that we
commented about the unbelievable
article front page of the santa
legislative session that she's
worked out and mister president
if the reader would read.
There are no objections to
reader to read the legislature
acknowledgement two genell may
seven whereas the second session
of the fifty six legislature
marks the fiftieth regular
legislative session that general
career in nineteen seventy four
at the round house working as a
temporary proof reader retiring
as a senior bill drafter in
twenty eleven and returning
work for so many years and
consecutive sessions don't
eleven respond with a perplexed
look and answer because it is
interesting and whereas jonel
whereas donald spence countless
hours at our desk pencil in and
focused on bill design and
drafting for a reader who will
some day come across a statute
an art form in general continues
to work diligent diligently to
perfect her art and whereas do
now graciously serves as a
member to our colleagues who are
the laws of new mexico and their
provinence because she the wrote
the law or was there when it pa.
And whereas general has been
therefore be it resolved by the
senate of the state in new
mexico that recognition and
honor be given to jone el mason
for her loyalty and dedication
city of santa fe senator peter
worth senator greg baca mimi
stewart president pro tem sherry
de luhan chief clerk new mexico
state senator.
uh channel is in that
certificate I go up there so I
can get a good laugh and then
come back down here and be more
serious er so she's just one of
the best if you want a bill
your bill is constitutional
that's what she can do so if
anyone else has any comments etc
it's a great day for channel
like to speak and i'll begin
with center bucket
thank you mister president and
thank you madame protemper
bringing this forward it was my
honor to to how have my
time probably few of us so to be
as dedicated in loyal to this
state by providing services for
a half a century um that is
something that we should all
not run the way it does it is
instrumental to have somebody
that you can walk up to ask a
question they've seen it before
they've done it before they know
now for all that you've done
here and you are appreciated.
Thank you centerbox a cinema
mars
vacuum is present I saw one echo
knowledge are and you know i'm
always amazed by the quality of
folks I have been able to work
with the last number of years
and you definitely are our part
of that group and and lead that
group and as she knows or are no
that memory to be able to say
yeah this was done before and
this is what happened with it
and I just want to thank you
you're you know true gentle lady
to many of us on both sides of
air thank you mister president I
I think working with genel has
been one of my very favorite
parts of being in this role and
I think almost every bill of
was just talking about
it is the reason that those
policies are become law here in
new mex account
but thank you center day center
but thank you very much mister
president I also raised and just
want to say thank you to
general I mister president I am
it now after twelve years but
mister president never once did
ever there was there ever time
where she made me feel silly or.
Like i'm being one of the non
attorneys here in the chamber
doing mister president they hope
you know you're doing some cross
training and some developmental
work with your colleagues up
there I mean it's your knowledge
is just so vast and so special
new mexico was absolutely a
you know a couple of decades
because we need you you've been
wonderful to me personally and
use hearing that over and over
from everybody here and and
there are a lot of people that
don't serve here anymore that
have a senator on zones out of
my center complex and center
stephanie
said it was on your mister
president
all the beautiful words have
you but we're getting there and
but thank you in and again just
the way you work with us is so
just it's an art you know have
research and you always swallow
would work better this way or
this way and we just go in from
there that are a big thank you
for all your fifty years of
service thank you mister
coming in to the new mexico
states senator going up to
legislative council and working
with a third to now there is a
time when there is probably
about two hundred pieces of
capital outlay she's dealt
directly with the clarification
of course putting together our
own thoughts and ideas into
legislation but this lady is
on every task she's can't she
interest she's hard working
she's diligent and I could
continue general with all these
the love for the process and I
see at each and every time I
visit with you you have that
deep love for new mexico and we
thank you very much for all the
chief shared with us.
this support is certificated
i've known general for over
thirty years of both sides that
constituent and as in analysts I
first newer here as an analyst
for that you might approach
general to find that but now in
recent years she has drafted
some of the very complicated two
hundred page bills that the
thank you mister president um
you know the thing that strikes
me the best about about general
is when I bring her a dumb idea
she'll tell me it's a dumb idea
but if I insist she will make it
as clear it's possible and make
it look like a new mexico law
and it it it's amazing that that
bunch of warehouses senator
share couldn't pass a bill in
the end therefore senator shares
should stop trying to pass a
bill
and that is my favorite bill but
and truly you've been a wonder
to the senate and I guess the
house to thank you.
Thank you for the share we have
senator love is followed by
center steinboard several offers
thank you.
I too want it out and say thank
you for your patience you're in
durance you're timeliness you
willingness to say you need to
some of us to think
she gives us information she
does her research and sometimes
I think that's good and I think
and you are magical and able to
create it into actual words the
black and white that we utilize
I know mr president when i've
asked you previously I mean our
just because of the working um
your your ability which is very
rare to find and want to say
thank you and also you know for
your time is yes I know you're
always gave me piece of mind
because I knew it was going to
be done correctly.
And I really appreciate that as
i'm sure many of us on this
floor but I look forward to
all that you are thank you
mister president.
Thank you centered up as well
center stineborn followed by
center gragus and senator worth
saying thank you mister
first got elected I was aware of
our problems with our university
regions and they said well
channel is education person so I
spend long hours in our office
now we're this body keep
bringing one back to do
nominating commissions I want to
say you can thank you now for
those because she's not allowed
to take a position but give now
people who work here and the
professionals who
who really show us the robes and
have that institutional
knowledge and that was true
which in now I love what my
colleague here from san joan
and only people with
institutional knowledge know
that and so general thank you
for all your great service
helping me out helping all of us
out and i'm just shocked at it's
damage to the minor country I
think UNM should study you and
there might be a scientific
break through there i'm just
saying because fifty years is a
stand in.
Uh in general of when I first
came to the house I had an idea
in center current and told me
but I do appreciate everything
you've done general I remember
many times i'd come in and I
give you a tide bit information
my education bills I just always
remember that you would give me
very direct and very sweet
advice on how I could make my
bill better so than
there is fifty years I had here
and and it was black when I came
here so i've changed but you
have not but we do appreciate
everything you've done force and
i've always taken the direction
heart I truly thought it was
only to me but looks like you've
got a lot of children under you
that you've directed to these
years double issue and thank
you.
you know the legislative council
is a pretty amazing special
place and we all work with them
daily but there's just this
my wife care all who's lawyer
and city counselor worked with
general back in the late
eighties at the legislative
timers that worked at
legislative council are around
behind the scene certainly and
we rely on them tremendously but
the amazing thing about this
again it's our council service
is something we can all be proud
of and the fact that both sides
of the aisle can go to your
office and work with you on
always done in your career and
something i'm super super proud
of for this institution so you
really reflect well on the
council service and it is super
strong support and of course I
feel honored in privilege just
to be able to stand here and say
a few words for general because
ask for a general when they ask
do you have any preference who
has drafted this in the past or
who do you prefer I am very
often asking for general many
because mister president in
general is smart she is so
intuitive in many times catches
things as she's drafting
solved and done but I just truly
appreciate her and I want to
thank her for that and let her
know cause many times we feel a
certain way but we don't let
Sino further on the less i'm
gonna go back to center stewart
to close this out
thank you mister president
thanks to all my colleagues or
standing up and and responding
so thank you mister president
thank you channel fuel stand up
and let all of us serve give you
a warm round of applause.
Thank you senator stewart was
done that order business and
also mislanded someone to go to
senator for the then to set back
lieutenant governor a day and
and the awardies that you've
selected through your process we
do have an individual here that
sitting I think to your laughed
five high school student is in
senator antonio my estimates mom
I assess district there in that
in district twenty six and he
does a ten west mays a high
school he is a leader in his
is throughout this that's
recognizing everybody.
Thank you mister president thank
are also going to hear another
certificate which will be read
in today for new mexico food and
farm day this is by senators to
fantastic I yield to senator
that several state senators are
very involved with the hunger
caucus the hunger initiatives
the food and farm initiatives
but I would ask the reader to
read the certificate.
four the new mescage states
senate does here by extend its
recognition and acknowledgment
to declaring january twenty
fifth twenty twenty four as do
thriving local food farming and
ranch and economy while
emphasizing that everyone in the
mexico should have access to
fresh local healthy and
celebrating new mexico's farmers
markets as deck farmers market
pauline powell and casey macune
and the martinez see the heart
of land of the land award for
outstanding leadership and
farming or ranching acama and
cestial lands conservation core
symbana and agriculture up
cooperative network local sector
elder garcia garzag d the
loss simple it is farmer
training program chicoyo left
farm don gate gonzalez done gone
dollars e the living land award
sort these in when you were
email use and f the new mexico
grow golden chilly award underin
all schools senior centers and
twenty fifth twenty twenty four
be declared new mexico food and
farms day in the senate signed
and sealed at this capital in
the city of south africa
luhan chief clerk new mexico
senate.
Thank you to our reader and
center spanics mister president
members on your desk you have a
communities that they represent
and I would act.
And I would ask that that us co
sponsor center peak companies at
his comments and any other
members as well sender
accomplished the instant
for her ongoing not only
leadership but being a champion
if you will to continue to help
as we go with good food good
energy and most importantly work
people that have received them
but let me just say one thing
the whole role of our food
products here in your mexico
when their home grown we take
new mexico state senate thanks
to each and every one of you for
the work that you have done to
support our food products that
are a home grown here in your
mexico thank you.
and food and farm has provided
fresh salads today that are in
the senate lounge plenty so
please pick them up you we do
line center lotters.
So love the situation speak on
this certificate yes mister
president thank you I was
hearing an echo of some sort
for it for us as we know
agriculture is important to new
mexico it has been for centuries
and
edible fresh vegetables and
fruit and as we know mister
president that is so important
for our economy but also for the
institution
companies I guess i'm just
trying to be nice so that mister
president to give a a plug for
him but
course into donian accounty
working north south east and
west and I know that they've
done some phenomenal work i've
learned so much and even talking
understand about how things were
grown from a receipt so I just
go to the store and buy but it's
part of that educational process
that's important and I just want
to give one shout out to
the working hard and with our
young people teaching on the
value of and for me as I say
mister president we are all
people of the earth.
To get your hands dirty and to
interstate thank you mister
president you send our lockers
where is the panics
thank you mr president and I
believe when it is appropriate
a couples to make those
announcements
thank you very much mister
president members of the senate
i'm gonna go through this very
quickly because we've been
recognizing people all morning
outstanding leadership and
farming and ranching uh from
alcama and cestro lands
conservation core and she's the
leadership in farming and
ranching the cultivating
bernaldi accounting growth the
growers program there in the
south alley and albuquerque we
k twelve schools school
nutrition program coordinator
and farming ten with a farming
to public schools we have
michelle
facilities director there in san
joan county with a parks in
facilities we have cars and
starks student farmington high
there in farmington and if I I
missed some of the information
please forgive me but as we move
along just trying to make sure
we can accommodate all these
people for the work that they've
resource center in damning we
have rachel rogers the food
service director in with a more
modern independent school
district new mexico school
communities frontier food hub in
silver city grant county new
mexico and after may liberal the
golden chilea wardy for k twelve
are missed pamroy to all these
people in so many more that are
also in the house of
representatives I asked the
members of the senate to please
applied their hard work in the
consent to present a certificate
for a sanity county day and the
senate might like the reader to
read seeing the objection to
reader to read the legislature
acknowledgment to january twenty
fifth twenty twenty four as
sanify county day in the senate
whereas in eighteen fifty two
sanity county was established as
spanial other city of santa fe
in the town of eduard and were
as santa fe county has within
its boundaries numerous tribal
government jurisdictions in
residents are governed publicly
by publicly elected officials on
the santa fe county board of
county commissioners the county
clerk the county assessor of the
county treasure the county
utilize resources to best
provide services for everyone in
where as sanity county honors
and promotes the strong
traditions and cultures of all
signed and sealed that the
capital in the city of south
affair senator nancy rodriguez
mimi stewart president pro term.
beautiful county i'm so honored
to have been asked to present
this certificate today i'm proud
to recognize santa fe county on
all the great things that the
staff and board of county
We have moved on excuse me
there's some interruption of
their there we go we have deep
and rich we have a deep and rich
culture here in santa fe county
with a number of tribal
under the stewartship of sanity
county government examples of
our communities diversity and
ongoing efforts
promote policies that are
inclusive of all persons and
authorities and protective of
the natural environment we are
we did make a call for the
volume to be adjusted but for
the meantime we can have just a
doors closed so that we would
have interruptions thank you
okay thank you very much mister
had prior to that than county
manager and then county
commissioner for four terms
before I came to the senate so I
I have this closeness to santa
fe county I will never change
the people on the county they
have a large geographical area
many times is just hard because
they don't have the resources
they need to even maintain the
Comment or two to say about
sanity county before we proceed
thank you center thing as we do
have other members who would
like to speak on the certificate
we are sinister fonix followed
many of our members have served
at the city level or the county
level before they came to the
state legislature they
dedication to the jar but in for
the hospitality for the entire
state legislature thank you
thank you service have an
extender was others
part of the sanity county which
are received so like on the two
my old area and I have really
enjoyed working with this
individuals you know how with
beautiful and again you know
it's some such a wonderful
county you know that
when you look at all while the
number of years that some of us
again very much thankful to all
the individuals that help serve
you know within the county and
again let's just enjoy this
And I want to tell you that the
leaders that should see right
next to you are not only
phenomenal leaders for northern
new mexico but I consider that
my friends and so when you work
the work that you do I respect
you as people and I honestly
love every single one of you to
every leader who's up there
thank you for what you do
leading elections and ensuring
her in the senate that includes
its completely within santa fe
county and so the fun part about
that is that i've got rural
county and so getting a chance
to work on those different
issues with a different
counselors who have similar
overlaps something that I have
very much appreciated and and I
to do whatever he wants you
being the third vote is a pretty
cool thing so and you guys don't
do that often I know that
everyone works together and and
going to all be in the process
of sitting down and figuring
things out on that front with
capital outlay coming up soon
but again thank you for being
here and thank you senator
rodriguez or bring in this
mister president you know said
worth right up a point that
really
moved my memory here when there
were three county commissioners
way back
awakened in pretty quickly there
because we had to do much more
work to get the support in the
votes we needed so it's been
that quite a quite a memory that
you know i'll never forget so
appreciate county and our other
elected officials to who are
with us today you are work very
hard and I want you know you're
appreciated immensely
day and help me welcome those
from santa fe county that are
with us today and I will have
them each stand up in a minute I
would like to mention first i've
then just and green county
commissioner district one justin
thank you
january months and noticed right
santa fe county clerk the
account around
and we've got an ahanson county
commissioner district for an out
Assessor thank you
and then
yes and then we have one more
account commissioner here and
that's an a hamilton hard
members of the senate and thank
you to a sanity county and i've
got some certificates for you
thank you thank you center three
years.
referred to springs I do believe
we have someone else on the dias
who works for us who's a former
santa fe county official as well
as is that not is that not the
who served as a commissioner was
sad if they county as well
thank you senator every southern
and thank you to it against
your.
he don't go county day and i'd
now yield to send her current
humphile senator could I have
hill thank you mister president
today is he dalgo day had all
ranching and mining communities
long before statehood and
nineteen twelve it was named and
honor if migal delorisadalgo who
as a bombing range for pilots
and training
and headache county was also
home to the cherry apache chief
hiking and mister president this
evening from six to eight
there's an event and honor of
hedelgo days at tiny's
restaurant in lounge they do
always go to chinese this
evening and pick up your swag
bag if they aren't able to
deliver them before to the
senate
and I want to think new mexico
county and lords berg chamber of
commerce and the continental
divide trail coalition for
helping with the swag bags I
have with us today down otero
peers chief executive officer of
hedalco medical services we have
commissioner art mallet had all
go county commissioner tissue
green hedalgo county manager
carlos romado associate vice
trail coalition and jeff gapart
from suit he's the
superintendent from a animal
schools and I asked my
Certainly I had a material
tickets at next order of
business mister president just
for the members this is how
we're going to continue today
we're gonna hear messages from
the governor we're then going to
of business messages from the
governor on that order and no
objection
to reader to read january twenty
fifth twenty twenty four senate
for section five b two of the
new mexico constitution i'm here
by authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
sixth legislature second session
submission of senate bill
changes in control of health
care energies including health
health insurance entities
providing exceptions granting
the office of superintendent of
the approval disapproval or
conditional approval of
transactions protecting
confidentiality of trade secrets
show the message on the governor
has been received.
Senate executive message number
forty four the honourable mimi
store president pro temporary
for your consideration during
the fifty sixth legislature
second session submission of
senate bill one seventy nine a
bill amending the life and
health insurance guarantee
fifty nine a dash forty six dash
fifteen m m s a nineteen seventy
eight being laws nineteen ninety
three chapter two sixty six
senator leo had a matter ticket
that next order business mister
president unanimous consent we
go back to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous hearing no
objection where in that order
guess or objection proceeds
thank you mister president thank
you mister leader just wanted to
do some leaders from our curky's
website there's albequirky was
site business association does
fantastic work a building
remains absolutely small
board vice president are lean my
estas
the board secretary and owner of
the mexican runners sports team
and dressed through hill the
board treasure from keller
We wanna thank you for for
coming up mister president and
analyst brandon kitchen thank
you very very much for all the
work you do in for making
western day a huge success thank
you consider my assessor still
on that order of business
announcements misleading a
center
phenomenal event this has turned
into and it highlights our
students primarily but there's
another part to this story and
that is that we want to
highlight what's going on on the
west side and in a lot of ways
new mexicans here that they just
do this as volunteers in most
cases and I have to say that I
know almost all of them very
very well miss so my esthers and
I used to work together many
wonderful work that all of you
do is is very special to all of
us and those kidos they're going
to be in your shoes some day and
you're gonna be an issue some
day and it just it's really
creating a nice sort of like
each of you also bring mr
president
you know all of the different
things that you do you make that
part of new mexico a thriving
you know vibrant place to live
so thank you very much for that
thanks mister president thank
continue where we left off with
committee reports confirmations
in introduction to legislation
so mister president with that I
ask you now to consent that we
go to that order of business
committee reports.
we do have an objection seat
your objection citing to more
are jet because I wasn't asked
to run the floor of today so i'm
gonna put him through the
wearing or here and teach these
go to emotion.
And then I was consent center
that we go to committee reports.
With a voice vote please now one
of my opportunity is share for
share proceed so mister
president I don't have anything
to say I just wanted him to know
that we don't go straight to the
vote because it's certainly
possible that I could talk about
debating the motion center more
for a second time thank you
mister president another
business could make us for a
roll call vote that would
actually put us on record on
motion so seders we have emotion
to move to that order of
business of committee reports
all those in favor of
significant by saying I
will suppose me
The reader to read.
Mr president your judiciary
committee to whom has been
referred senate bill seventy has
seventy due pass and then's
referred to the finance
committee respectfully submitted
joseph servant is chair center
sim on this we would up to the
committee report.
been adopted reader to read
mister president you're indian
rule and cultural affairs
committee to whom has been
referred senate bill fifty two
has had it under consideration
and reports the same with the
Yes center pinto I move adoption
of the committee report on the
thank you senators there's a
motion to adopt the committee
report all those in favor
Mister president your
conservation committee to whom
has been referred senate bill
seventy nine has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
annex mister president I assume
unanimous consent of the senate
that the reader be allowed to
read all the committee reports
that we vote on them with one
motion and that the journal
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
bill one eleven do pass finance
committee
send us a band it's mister
president I move adoption of the
committee report.
report has been adopted and the
journal will show that they were
acted upon individually
the reader to read mister
president your health and public
affairs committee to whom has
finance committee respectfully
submitted senator gerald or
these peno chairs decided mister
president asking animals consent
of the senate the reader be
allowed to read all the
the reader to read that about
sixty one do pass judiciary
committee.
Senate bill seventy seven do
pass finance committee.
Senate bill one twenty four do
pass finance committee
respectfully submitted senator
gerald or these pinot chair
thought was opposed the guys
have at the current reports have
been adopted as journal reflect
their acted upon individually
centerly I had a matter of takes
we are in that order of business
confirmations etc mister
president I yield to senator do
high center to head mr president
peanut senator disappear
mister president pursuant to
send it executive letter number
twenty one dated august tenth
Here in our objection center or
disability of your please
explain.
Mister president we heard of
this nominee for the space port
authority she's currently the
chief of mission operations at
say incorporated it's a
moriality based company and she
years of experience in the
aerospace industry spread across
design and development flight
test planning operations and
management she began her career
history of working in companies
in these high tech companies
that that background will be
incredibly valuable uh to her
role on the space port authority
engineering and is a single
engineering and multi
engineering pillar in more than
twenty five different aircraft
with commercial pilot in flight
instructor certificates and
company I thank you mister
president yes can send to excuse
senators gonzalez and city
alopes until they return to the
chamber.
the record show the rule has
been called and that all those
voted
in that all those present voters
in the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by show
if you wish to vote on please
raise your hand.
The.
But I have out of twenty eight
seventeenth twenty twenty five
has been confirmed by the new
mexico senate senative you know
members would you join me in
congratulating stephanie and a
longer she's not here but i'm
mr president I asked the liquor
that the credentials have locked
t trong be presented to the
force and it for consideration
for appointment to the
unemployment compensation review
twenty ninth twenty twenty one I
move the senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of lock
trunk to the unemployment
compensation review board.
held the hearing on large trunks
confirmation and if she was
president for that hearing we
had a lot of people that come
into about her suitability for
in the human re- in the
she's the director of of
classified service in the
executive top grade in the human
suited for work on the
unemployment compensation review
board and with that will stand
for questions thank you
I ask unanimous consent
that the record shows that the
role has been called and that
all those president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
The.
My vote of thirty one in the
affirmative zero on the native
the reappointment of lock teach
as a member of the unemployment
compensation review more for.
For a term committee on august
lock wrong on your confirmation.
appointment to the state recent
commission and a yield for a
third time to senatorities
appear senator pino
mister president pursuant to
send an executive letter number
See no objection senator ticket
pin of your please explain
mister president members of the
senate margaret moses branches
which resulted in a one point
four billion settlement for the
state of new mexico she also
represented many clients in new
northwest new mexico litigation
implant litigation which led to
a settlement of one point two
billion market meter husband
turner branch at the downs of
the help of kurki in nineteen
eighty four they were frequent
albuquerque for a hundred and
seventy five thousand dollar
payout this participation
sparked an immediate intense
interest in thorough bread in a
which of course is a model of
the marine corps turner the
served in the marine corps
faithful random belmont park and
it can learn twice in the twenty
races throughout the state of
new mexico
but I think her background in
the law and her intense interest
in horse racing will make her a
Wishing to be.
See no debate center this minute
cause
I ask in animals consent that
senators to your seats we are
voting i'll send it as your
seats
would you wish to vote now
please raise your hands.
Yeah.
state was the commission for a
term comments in on january
fourth twenty twenty three and
expired in december thirty first
twenty twenty eight has been
confirmed by the new mexico
senate center disability mister
on her confirmation as a member
of the racing commission
sender to you mr president as
that the credentials of gary
Senator michael with you thank
you very much mister president I
moved that the senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of gary
david tonges to the state
transportation commission.
There are no objections centered
and and if too many of us here
in the chamber mr tongues was
the director i'm sorry the
president and c o the
albuquerque economic development
tour potential economic
development opportunities all
over alva mainly in my district
when I joined this party that he
was also from june nineteen
eighty four through october of
eighty four as the director of
economic development and
assistant director of economic
development for the odes a
chamber of commerce and also
right here in our beautiful
director as well and also the
communications director for
nineteen seventy nine to
nineteen eighty one so all that
experience he shows up in
albuquerque and literally turns
out the kirki around from an
economic development standpoint
ago and he's received several
awards mister president
including the apps a chuck gear
a community leadership award in
december of two thousand and
and ethical business practice
and the site selectors guild and
that's really where I met mister
ton just mister president so
just all of those wonderful
things but on top of all of that
is all that.
Thank you center by the anyone
else wishing the debate
similar every so though thank
you very much mister president
mister president i'd i'd like to
had the perfect job.
Calls are the perfect job of the
world because he would have
these poor quarterly investor
lunches.
Would you have I think like four
hundred people in the room
and what time for bad he got to
get up there and he he got to
say let me take my project
mandolia
can't give you many details but
at and I said the libertarian
cheek but it but but but here's
what I know is that whether
times are going to time to bad
goton just has always been
steadfast and trying to bring
understanding that a rising tied
lisa ships.
He's always him understanding
that a facebook has last learned
that still affects albert.
that also needs to have economic
development happening and that
supports inter region.
And and that's why people have
always invested in the vision.
has done are so faithfully so
honestly and and
and and with such amazing
consistent energy.
have sent to more than mister
president but definitely will go
on and on and on like center
every so to carry I thank you
for your year's friendship its
service to new mexico and all
I look forward to it thank you
thank you center morning.
because of who this this very
wonderful new mexican is with
that I ask unanswered consent
that the record show that the
role has been called and that
all those present voted in the
affirmative accept those voting
By a vote of thirty five of the
affirmative zero the negative
the employment of gary david
time just as a member of the
state transfer commission for
turn comments in on may fifteen
twenty twenty three and expiring
ask the body to congratulate him
on his confirmation.
sign up for consideration for
appointment to the border
authority and I yield to senator
servant us center circumstance
is mispresent pursuant to senate
executive message number four
days in february twenty one
circus before we move forward I
just want to make sure that we
have the correct center survived
this up there
there and and I envy the beard
that must represent miss
president alex sierra
is a distinguished member of the
border of business community
a week served through two
thousand and one mr sierra is a
part of acne mills which is a
privately owned company and
response for warehousing
production and inventories
mister has twenty five years of
business in industry experience
in various positions including
director of materials and
for group deco international
increment dairies and mister
sira also serves as it doesn't
need a point eight to me to the
crew water boards of the sears
active really in all aspects of
stories and so as present i'll
stand for any questions.
Thank you center servant is the
centers we are debating anyone
which is a debate.
records show the role has been
called in all those present
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative
buyers show hands.
two and expire in july fifteenth
twenty twenty six has been
confirmed by the new mexican
senate senator sir want this
vicious president colleagues
would you help me join in an
applause for the appointment in
Senator doing mister president I
ask that the credentials of
helma espinos a channel with be
presented to the full senate for
consideration for appointment to
letter number one which was
dated march twenty seventh
twenty twenty three I moved that
the senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of helma is been
also channel which to the state
transportation commission.
have a tremendous history of
experience in leadership she
currently serves on the
transportation commission and
wishes to serve again so that's
a tribute to her commitment
she's been up on several
does economic development
projects real estate ventures
and community liaison for the
garcia automotive group one of
the more reputable businesses
there and albuquerque and she
importantly mister president she
has a particularly keen insight
and intellect into into
jocularity she's in the one
debating the appointment
anyone wishing to debate
senator I resort thank you very
much mister president once again
an and we have to say this is is
yes and also because because if
she only relates with china with
that that excludes have the
people right there
on the spot
and
and and they both have a keen
understanding
that of what it takes to grow
We have a lot of bills that that
they try to separate between the
employer and employee and and
and part of the understanding
can have employees without a
good employer and and and that's
what would need to grow and in
fact with the garcia group
there are more employees than
activity uh that that these
folks are able to do
and and and that helmet
specifically is responsible for
expanding
in terms of their investments in
their dreams and who able to
invest for their own retirements
and and to be able to live with
security
about about not have to worry
about things in terms of where
do any happy to support this and
you send our everything to any
further debate
is anybody thank you mister
president you know it's consent
to excuse center stewart until
Seen that center of my assistant
close
thank you mister president thank
you honorable members I asked
unanimous consent that the
records show that the role has
been called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
of the appointment of helmets
been also channel at as a member
of the state has fish commission
for a term commencing on january
first twenty twenty three and
expiring december thirty first
hilmart has been also channel
with
him
transportation commission and I
yield to senator lopez in our
office and thank you very much
mister president I pursuant to
send it executive letter number
see an objection senator feel
explained
I thank you very much mister
president members of the senate
president members of the senate
you know mr adams comes from the
wonderful community of las vegas
new mexico
education he has served as a
board member also in mexico
highlands university board of
regions and mister president
that's when I first met mister
adams when he was in front of
and I know again an inronamex
occurs in other parts two of our
state various very important for
many different reasons but
mrperiod president mr adams
he understands a lot of the
issues a lot of the needs in the
state
he is well versed in a lot of
the different procedures within
with his leadership to help
guide an across advise the
secretary so without mr adams
if anybody else would like to
add any words.
lopus thank you very much for
bringing this nominee
forward walter adams has already
been alluded to continues to be
but how can I help people from
all over he is very fair he is
open in his conversation and
most importantly he always adds
a little humor to some of the
experience and his role as
chairman of the new mexico
department of transportation
highway commission that's what
i've called it from the all days
he continues to ensure that the
with our secretary ricky and in
and as others that have all come
together to insure that as we
move forward our highways are
going to be safe in most
importantly that the work
Seen no further debate center
lot as to close
thank you very much and thank
you very much senator campus
seats we are voting if you wish
to vote now please raise your
hand.
But I have out of thirty four in
the permit of zero the negative
of the reappointment of walter g
adams as a member of the state
thank you mr president members
of the senate mr adamant was
hoping to be here with us today
but I know that his wife had a
if we could please congratulate
mr adams
mr president I ask that the
credentials of thomas ceased
hailer be presented to the four
letter number seven dated march
seventeenth twenty twenty two I
move that the senate do hereby
confirm the appointment of
thomas taylor to the state
transportation commission here
aware of the representative
former representative taylor's
performance here in the
legislature and what he did he's
a lifelong resident of farming
to new mexico self employed
investment manager and various
functions as a hardware company
but is one of the primary then
using downtown farmington for
many events in coffee and art
and so forth and place that I
have tom so good job anyway a
long list of involvement
includes besides the city
council which he was on for four
years.
He was mayor for twelve years of
eleven he was on the bank board
up there on the local bank and
so forth
very extensive that resume and
with that mister president I
you senator bill centers we are
demanding the reappointment of
thomas taylor and will start
with sender to share followed by
center on zones and sending them
when yours
the mayor he was he was like
seventeen and
so i'm not sure exactly if if if
any of the laws that were passed
or any of the uh resolutions who
and in a great asset to me and
even when he calls me in tells
me i'm wrong he does it in such
a way that I have to agree with
him so while i'm not sure I need
i'm going to support him thank
you mister president thank you
center share senator gonzalez
thank you mister president home
I have no one know former
this is a perfect you know
nomination if you want to call
it the vast experience that he
has.
Then also here's some way off
beautiful building that he has
sold you know changing to it has
the combination of both still
being a lumber yard better a
entire part of just being very
gracious you know for the number
of time and hears that he has
gone to public service and with
that on
mister president members I start
ie
senator worth thank you mister
president I also rise in support
but there's a few things you
don't know about tom taylor one
is he goals without shoes on our
library of farmington of all the
ferry tales and I don't know how
many years they spent on it but
that is one of the most amazing
things I mean he's got so many
talents but if you get a chance
things but he's just one of
those persons that kind of
dedicated his life to what he
wanted to do and keep his life
to public service and that kind
of makes a difference in the
world tom we appreciate that
thank you.
This is back of the day when if
you ask for a list of voters I
don't remember this mister
trailer
when you asked for a list of
voters from central states
administration at sacro states
office at the time and someone
had requested a list of voters
and whoever had fulfilled the
are a mistake on the part of the
secret it's offers that we
should not have made.
Ah it went to a member of the
house republican caucus they
mr taylor is the leader said let
me take care of it and he walked
over to the secretary states
office he said let me talk to
the state elections director and
I came out
would say was the leader the men
are so humble
he's so humble he does the work
he doesn't lead with the title.
Pretty then say i'm
to I see said luck you guys made
a mistake
you might want to fix it you
probably want to figure out how
you did it.
And he did make up a political
bill about it at all and i've
always respected that.
getting things right and doing
things right
and his ability to distinguish
between the two.
Even in a political environment.
And dedication service thank you
sir.
Thank you center I thought that
we have sooner worth followed by
center gagas thank you mister
president members I rise in
like so many new members that
come in you have all kinds of
ideas and you drop all kinds of
bills and I dropped a few tax
bills that were headed into the
business and industry committee
talk about them with certain
other members on the other side
of the aisle my side of the
aisle wanted nothing to do with
those bills but he would sit
down and we'd work through them
to have some fun when you're
doing this as well and so I just
want to share a story and maybe
he will act this out as we do it
motion and the speaker goes
while state the nature of your
motion.
And it just was one of those
moments that took took the
temperature down for everybody
and we worked our way through it
and they would it just typifies
you know how representative
tailor approached his job here
and again I just think it's a
fantastic thing that you're
continuing to serve the state
age of
then represent taylor in the
house and I had not seen that
motion
talking to some pig latin and
can't my attention i'm trying to
think too he didn't know spanish
in had a heart time figured out
where he was governed from but
of us newbies given a stretching
and guidance I still don't know
pig laden and it still done
sound right if it's if you're
trying to do spanish at all a
ways of staying new mexico thank
you mister president thank you
senator sir montes.
Thank you mister president
mister president I want to join
twenty twenty two tom and berve
received the governor's
excellence in arts award and and
what stood out to me about your
example in that particular word
because you and before are that
kind of a team and I had the
privilege of spending two weeks
with you in turkey
a while back to me all may
cause thomson very avid swimmer
so were we're out at sea the
rest of us are in life
preservers and hanging close to
the boat's tom jumps off and
swims two miles to shore to to
together in study art in
architecture folks may forget
thomas and avid interest in
architecture in him and I always
had that in common a great deal
the time when you and I were
trying to look at the leadership
of the house and how the
leadership of the house might be
improved and you drove from
farming to los crosses to meet
background the artistic
background and just really who
you are your sense of humor are
are missed here.
The things have changed a bit
since you were here and i'm glad
you're going to continue to
there's any further debate.
Seen answering the biller class
thank you mister president and I
want forgot to mention one thing
better taylor was recently
elected to the board of a son
record show that the role has
been called and that all those
president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands senators here seats please
wear voting.
The.
The.
The.
term commencing on march
seventeen twenty twenty two and
expiring december thirty first
twenty twenty six has been it
has been.
mister tom taylor former
representative
anything like that
senate for a consideration for
appointment to the new mexico
renewable energy transmission
authority and I yield to senator
birth hearing no objection
that senate do hereby confirm
the appointment of james paul
miller junior phd to the new
mexico renewable energy
transmission authority.
an incredibly busy career that
he has contributed to starting
off of the education of public
administration from ball state
commissions nullian are area
where he resides in the link in
county area but also around the
state
uhm
curiosity superintendent
information and he was deemed
the campus directner founder of
eastern new mexico university at
red also where he served for
superintendent of the year
founder member of the linking
carry eternal and child health
council ridosa valley chair of
college citizens in the year not
energy he has one not one but
two national words for energy in
novation in so mister president
I present the credentials and
the name of uh
confirmation of james pomilor
anyone who should debate
seen and sand a birthday close
thank you mister president I ask
you nan was considered the
Senators to your seats please we
are voting
if you wish to vote now please
raise your hand.
The.
the appointment of james paul
miller as a member of the new
mexico renewable energy
transmission authority for term
commencing on september twelfth
twenty twenty two and expiring
september eleventh twenty twenty
in the fire looking forward to
being part of that new mexico
renewable energy transmission
authority and if you would
please give him a round of
thank you mister president I
asked that the credentials of
wayne lacy savage be presented
to the full senate for
consideration for appointment to
confirm the appointment of wayne
lacy savage to the space port
authority.
See no objection center happen
feel explained thank you mister
president and senate body when
daytime job there they are doing
some incredible work for their
tenants like the borough college
of osteopathic medicine pleading
diagnostics mister photonics and
in new mexico space port
and crucial to help our small
businesses wayne is a nineteen
eighty graduate of new mexico
state universities industrial
engineering program and serves
on the university's engineering
and construction of space port
america before joining aerohed
center in two thousand thirteen
and so mister president I do
uhm welcome any conversation or
debate about mister wayne
Seen in center hampling to close
thank you mister president I ask
unanimous consent at the
reconsure that the role has been
called and that all those
present voted in the affirmative
it is to your seats have you
wished a vote now please raise
your hand.
the appointment of wayne laces
savages a member of the space
for authority for terror
commenced on an august four
twenty twenty two and expiring
june seventeenth twenty twenty
six has been confirmed by the
space port authority let's give
him a big round of applause
thank you thank you as well we
business committee reports the
reader to read the report
this president your commitments
committee to whom has been
referred to senate bill fourteen
has had it under consideration
stewart chair served worth you
mister president as he ham as
concerned the senate the reader
be allowed to read all the
community reports we vote on
them in one motion and act on
them individually.
committee send a bill one twenty
seven to meet your main dense
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
senator bill one thirty five
be german and that's referred to
the roles committee
senate bill one forty five to be
german and referred to the
health and public affairs
be your main and that's referred
to the health and public affairs
committee
senator bill one ninety three to
be dermane and then referred to
public affairs committee
senator bill one eighty seven to
visual main
referred to the conservation
committee
senate bill two hundred to be
demand referred to the
conservation committee
send about two o one to be
german referred to tax business
health and public affairs
committee
senate bill two o five to be
german and referred to the
health and public affairs
committee
senate bill two oh six to be
reports thank you senator worth
we do have a motion to adopt
community ports all those in
favor
signified by saying I
was a bosnia the eyes have a
center how to meal mister
president we go unanimous
consent to move to that order of
business introduction of
legislation.
epino and act relating to
criminal procedure providing for
the termination of competency
providing a process for raising
the issue of competency
the state to pay for mental
examinations senate bill sixteen
senate bill sixteen having been
read twice by title's order
printer referred to the senate's
introduced by senator worth an
act relating to law enforcement
and acting the automatic
automatic license plate redirect
collected data send a bill two
hundred eight annabell two
hundred and eight having better
add twice my titles order
printed referred to the senate
committees committee that senate
health public affairs committee
for those cruces public school
district to connect to
individuals and families to ten
vital services through a one
stop shop that provides parents
organizations to improve access
to services and reduce adverse
childhood experiences center
bill two hundred nine seven two
hundred and nine haven't been
introduced by senator pavia and
act making appropriations from
the general fund to the
requirement of finance and
facility revolving long fund
senate bill two hundred ten
center bill two hundred and ten
have you been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the senate
introduced by senator padia and
act related to finance creating
the science education promotion
fund required the economic
development department to
committees committee then send
it education committee then
senate finance committee senate
bill too eleven
senate bill to twelve introduced
following five years senate bill
to twelve senate bill to twelve
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the senate committees
committee then send it health
public a first committee then
recovery required reports making
an appropriation the department
of finance administration for
black fire recovery efforts
senate bill two hundred thirteen
bill two hundred and thirteen
thirteen senate bill two
fourteen introduced by senator
share and act relating to public
schools and acting the student
achievement and innovation
reading and method chief meants
and growth in school district
and charter schools providing
award calculation criteria
committees committee then
senator education then sent
their finances senator bill two
fourteen
senate bill two hundred and
environment and acting the
geologic carbon dioxides a
question act providing for the
utilization of formations for
subsurface equestrian of carbon
two hundred fifteen senate bill
two hundred fifteen haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed a referred to the senate
committees committee then senate
conservation then senate
judiciary committee that senate
financing for affordable housing
projects amending the
definitions of public project
and qualified entity amending
the local government planning
senate public affairs committee
helped them public affairs
committee then send it finance
committee a senate bill to
sixteen
senate bill to seventeen
severance tax permanent fund
every year for ten years
limiting the amount of
supplemental severance tax bond
bonds or notes issued in twenty
transportation for many then
sent it finance committee that
senate bill two seventeen the
senate bill to eighteen
introduced by senator monos and
act making general
hundred eighteen animal two
hundred and nineteen every man
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the senate
finance committee that senate
bill two eighteen.
Send a memorial six introduced
by senator lopez in center
referred to the senate finance
committee then senate health
provide first committee that
center memorial six
senate joint resolution fourteen
secession of three or more
contiguous counties senate joint
resolution fourteen a joint
resolution fourteen having been
committee events then judiciary
committee that said a joint
resolution fourteen.
business announcements and
miscellaneous we're on that
order business announcement
missing a similar
invitation only.
Tomorrow morning
there will be a presentation for
put on by new mexico thrives the
state nonprofit association
everyone is invited to attend we
also have the coalition to and
homelessness who is having a
senators.
Mister president we will be back
in tomorrow eleven am and I was
at eight thirty in the morning
centers please be on time that
gets us out a lot quicker and
you can get to do in your
capital outlay and things but
in room two thirty one we have a
busy day in store for us today
so committee members of you can
please be on time that would be
great again tax business and
transportation at two thirty in
friendly reminder tonight at
five three will be the west idea
reception and everyone is a west
center today several invited to
the reception at five thirty
that la fonda in the new mexico
tomorrow at nine am and we're
going to be only be doing
confirmations are folks who will
have conference there who you're
sponsoring are consolidate
in finance are going about two
fifteen they're wrapping up grow
right now and and they've worked
late they were till midnight
last night working on it I don't
wear center complexities with
their make sure he's not in that
the cogs are accepting all the
language we're going through the
process with the f a tomorrow to
so somewhere around noon
tomorrow they'll start that
staff will start coming on the
don't they won't hear from us
but if you do they will be
hunting you down so that's going
to happen that processes is good
on dispel the rumours about the
may no mention of that so I just
want to make sure everybody's
clear
that cabinet secretaries cannot
reject her or the funding or
have to sign off on the funding
installing that every charger
out there I don't know if that
was for you or the governor I
know that bill is not german yet
but I may pull it off the
president's table make the next
silver city mister president is
there charging station between
tier CNN
so city sending us I did notice
between santa fe to silver city
so thanks for asking that and
but mister president what
happens if you get to members
and you need to charge and it is
a little short from getting home
might get it for free here age
mister president better what
colour car would you like mister
president thank you mister
send it worth thank you mister
president in a committee's
committee will meet at ten
thirty tomorrow in room three
twenty six.
See no further announcements
this has been one of the
highlights of being the senator
and I want to thank him for this
opportunity and with that mister
president the senate stands in
recess until eleven am tomorrow
morning.
