But we do have the joint
resolutions in the memorials
that have all been up there I
think the other side is seen
those of all kind of
day and there is a al a gordon
center chamber of commerce
legislative reception tonight
for alter or county day at the
her vay wine bar six to nine pm
so I would yield any members for
announcements before we go to
third reading on house bill one
assuming center money is ready.
He may not get a paycheck this
week.
I removed my objection madame
president all right seeing no
objection the gentleman can
pant and fan you are but jesse
ambient is with us today the
executive director for last
eighteen ish years of the new
mexico ball and it's a big honor
for him and and senator my
were going to work on that try
to get that in the budget this
year because it's really
important for last eighteen
years the mexican ball is really
highlighted athletics in the
state in fact this last ball
economic impact not just for our
home districts uh manner protown
with the hotels and everything
else but people are driving in
from arizona colorado in this
case all the people come enough
month without his jacket later
on about the importance of that
investment because not only to
people come in they're watching
it on television about a million
people year matter president
it and it's really need to know
what the sponsorship is up from
his latter really ties in our
are try cultural pride that
works we talk about new mexico
of course we have much more
the new medical ball get chance
talk to him about it and I would
yield to.
Senator my estimates ap has
anything else to say
center my estus thank you thank
directors of the sports
authority division of the
tourism department which still
exists in state law and was one
of the founders of the new
mexico ball he could take his
talents anywhere in the country
in this country and then mexico
ball is a big part of it is the
number one single g r t creator
in in the state obviously that
the blue cast but that's two
Thank you centered monos and
president you know I also
writing support you look at
cross all the ball games and and
what's happening in college
football and and look whom
bring in two football teams and
you have a again there's a lot
of things that move in the
background dinners keeping
I attended personally me my
family and me we really enjoy
going to the new mexico may not
be our favorite teams there but
new mexico state was there and
that was our favorite team and
in the highlight across the
nation that being in jeff does a
great job in his crew
really do a great job in making
new mexico shine in that
spotlight.
president tasking house consent
to excuse senator hamlet until
she returns to the chamber.
A single objection we will do so
but a senator had a meal
thank you madame president you
is one of those cheerleaders
from that team miss meggie
voscas was a member of the saint
pious team and has stayed a good
friend of mine all these years
later and she said the year
after I coach them I have no
that center of servant is thank
you madame president mi- my
president I may be a little late
into the last discussion on the
ball game but I I was with with
us from las cruises were very
excited as you might imagine and
and the the line of cars between
last cruises and I work again
that it was just an incredible
thing to say I I will tell you
that sometimes like this last
you know so he's got money on
the game any any he wants to
lowest the wind but I wanted to
win by too much it was very
disappointed on saturday to
watch the lowest really blow out
with him so watch out madame
president members of the senate.
We are to watch out for him
at any other comments but
thank you madame president I was
gonna have center munios in what
your restriction that gambling
happened if it was on the state
of new mexico or not but we can
get into that later again jeff
and albuquerque here today
please now doubt jeff
thank you so much any other
announcements seeing none were
backed sorry since souls thank
you madame chair i'd like to
and is very interested in social
work on the macro level which
includes lots of public policy
which is why she's up here and
so if everyone will help me and
Alright seeing under practice
center peter worth an
extraordinary thank you madame
president so we are going to go
to third reading in its house
objection where on third reading
of legislation senator minus man
president I asked me as consider
the senate the record show that
all action for placing house
feedback you'll see there's some
changes especially on the
legislative side is we now
professionalize and bring our
legislative employees up to code
that's very important as we
moved because we've always taken
care of agencies in this
historic moment of revenue but
we is a legislature has
will new technology you'll see
an increase in l of increases
across the board as we modernize
the legislature.
With that many present will
stand for question.
Is there debate on the bill.
Same name center to close man
president I move that house bill
one do now and do now pass and
as this consider the senate the
seats you wish to vote no please
raise your house.
Yeah.
Yeah.
emergency clause has duly passed
the senate
center renewals thank you madame
president.
Thank you center peter worth
Senator had a meal made a
president I asked that the
credentials of deborah garcia
agree ago be presented to the
full senate for consideration as
an executive message number two
dated february second two
thousand and twenty three I
moved the senate do here by
confirm the appointment of
called no not yet
senator or two simpino to
explain the confree
talk about the country
launched a series of coordinated
initiatives
providing all thirty three
counties in twenty three tribal
communities with direct
educational programs certifying
museum of arts vladim community
contemporary of sight a twenty
million dollar public private
part project construction of the
national hispanic cultural
of the inford summer
and numerous other capital
improvement projects she's
focused currently on
transferring the transfer of the
mexico museum of space history
and continuing to build internal
collaboration to increase
services to new mexicans
secretary greego has seen the
attendance at those museums is
up twenty one percent over last
year uh she's the recipient of
of many awards and serves on the
can really be proud of it's
become part of the uh the
attraction of our state and and
we're very pleased to have the
there is debate senator moores I
think amount of president over
two risen support of this
conference
comprehensive confirmation like
I really appreciate that also on
a faker on the ministry of side
we just had an issue with
um just this last week with up
those
historical and that renactors
are using black powder in the
really appreciate that attention
to us for our constituents all
we have problems and that's what
I asked having secretaries to do
regardless of pot politics that
when we have considering issues
they jump on it and she did that
center
thank you matter president I
just uh also rise in support of
this confirmation what I really
appreciate that sector is
looks at ways to expand the
horizon of each and every one of
those museums including the new
and the maximum museum was face
history which is in my home town
buildings and availabilities of
the museums for
events that are not just coming
to the museum but community tied
events and so she has a broad
Thank you senator a center
cricks.
Thank you madame president I too
rise in support of this conferee
system and mentioning mexico
museum of space history and it
has been I would tell you and
neglected over the past you pass
growing it's expanding and I
want to say that all of you if
you have a chance to have an
opportunity to go up to the
governor's gallery and have been
the governor's gallery right now
are able to be brought here and
the entire state can enjoy those
show madame president and
manconfree madame secretary
as the cabinet secretary she's
doing two amazing things for
rural new mexicans one she's
taking museums on the road so
rural new mexicans in schools
the second reason is because she
is taking me up but an offer of
madame president she's coming
cruising and espaniello where
we're going to drive sonic to
sonic and low writers so she can
understand the sub culture of
part of that low writer sub
culture in the especial of alley
and i'm looking forward to that
thank you madame president thank
you in the other debate
issue and until now until mister
senator mark wars mentioned you
had so quickly that letter was
just sent in the mail so the
quick response I want to commend
you on that always seems to be
the case they're within her
curators were having to scrub
the toilets and some of their
museums and she was simply
asking for janitors and I
thought well absolutely I mean
you do a phenomenal job thank
Thank you senator any other
debate
up seeing none the senator or
these penalty close and
the endowment fund for rural
libraries in the state has been
a slow goal because it doesn't
always seem to be as higher
priority with members of our
from the lfc so hopefully that
can be rectified during the
legislative process but I just
wanted to point out that the the
work of this department in
implementing that phone has been
helped to create new libraries
those libraries are so much more
than just places where people
can read books or get books to
read it home they're become the
center of community activities
that the record show the role
has been called and that all
those president voted in the
affirmative in confirming debris
he agree I go as cabinet
years seats if you wish to vote
no please raise your hands.
Yeah.
Five vote of thirty five in the
affirmative seroe in the
negative the appointment of
depot garcia creator as
secretary of the department of
members of the senate would
please join recognizing
Senator had a meal madame
president I asked that the
credentials of dennis the garcia
the second be presented to the
fourth senate for consideration
to the new mexico law
letter number five dated
september the nineteenth twenty
twenty three i'd move that the
senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of dennis speed
garcia the second to the new
Senator woods.
so senator companies do yield
and it could senator would you
thank you very much madam
president and a course senator
he may be there but I know that
continuing as the quake count is
share of but again i'm not too
sure in terms of the employment
worries that today.
You know I am mistaken and madam
mean he is i've been around
enquire a little bit he hadn't
throwed me in jail yet so I
think he's his daughter admiral
job so
president if I may just briefly
talk a little bit about him will
just be about a minute
absolutely thank you very much
madame president basically
and he returned are two to
concurry quake county to
continue into uh provide good
law enforcement to the community
that he was raised and thank you
very much madame president.
that the role has been called in
all those present voted in the
affirmative except those voting
the negative by a show of hands.
We are voting on the
confirmation of dennis fee
Yeah.
The appointment of dinner
speakers see the second as a
member of the new mexican law
enforcement standards and
training council for a term
commencing on july one twenty
twenty three and expiring till I
be with us here today but he
sends his thanks and has
grounded for the uh trust that
you placed in him thank you.
Thank you senator senator had a
So there campus thank you very
much madame president pursuant
to send it executive letter
number three days in february
the twenty second twenty twenty
two I moved that the senate do
madame president in the course
uh here's a highly qualified
individual who has spent forty
five years in law enforcement
starting to serve in communities
continues in every aspects of
helping to go ahead and provide
great public safety here in your
mexico so without madame
president we stand for questions
president I ask in animals
consent that the record show
that they're all has been called
in all those present voters in
the affirmative except those
voting in the negative by a show
of hounds
we are voting on the
The.
By a voda thirty six in the
affirmative zero in the negative
the appointment of chris mayes
senate center come thank you
very much madame president
members of the senate and mister
mates was not able to be here
with us today but he too senses
president thank you senator
center hotel mail madame
president I as of the
credentials of retreats a beatie
be presented to the full senate
for consideration to the new
madam president pursuant to
senate executive letter number
five days at september
to the new medical law
enforcement standard and
training council.
Center consolidates to discuss
the conference.
military veteran system
dedicated educator and
accomplished to research in the
field of earth environment
environmental science she is
also with a teaching experience
and in addition the contribution
and but strong background in
Sing none the seller to close
thank you madame president I
asked unanimous concern that the
record shows that the role has
confirmation of tree summary pd
to your seats please raise your
hands if you wish to vote no.
By a vote of thirty five in the
affirmative so you are in the
negative tree summary bd as a
member of the new mexican law
enforcement standards and
training council for a term
center considers manner
president
she was here this morning and
then due to our break that we
had a she had to go back to her
and training council.
Thank you center so her hotel
meal madame president I as of
the credentials of bizen garcia
be presented to the full senate
president pursuant to senect
executive letter number five
dated september nineteenth
twenty twenty three I moved that
the senate do here by confirm
Center consolidates to discuss
the conference
madame president member or some
are comfortable comes with a
tremendous professional summary
of police with the espanola
police department the
albuquerque police department
and being as a lieutenant as a
surgeon.
of arts and military science f b
I national academy leadership
course and with that are manager
i'll stand for a question.
close a matter president I ask
unanimous concerned that the
record shows that the role has
been called and that was present
you wish to fault no police
raise your hand.
The.
mazel garcia as a member of the
new mexico law enforcement
standards and training council
for a term commencing on july
one twenty twenty three
miss garcia was present this
morning and then due to our
break last year also had to
return back to her work and I do
president I asked that the
credentials of mark francis
wants them be presented to the
full set up for consideration to
the new mexico enforcement
september nineteen twenty twenty
three I moved that to send it to
here by confirm the appointment
of mark francis wants in to the
new mexico on enforcement
standards and training council.
Is third debate.
Seeing nonsenator morris to
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands.
We are voting on the
confirmation of mark francis
swansen to your seat senators
raise your hands if you've
wished to vote now.
By vote of thirty six in the
affirmative sierra in the
negative mark francis wants and
one twenty twenty six has been
duly confirmed by the senate
center morris thank you members
of the center.
Center had a meal madame
president as of the credentials
thinking matter president once
again pursuing the senate
executive letter number twenty
nine day to january thirteenth
twenty twenty three I move that
senator here by confirm the
appointment of dare and gland
madam protem a man president a
credibly great
nomination that the governor has
given us today.
Is there debate.
voted in the affirmative except
those voting in the negative by
a show of hands
we are voting on the
confirmation of darren glen
holly senators to your seats
The.
affirmative zero in the negative
the reappointment of darren glen
holly as a member of the public
safety advertiser commission for
term commenting on january
thank you man president
center had a meal madame
president at I asked that the
credentials of doctors there are
mills prior be presented to the
full senate for consideration to
executive letter number five
dated september nineteenth two
thousand twenty three I moved at
the senate do hereby confirm the
appointment of sarah mills paul
senator thomas explain the
comforty
thank you thank you madame
president.
Plea.
masters of science and criminal
psychology from rosalyn franklin
university
and she graduated with a degree
she's a license clinical
psychologist with the state of
new mexico board of psychologist
debate on the confront.
Sing non senator tommon to close
the president
negative by show of hands we are
voting on the confirmation of
surpert nil spa senators to your
seats if you wish to vote no
please raise your hands.
By a vote of thirty two in the
commenting on july one twenty
twenty three and expiring july
one twenty twenty six has been
duly confirmed by the senate
senator thomas thank you madam
law enforcement standards and
training council I know to send
it or share.
Senator chair madame president
pursuant to send an executive
letter number five dated
Center shared to discuss the
conferry
so madame president
the call brown is currently the
communities that border the
naval whonation and she has to
by the what she does collaborate
with local law enforcement fire
ems in other government leaders
clothes madame president I ask
unanimous consent of the senate
that the
records reselect that the roles
being called in all those
present voted in the affirmative
except those voting in the
By voda thirty one in the
commencing on july one twenty
twenty three and expiring july
one twenty twenty four has been
duly confirmed by the senate
fourth senate for consideration
to the new mexico enforcement
standards and training council I
know yield to senator my estus
senator my estus.
thank you senator.
Appreciate it.
three I moved that the senate do
here by confirm the appointment
of richard h matthews to the new
mexico law enforcement standards
and training council.
training council was a newly
credit body uhm which is very
important to police reform and
law enforcement reform richard
matthews uh lives here in sanity
and he attended the new mexico
police recruiting school back in
nineteen ninety eight at as the
class ballet
he's a capital and mexico state
police he participated in the in
conference.
Seeing none the seller to close
thank you madame president we
want to thank mister matthews
for
called and that all those
president voted in the
affirmative except those voting
in the negative by a show of
hands centers we are voting on
the confirmation of richard hunt
The.
You have to beat your seat to
vote centers to not your seat
you're not voting.
by voda thirty in the
affirmative sir on the negative
the appointment of richard hunt
matthews as a member of the new
mexican law enforcement
standards and training council
Senator my stuff you just stand
up and thank thank you and for
permission matthews in his
family who may see this
consideration to the new mexico
law enforcement standards and
training council I know you'll
just send the remorse senator
morris thank you man president
pursuing the senate executive
letter number five day to
Center moors to do a little
discussion of the comfortable
man I could talk about sam for a
long time you might find the
shocking and I can say this now
publicly since i'm not running
to walter johnson high school so
we give each other a lot of
a grief about that good man I
think the government would save
governor with savings and time
and just point sam to every
board of commission since I
think this is about a third or
Is her further diverse or debate
on the conference
center
thinking about a president I was
just curious if we were in need
yield are you asking to could
send her it would serve worse
please turn more do you
must to my my distinguished
leader from the lens the
I I think made a president I
think you are last night we're
also shocked by my disclosure
back of shock center i've been
so it'll give me a good point
last night so hey i'm a free
agent right now matter president
a single center more to close
thank you man present that you
senator back uh as you name his
extent that the record show that
all those present vote informed
from a firm except for those
voting negative by a show of
wish to vote now.
By vote of twenty ninth now and
the affirmative zero in the
negative
the appointment of samuel sam
holiday brickman as a member of
seven has been duly confirmed by
the senate center more president
I had no idea that was his
middle name and he has promised
sign uh based false from his
sign for all of us before this
is over thank you mate president
through those confirmations
unanimous consent we go that are
business messages from the
governor.
If there's an objection messages
from the governor of the reader
president pro temporary stewart
and members of the senate
pursuing to article for section
five b two of the new message of
constitution I am authority
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
that it is a fourth degree
felony for a person to enter a
retail establishment with the
attempt to commit any felony or
theft after receiving notice
will be entered into the journal
the senate executive message
number twenty seven the
honourable need me stewart
president pro temporary
the fifty six legislature second
session submission of a bill
bearing legislative council
service drafting number point
two to seven three zero four a
michel hungrish and governor the
message from the governor will
be entered into the journal
senator peter worth for the next
worth are you ready to take over
for committees committee few it
occurred the reader should read
madame president your
committee's committee to whom
and then refer to the tax
business and transportation
committee respectfully submitted
me me stewart chair singer worth
man president amazon and the
senate bill five german then's
referred to rules committee
center built twelve german
thence referred to the health
senator thirty six german and
that's referred to the tax
business in transportation
committee senator bill thirty
Senate bill forty three germane
and then referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee
senate bill forty six seem to be
germane and that's referred to
the health public affairs
committee
senate bill fifty one german and
and then referred to indian
Bill fifty four german then
senator bill fifty six germane
and that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee.
then's referred to the education
committee.
Senate bill sixty one german and
that's referred to the health
and public affairs committee.
business and transportation
committee
senate bill sixty eight germane
and then referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee.
Senator bill seventy germain and
this referred to the judiciary
committee
senate bill seventy one german
and then's referred to the
education committee.
Senate bill seventy six german
in accordance with
german and then referred to the
health and public affairs
committee
senate bill seventy eight
germane and that's referred to
conservation committee
senate bill eighty one german
and that's referred to the tax
business and transportation
committee.
Senate bill eighty seven german
and then referred to the health
and public affairs committee.
Senate bill eighty eight german
Senate bill eighty nine german
and that's referred to the
health and public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
mimi stewart chair
committee's committee report all
those in favor of significant
saying I
those opposed name the is have
chat about more bills were on
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
senator duhig endorsed by the
court's corrections and justice
committee a joint resolution
proposing to amend article sex
section thirty five of the
commission with the chief
justice of the supreme court or
the chief justice is designed
and adding an additional member
of the supreme court to the
The.
The.
The.
A center brown I think about the
president but that's only up one
referral man president of two
referrals so we need to i'm
At cynic joint resolution one
having been read twice by title
that and and i'm wondering if we
shouldn't have a third referral
on that one maybe the finance
committee you are since it's
going to add another member that
would increase the cost and
since that's kind of what we're
Amendment madame president I
just are you asking the majority
leader to yield a yes manner
president with the majority
leader yield center worth madame
president I would yield and I
visited with the sponsor and
just a I I know this I I stated
that was a third referral under
our senate rules the extra visit
to the senate finance committee
is not actually considered a
on the floor or so but not for a
third not for a third visit to
the finance committee.
Thank you
amendment to article twelve
section thirteen of the
constitution of new mexico to
provide for nominating
committees for appointed and
reappointed members of boards of
disorder printed and referred to
the rules committee dense to
senate judiciary committee
senate joint resolution to
regular session of the
legislature shall not exceed
forty five days remove the
restrictions on bills that may
be considered in even numbered
legislative sessions senate
joint resolution three
set track resolution three have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
joint resolution proposing to
amend article four section five
of the constitution of new
mexico by changing the length of
the legislative sessions in even
victor overrides for bills of
certain special or extraordinary
legislative sessions.
Senate joint resolution for
senate train resolution for
senate joint resolution five
introduced by senator gonzalez
endorsed by the investments and
pensions oversight committee a
the expenditure or incumbrance
of trust funds created for
public employees retiree health
care for any purpose except for
the soul and exclusive benefit
joint resolution five senator
resolution five have been read
whilst by title is ordered
printed referred to the rules
committee things to senate
peno carrier hamp pill and
tulman in representative
chovers.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of new
and families department as
provided by law
senate joint resolution six
senate joint resolution six have
been read twice by title is
senate joint resolution seven
introduced by a senator hotel
a joint resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of new
mexico to provide for the
legislative districts and the
districts of other districted
state officers senate joint
resolution seven.
resolution seven
senate joint resolution eight
introduced by senator said the
alfairs a joint resolution
proposing to amend the
air water soil native ecosystems
and environments including a
safe climate and directs the
state county's and minus about
Search resolution eight hundred
red twice by title sort of
printed
preferred to the rules committee
things to senate judiciary
soles and stewart a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article twelve of
the constitution of new mexico
by repealing set section six and
distribution of school funds and
financial accounting for all
public schools as provided by
law and direct the public
committee things to senate
The senate joined resolution
eleven introduced by senators
griggs and neibert
pretrial detention remove the
requirement the bail denial be
made only by a court of record
and remove the limitation of
printed referred to the rules
committee dense to judiciary and
tense to senate finance senate
joint resolution eleven
changing definitions providing
powers and duties providing
procedures for criminal history
background checks removing the
prohibition against a person
beverage sales or service
activities to the public or
members of private clubs
providing for investigatory
confidentiality providing for
from the nonprofit for profit
corporate status changing the
packaging requirements replacing
licenseer with registration of
canada's training and education
uniform licensing act including
canabas in a list of contraband.
In jails and prisons creating
crimes prescribing penalties
the mse nineteen seventy eight
senate bill six
seller bell six haven't been
read twice by title is sort of
printed and referred to the
senate
senate joint resolution ten
introduced by
which
first.
senate bill six having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the senate
committees committee thence to
Senate joint resolution ten
legislative vacancies are filled
as provided by law by
appointment for the remainder of
the unexpired term if the
vacancy occurs when less than
a vacancy occurs during or less
than sixty days before the start
of a regular session of the
legislature after which session
term senate joint resolution ten
senate joint resolution ten
having and read twice by title a
senate memorial one introduced
by senator steinborne a memorial
requesting the established
establishment of a working group
read twice by time the sort of
printed referred to the rules
committee that's to senate
health and public affairs
committee senate memorial one
electric vehicle mandate senate
memorial to
senate memorial two hundred
twice by title sort of printed
by senators would words brand
guy goes moors and others a
memorial supporting the state
and people of israel and
twice by title is or to print it
and refer to the senate rules
committee tents to senate health
and public affairs committee
sent up memorial three
equalizing the pension benefit
structures of the educational
retirement board and the public
employees retirement association
in collaboration with the
senate memorial for a him and
read twice by tireless sort of
printed and referred to the
rules committee and things to
education senate memorial for
The national infrastructure bank
act of twenty twenty three to
create a national infrastructure
bank the finance urgently needed
been read twice by title is sort
of printed and referred to the
rules committee things to senate
tax business and transportation
so you name we go that a
business committee reports.
If there's no objection we're on
that order business committee
reports the reader will read
madame president jury
provisions and then referred to
the education committee
respectfully submitted me me
stewart chair a center worth a
them with one motion in the
journal reflect their acted upon
individually.
Seeing no objection the reader
will read all the committee
reports senate bill ninety three
sent about ninety five fine
seemed to be german and that's
referred to the health and
public affairs committee
stewart chair center worth move
adoption the community parts
centers were on adoption of a
permitted report
all those in favor of signified
by saying I
amazon said we go that our
business announcements and
miscellaneous where on that
order of business announcements
in miscellaneous will start with
peter worth thank you man
it takes time to get all these
bills read in getting the
committees to do the analysis so
the senate floor will be back in
at eleven o'clock on monday so
announce the time for any
Thank you senator do here thank
you madame president the senate
rules committee will be meeting
on monday at eight am
to do confirmations in room
three twenty one.
everybody one last break before
we go to hard work we had a
really interest hearing
yesterday I hope many people had
a chance to uh participate or
watch the proceedings and a
manner president I may just note
will hear today we're able to
join an organization that I
belong to and very proud of
belong to me goes is of course
well known to this organization
but these are the the new
economic development
opportunities we were really
fortunate here from the governor
which is great to have her
participate with us and we had
as our featured yes speaker
today senator george monus who
it's important that we recognize
him there too and and along the
idea of economic development if
I can i'd like to invite all of
you this evening to the border
in the context of the meagoes
and others and i've got to tell
you as a lifetime business my
myself we need to recognize that
what business does when it's
successful are pretty basic
principles one of measure
this group to know that there
was two billion dollars added to
the city economy two billion
dollars by the sanitary board of
industrial group we've got three
point two billion dollars in
exports to mexico which is a new
important is because unlike
candidately the other shiny
objects whether it's hamp
whether it's film whether it's
space all of these things those
industries are going to come and
our greatest asset here in the
state of new mexico and it
should be no surprise that
that's where the economic
development activity in our
state is really fundamentally at
right now is that that border so
we should capitalize on that and
uh opportunities it's happening
at centuries and in a district
i'm proud to represent thank you
madame president.
Thank you senator are you going
to make an announcement about
working on our agendas and by
heard a lot of you I heard you
introduce a lot of bills to our
committee day and i'm so glad
you're on our committee madame
president because as you will
refer every one of those bills
thing amendment share the senate
text this is a transportation
committee will meet
right after the floor session
for organization means what we
get out there because I know
the border next time you cross
man president you know
everybody's talked about junior
and capital your capital is out
been trained on on your capital
requests and how to get a filled
out in and do that so if your
staff does not have that and
they've been trained you need to
come back in a finance and pick
you received yesterday in the
both caucasus gotten and fill
those forms out we put upon your
desk a member of our staff since
senate finance so you'll be able
a name but you have a face to go
with that and so we can get that
process because it's going to
move really quickly so make sure
you're getting off over the
weekend some of the to do that
this year and it was a no until
a couple days ago
and we just started moving
forward in and this is where
we're at so bare with us
listen out early and get him
fixed so mem- sure everybody's
capital flows quickly madam
president finance will not go in
tonight
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
thank you center or this panel
thank you madame president and
the senate health and public
affairs committee will hold its
the schedule of several bills it
will be looking at and I think
we'll put we will have picked up
several more today so we'll have
a full working meeting following
uh one final reminder for those
of you hanging around tonight
and in the morning senator ron
gregs and myself we invite you
which should be a lot of fun and
then in the morning at the elder
on a hotel we will feed you
breakfast no big agenda anything
we just like to have everyone
come
meet the
and we would love to see you
there again tonight at the wine
bar and in the morning at the
elderator hotel uh between seven
and nine am thank you madame
at nine am on monday for senate
rules not eight am
at the request of my esteemed
car week
right thank you any other
announcements a let me announce
you came to look over here I
freeze my hand about twenty
times I apologize
thank you madame president and I
I just you know want to remind
everyone that it was a hundred
israel and about ten americans
are still being held by that
terrorist organization
and yet we remain silent as to
this issue
american people and tell us the
by terrorist organization.
The.
And i'm being told the memorial
about it won't even be hurt
thank you.
those of you
senate chief clerk and her staff
sergeant arms their staff all of
those on the rostrum here that
assistance every day and the
build your after those who
produce all the paperwork that
we go through the multitudes of
paperwork every day also on
express thanks to the senate
think you made a protemp for for
exercising your duties so
competently today as well as I
think the lieutenant governor
who is not here to be and uh
even cordial and say hello to
you so if you if you I do do
that and perform in that way
when acting towards you uh I I
would ask your forgiveness for
honored places I just wanted to
express that to you today and
think my colleagues as well.
Thank you center back
since time born thank you madame
three new mexico cities man a
president colleagues make the
top ten less artana santa fe was
named number one small town in
toronto which is a massive film
production center and my home
community of loss court
assessors for the second year
and a row named number eight on
the list of small towns in
communities around the state
manner president that want to
grow film jobs like farmington
alama gardo I could go on and on
and on and the goal is if we can
because it really is big it's a
big deal on the film world also
um remind everyone that might
want to go of the the funeral
service for our twenty five year
veteran colleague marriage in
about a president I apologize I
was out on phone call if you
would already done it send it
education is going to be monday
morning at nine o'clock and then
in nine thirty we will move over
I just wanted to bring the
attention to the body you know
the the businesses of the state
are bound by red tape.
Then we have so much red tap in
the state madame president that
it's found it's way to the floor
parting parting comments center
worth thank you madame president
thank you members for a terrific
opening week again I think
staff it takes an extraordinary
effort to
get us to the front gate and
then to go through this week
today we watch the senate
committees committee staff and
and will be back on monday so
with that unanimous sentence and
a senate recess until eleven
o'clock monday morning.
Seeing no objection the senate
will stand and research until
