Schools navy junior reserves
offer training core color guard
the pledgeably just to be led in
english by senator bilbert to be
the chap on for the new mexico
states senate let me add my
welcome to the second session of
the fifty six fifty six
legislature and the first center
traditions and senator brant for
his encouragement and his
guidance
to do the same.
Greater state in the union
the city of santa fe state of
the the county of santa fe
so as we begin this legislative
session of its the world that
seems to have come on more
bloring the lines that humanity
dictates and our creator
god of power in lord of mercy
from whose fullness we receive
are very breath.
May it be your divine intention
to direct our steps in our
and all the creatures great the
small of our great state
may the changing moods of the
heart never interfere with the
dialogue that provides in
presents us with other
and may we listen to each other
for the purpose of real
understanding free of
preconceptions and bias that
paralyzes us from doing the good
color guard
yes this is
a little while I was getting.
And.
i'm not getting any sick.
The.
The.
The.
Oh.
Said it would.
Members of the senate
distinguished gas and a
of the united states of america
and to the republic for which it
stands one nation under god
Promital land dad alabanda the
less state also need us to
america a republican
representative on a nasty on
antarios in the receiver
symbol of perfect friendship
among united cultures please
remain standing
for the national address to be
Oh see
can you see.
Uh the two
it's
who whose broad stripes and
brides.
It's.
So get
Gave
through the
spaingle
yeah.
And.
This.
The.
He.
applies for a color guard and
safe
before they do walk out the door
if I may unanimous consent thank
you.
Center we're gonna go to center
greekers for the color guard the
opening day we want to thank
them and I will mention their
names and very great
appreciation cadet wendy monos
cadout shine romero cadet beyond
center but there
thank you mister president you
know it's content to allow
cameras on the senate floor and
in the senate gallery.
See no objection so ordered
sixteenth to january nineteen
and senator shannon pinto
january sixteenth today.
See no objection if sword
senator leo hutton you know
from a family of educators and
plans to pursue a career in
teaching and also has a dream of
becoming a broadway per former
her family has inspired her
passion for music and has
her hand she has worked on
several murals around cuba both
in public spaces and i'm squill
grounds and has had her art
displayed by explosive new
schools volleyball program you
might want to take rip on this
her power lifting team and her
truck and fill teams so he has
honored to be here it is
grateful for the opportunity to
welcoming the dog other family
send it on ill thank you mister
laureate and this wonderful
state until recently so we've
gone from having no state poet
laureate having one of the best
point lorian programs in the
throughout the state conducting
free creative varieting
workshops for students and
elders and underserved and rural
communities.
And lauren also teaches for the
the coming spring per many
account aids include being named
as a two thousand twenty three
academy of american poets poet
lauriet fellow and she's been
selected to receive a dorset
went to cornell university case
so there okay so here's she
poem from one of my poet loria
trips around the state it's
called small mariners.
square state I drive forty one
through aura and whether.
And slip into golden then out to
wins falled in and exasperate
the radio sputters it speeds
assigned to be at a school as
but I can't see the entrance
apart from the fences I seed to
another end while the sky stays
to its raisering blue
gym late and flammexed I swallow
set my eyes on one hundred and
A stand my weights like a nest
below the floor essence and I am
the gymnasium put my teeth to
the mesh.
And inventor direction
I discovered what I intended and
Where have you been lost they
listen for rules but I give none
they tremble with their little
power.
here where hawks skirl in
transport
the children's worries are the
were shipped wings seasonal
sewing tires the skiddering
intersections.
Isles they ask me to spell and
towns slickest business as the
world i've gone children.
At last and thank goodness they
They were all clenched back to
parents.
Without embellishment.
They were saved.
Thank you.
at this time the clerk
to call the role
senator barca
santo brand
Centre gonzalez present center
griggs
center hamlin
center handpile.
Senator hecky.
There are new center hickey.
Santa metro
center mechanic now center
morris.
Santa pinto is excused.
Center pertal
center pope
center's meetings.
Center shandow is excused
center souls center stephanie
centers time born.
you do have a car mr president.
Thank you mister president.
The chair recognizes as a
senator from santa fe said the
constitute the senate for the
second session until such time
as the senate ascertains the
status of any vacancies.
If there is no objection it is
ordered mister president senator
There is no objection it is so
ordered mister president senator
peter worth mister president I
asking about consent to send a
proceed subject to revision
and I was consent that we
proceed to receive the
commission's of appointment of
greg neighborhood who has been
appointed to serve in this
senate to represent chavis carry
to back a lee in rose about
Thank you senator worth at this
time I would ask that so when
yours and senator diamond
brantley please escort
words and senators the eleventh
peace please escort
stephen kojo to the center of
the chamber.
I would ask that both members
please raise your right hand and
repeat after me
it is solemnly swear
And the constitution in laws of
the state in your mexico
that I will true faith and
allege us bear the same.
discharge the duties on my
office.
As a member
of the new mexico state senate
at the chief clerical and
minister the auth a vertical
contact
I state your name.
The.
So do hereby recognize
the incredible principle.
That a public office is a public
tra.
united states constitution.
And the constitution at the
state of new mexico.
Upon me by the constitution are
the state of new mexico.
And the voters have my district.
rules pertaining to ethical
conduct.
I shall not use my office for
personal gain.
avoid
any act of and pritority in
priority there you go
You have these at your desk
please sign him and keep them
where you've been rebuild.
Ladies and went they were out of
Mister president.
senate if there is no objection
it is ordered.
I remembers even will now come
we'll start with centre backer
center brand center brantley
center birth and center compass.
There will start with center
servant center do here centre
guy
dollars
Center gregs center handling
center meal centre lopus center
my estimates and centre
mechanism.
Sentiment cannot center more
center minions and centre never.
Centre mckinner.
Center period center pop centre
rodriguez and center sanchez.
Centers maybe center city allow
this.
Why
senate is organized and is ready
for the business of the second
session of the fifty sixth
legislature.
If there is no objection to
chair will a point senator
hambling
Chair recognize the synergy
mister president I ask you is
consent that the chair appointee
committee to notify the house of
representatives that the set the
hotel meal and send a mechanic
to notify the house
representatives at the senate
his organized and is ready for
the business of the second
announcements and miscellaneous
for the purpose of a few entry
introductory remarks by a few
members here in no objection
senator worth
the names of our new senators
center recution center niber
welcome to our chamber i'd like
to think the governor for
appointing them and what i'd
ready for session and it's a
great chance to hear from our
constituents and one of the
constituents here in santa fe
stood up and shared his thoughts
gratitude for how we operate
here in the new mexico
legislature at a time when we're
seeing so much ranker and severe
operated differently.
And I think we've agreed to
disagree yes but do so on a way
state's problems and I want to
thank all the members for
ongoing effort to do that and
it's when the folks at home see
that
it's something we should be
our leadership team on this side
of the aisle and your leadership
team senator barcar we've been
working together on how this
chamber gets run I think we see
some bumps and turbulent moments
that we keep in mind uh that
sense of mutual respect keep
that in our hearts in our mind
and in our actions so i'll
Senate president protempt
stewart.
Thank you mister president thank
you
uh
happy new year to our guest here
smiling faces or relaxed from
spending time with your family
and love one so for the holidays
mexico families at best we can
in so many ways are very own
states said it has become a
family a may not be the family
like most new mexico communities
I think our families like a
village you aren't diversity
we've got it all here in the
attorney's social workers and
yes like most families we have
got a little mix of democrats
and republicans
which frankly is a lot more fun
than playing mark
so I want to think each of you
Not political opponents there's
a little bit of that
they say that government
supplies to do things that you
at each of the protects we've
all worked on a brought
interventions from many people
and thank you for your
commitment to attention to
detail.
I know you join me and looking
forward to the next thirty days
where we get to do the work for
our state's families and mister
president I would now like to
yield to send your bucket set
spoken a one of welcome or new
senators mccutching and senator
greg neighbor to the senate and
I look forward to working with
each of you and we're glad to
have you here else who want to
it is I look forward to this
year I look forward to working
with all of you senators and I
want to think the senators
themselves for for the service
um me we conduct that business
with effort cassy and ethics
that the state senate is known
for and respected for throughout
this whole state I appreciate
relations outside of this body
it holds a highest standard I
believe in this state of anybody
and i'm proud to be one of you
so welcome back everybody to the
today and a will continue to
keep the dialogue going will
work on the issues that we can
cooperate where we can and we
will have vibrant and spirited
discussion for the other topics
and.
because for as long as i've been
here we always have closing
remarks at the end of the
session to talk about how that
went and how we are able to come
together I can never remember
doing it at the beginning and I
think that you set a wonderful
another is what makes it in your
mexico senate so special I want
to think all the family members
who are here with us and who the
who are not able to be with us
today for your understanding
those internet committees to set
the stage for today to recognize
that the theme of this session
really should be generational
impact the decisions that we
even though today is somewhat a
little bit of a difference for
me personally because when I
look and I see that sender ingle
isn't with this were senator
kernines and with us that we not
those two senators specifically
for all the years of service and
they're given us and as we move
forward for a generational
impact I know that this is going
to take a lot of work a lot of
Thank you
mister president the chair
Here in objections senator peter
worth thank you mister president
I will start off I am very
honored today to have
three currently elected
around the state and today I
have three first is marty shaves
born and raised an albuquerque
received as ba from u and m jit
jady from georgetown served in a
two thousand nine the first
mayor to sue serve two terms
when he was reelected in the
position he is now a senior
policy advisor for
infrastructure for governor
Thank you next again I welcome
back mayor tim keller senator
tim keller again born and raised
an albuquerque attended note and
twenty twelve when he was a
point
as the state or he ran for state
auditor in twenty fourteen he
was the whip here from twenty
position he holds today welcome
back mayor senator tim keller.
And i'm very honored to have
jennings mayor jennings born and
raised in roswell went to nimmi
earned his battle of science n b
a crayton served as a chavez
county commissioner before being
elected to the new mexico state
two thousand eight to two
thousand twelve a majority floor
leader from nineteen ninety
seven to two thousand one
majority whip from nineteen
eighty nine to nineteen ninety
six
public service i'll let welcome
back our good friend mayor and
senator time jennies.
The thing was president though
before I get started out asking
as constant that we suspend our
get that on the record that we
can suspend our rules for you
mister president
this is my last session as you
all know mister president we've
been together for a long time
and a lot of you we've had a lot
you know doctor julia my
instance p h d and linguistics
and has done a stellar job
throughout her career helping
out especially a hard hearing
and death students and has been
and her husband assusing in fact
hit more and are two of our
grandchildren appear in the
front we have had and maddocks
are they live in los crucials
alex is currently being
recruited play college
golf hopefully and are key it is
a stellar gulfer at the right
now I were looking forward to
hit her hitting the weeks are on
hair back there all that's going
around to my other brother both
these are my big brothers home
and believe it or not erica who
hears now working for the state
over at broadband uh his real
student at their students who
was great getting ready to go
off the college really excited
about that.
Lastly this has been the best
year my life mister president
you know this know how much I
mark donald moores has been the
joy and makes me cry and this is
why i'm leaving the senate
because I don't want to spend
another moment away from him for
the rest of my life and my
such a successful woman
successful leader and I just
love you so much and this is a
this is my life is about mister
president so i'll miss you all
i'll be here for thirty more
days for you to kick around some
Center several offers thank you
mister president it's always
difficult to follow cute babies
but i'm i'm very happy to be
family caucus dorothes are
retired vietnam arab veteran
jone dickerson is a legislative
analyst for the veteran's
advocacy committee jone is the
legislative aid and bill analyst
dan good root is actually a
neighbor and is a retired film
executive from los angeles she's
a family member of the
figure out we've been front
family friends at least three
decades she is a took retired
profess- professor from the
university of houston and a
former school board member in
Server bucket
thinking mr president we know
support and the ability to uh
keep my office on life support
down to managing children and
really just being somebody that
well I have a because in it
would be in his wife lisa at
word has been not only a family
member of mine but he's been a
mentor to me
guidance of his family I would
be a different person today and
some of you might apply that but
that's just the way it is um
anyway please help me enjoy and
The next week senators will be
sitting when you ask while by
senate available in senator
soles
thank you mister president in
you know the story brings true
each other each and every one of
us leaves our house and you know
an absent family member in one
day they're there and next day
we're gone and we come up here
to do the states work but if we
don't have good support at home
to do sometimes but not all the
time but without her I couldn't
be here without her staying at
home and raising our kids and
watching him grow I couldn't be
down get mister resolve from
better I am beat though in
mexico which is a little doubt
on the map just about twelve
miles outside a gallop he's a
president into welcome them here
today.
But mister president is you
watched your kids grow up in
this building and i've watched
getting in trouble you guys can
go charge people to get on the
elevator
and it if anybody says the
holiday jailed dory just tell
him george mills is going to
theme there I know my wife
always appreciates it when i'm
down here and it's snow
situations and she has to shovel
the driveway and uh I know she
be with me almost half of the
session two weeks and I
appreciate that my wife tell me
is here with me and is going to
be here this week and next week
and I certainly appreciate that
introduce my wife of a little
over one year casandragan data
has been with me for the twelve
years i've been in the
legislature and hasn't been able
to be here for the the opening
services public health and we'll
continue to work in the area of
domestic violence prevention and
child abuse prevention uh she is
also a former city counselor and
We'll have soon at a bird
followed by center party than
senator lovers
thank you mister president and
the I know a lot of folks here
on the
own business and as of last
march we became cared givers do
her ninety five year old mother
who now lives with us and so
it regrets that she is not here
And the love my wife dearly we
celebrate our forty seventh
anniversary last july so we
might make it forty eight for if
anyway I just wanted to mention
that
under desk we like to be a
little early on these things you
have a long card about next
gold a broadcast in the state
started this decades ago and the
new mexico broadcast association
which I still am on the board of
continues to have the friends of
the legislature we've teamed out
just invite you no agenda we
know I mean how of no one speaks
that nothing like that it's a
wonderful meal and and adult
beverages or or kid beverages as
call for someone to introduce
sitting up here by me
in our office in our minority
office we have grown and
the tip of the spears the lady
who sits in the front there
deborah tourists and she is the
consistent services
administrator and I am honored
today to have sitting up here
or to the new mexico senate.
The.
Awesome was present truly
honored to have a special guest
today a good friend of mine who
has done wonderful things about
terror county she is the chief
Thank you mister president good
to see you too i'm glad you got
to reduced on today thank you
several center by the thank you
opening i'm an ask her to stand
her name is valetia but that is
standard appear and you know
when we talk about our family I
have to say this is a remarkable
human being standing next to me
first generation here in the
number of other people start
their businesses so she's now
with an organization called west
I know many of you probably
heard of west and albuquerque
and she does a remarkable job
i've had the opportunity on
raising two kids you met
humanity last year you might
remember she stopped the
governor on the way in to give
her speech and required a
picture and absolutely I just
want to thank her for being here
and being my strength and my bis
And his leader worth just said
thank you valetia yes.
Every year when we come up here
you know and I I heard senator
munios was right my very first
sweep made if you will was
daughter or a son or a
grandchildren a brother's sister
I hope you all continue to come
up here and sit in these seats
eventually because this is yours
this building belongs to you so
just want to thanks editing when
here behind me he's the vice
president of lending a try and
easy try linguist first
generation american also with
the background in retail banking
and marketing he now leads west
And mister president we are
really in for a treat here we
have agnes
management previously she served
as the executive director of the
american chamber of commerce in
egypt of all places and comes to
new mexico inc- and she was also
in costa from nineteen eighty
a and political science from
boring a college and an m and
international affairs with a
concentration in latin american
business and economics from the
georgetown university mister
in egypt her life's work has
been focused on increasing
economic opportunities for the
most marginalized people in our
communities can we please
welcome agness noon.
have a honored guest from the
house of representatives
representative harper.
Kye goes representative
defocment vehicle with an
important message for this in it
business of the second session
of the fifty six legislature we
also carry an invitation for you
mister president and the
honourable members of the senate
joining us and the message has
been received.
Center lovers
thank you very much mister
history in this chamber for many
many decades and a few decades
ago mr president this young man
who's now just celebrated as
twenty third birthday
and time mr chair mister
president but that was a
different change in the history
of this chamber but also in new
mexico politics so I do have lot
about family it takes the
village when you're a single
parent is the village that helps
you raise work with guide your
children and I am asked I was
grateful for the village that
family unit to work on this
together and maybe some day one
of them will certainly sit in
one of these chairs to you never
know but thank you mister
president.
thank you mister president
members of the senate with me
today as my spouse lender siegel
she is an elected trustee of the
santa fe community college and a
president have a few guests with
me I have dead modes back who is
sitting right behind me and she
is a community activist that
lives in my district uh really
phyllis connor as well in katie
is an an activist relief
fighting for disability rights
here in our state I also have my
girlfriend here a stellar
being appeared working up here
with me so it's been great so
with that if I can get a router
plus from everyone here in the
chamber for my guess thank you
mister president
i'm so fortunate to have two of
my favorite people here
listening today to be my guests
best scholarship per diversity
at the UNM law score but most
importantly german and I were so
lucky to be on her invite list
for holiday dinners my goodness
also joined by catestets and who
many of you might recognize long
time attorney very very involved
with native american law very
join me in welcoming my two
fabulous guests thank you.
Thank you center now center
servant is a gore good morning
know county she's also the
oldest daughter of our former
colleague mary helen garcia
which makes rock sand my first
cousin and so she's here from
last crucials with me and also
jennifer is also been published
twice on the new york times best
sellers list she's attaining the
list twice now how her books are
reviewed in new york times a
review she's represented by
as well it's just about every
other language you can get out
of the thirteen now what's that
she is done uh i've also up I
think it's important to
recognize that jennifer is real
you my colleagues in her books
have gone from young adopt p g
rated to the adult novel which
is not p g rated and and i'll
to jennifers creative
imagination
we were we celebrate our
thirtieth anniversary this year
we were married here in santa fe
at the cathedral and uh she is
And taking the floor for the
first time single curtain.
The.
but I have over here I have a
couple of the best parents that
you could probably have or my
mother and my father here
michelle and steve my mother's
been set behind me the whole
wake sleeping babies at our
house that's a rule
than I have my daughter everyone
here and sun brice and and I
don't know the
I don't know how we should do
he is in minor so I I appreciate
my appreciate my children got my
wife lisa and you know saturday
my kitchen if you can just
please face the chair i'm sorry
my wife listen and been here in
santa fe when she's at the hill
my I don't worry a thing about
uh about the things at home so
glad to be here thank you guys.
Thank you mister president has
always it's an honor to be back
in honor with you and all my
colleagues here it's so they can
sitters to have set our family
it's all my friends glad to be
president he is a sitting
council member now he served in
the US marines in iraq and then
moved on to go to the army and
served in afghanistan he's your
the army the air space
management uhm
we don't get to see each other
much and he came in the town
yesterday and I said you have to
get up here I have to bring you
the god father with me today
solomon court of a he is my
godfather and it's an honor but
within this man is
just been a blessing to me and I
showed me a lot of trades in
different things so it's an
honor to have these three people
here with me today and up in the
gallery of some extended family
uh solo's wife linda court of a
guys will help me
welcome my yesterday thank you.
Senator could air hand hill
I met him twenty two years ago
he was cloying here this amazing
glowing or any still the most
sparkly brightest human being
i've ever matched and I am
know they're taken care of by
his mom and so I want to also
think her for all of her help
and support during this session
or take a canity and i'd also
like to recognize that today is
the hundred and fourth founders
day of zero fider fi beta
and finer woman hurt in nineteen
twenty five pearls envisioned a
sorority that would affect
positive change to the course of
action to raise the
leading the change in ground
bait breaking endeavours and
mercedes or take a cannedy as a
graduate of unamin holton mba
sorority incorporated and albert
kirky so please join me and
apply the finer women.
her her old pope is also a
fraternity member and camela
carris has had her founders day
yesterday so thank you mister
president.
Thank you mister president and I
want to want to make a couple
comments real quick about
senator jennings
shouting to be mayors after
serving and the state set it
those reverse who took the other
route and were mayor's first and
perspective about how this body
influences the communities where
we live and I more of as who
could do that I think that would
be great they got would be great
way teach senator moores
again but there were sea will
see glad you guys are here
is president I want to to take a
be this will be our forty six
year other of marriage and you
know she's put up with me that
long show sometimes I must be
favorite grandkids james here in
matters and here and then make
your president we're really
fortunate to have with this
today
ballanger and denish balancer
here with us in the back.
So much president members of the
body had appreciated if you'd
help me with recognize my guess.
hearing the chamber I appreciate
the remarks made by our
leadership today especially
those of our protm who compared
us to a family and she's so rate
have a new last name mister
president I had a busy interim
thanks to this general hand my
new husband mister tom brantley
time was raising their three
I also went to introduce my best
friend in my sister mindy blueth
mandy and her husband vince have
raised their kids and customers
and she is a wonderful sister
and has a four swedish sweetest
baby's money in half use with my
probably my favorite people
thank you mandy and this is my
mom calling running my mom
health clinics and gasten him
mexico she is that she's a
champion hair for all of us and
marmal appreciate everything you
do and thank you if you would
introduce and welcome it thank
you for the opportunity to
introduce my guests if you would
thank you mister president I
would like to introduce my
sister kathleen here so she was
sent here specifically to try to
make me behave for a little bit
and so miss president I know
but I also want to acknowledge
my wife who has not been here in
several years but she watches
everything that we do every day
which means she is more informed
Next we'll have a single every
sort of followed by senator tom
and senator
begin up in the gallery with
introducing the result kind of
clerk
many parks who's joining us up
there and sitting next to me
here on the floor is the
daily basis not only to maintain
a good functioning elections in
your counties but also uh the
property records maintain
addition to that actually as the
subway robert also serves in the
army national guard we
appreciate his service to our
of veterans and military
families caucus what it is a
retired full bird captain from
to go explore that continent and
and has a a number of stories to
tell about that but so thank you
for your service to our nation
party bob is served in the
marines and uh served in
vietnam.
And to bob we say welcome home
and thank you for your service
whom are very present with us
the first being a stored angle
who are for whom this chamber is
in a way empty without him
a and and the the sage advice
that he would give a in many
ways and second of all
to my very dear friend that we
hobs high school back when she
was told gay got and and gay
current in and I are always
spent time make make sure that
we had some time that we spent
together
finally mister president we've
several people talked about that
they cannot do what they do here
in this chamber without the
support of their spouse
I am very fortunate to have a a
strong coparenting relationship
with my former spouse cherry jet
I could not do what I do if she
to help support my work here in
the state senate that she
continues to do to support that.
And olivia those of you who ben
here for the for the twelve year
the day I I missed that day
because that was the day that
olivie was born she will be
turning because we don't cut the
first year of life when we do
and today she actually already
has her own youtube channel with
over a thousand subscribers
smart
and i'm very grateful that she
takes so much after her mother
in that regard and and so
anyways mister president if you
Senator man
thank you thank you mister
mair of chavis left because I
want to give him a shout out the
thing mayor shaves and myself
for the two strongest advocates
for a downtown more purpose
so I have very proud mister
president to introduce my
daughter in my
grandson my daughter graduated
she is also has two masters
degrees from a service
university one from the one of
which is from the maximum school
time she.
Works for a national uh non
profit that was headquartered
national tendency and she
reported to the uh chancellor of
very smart well my grandson is
very smart
some people are probably
wondering I took him out of
school to come to this
and he is so smart that he could
thank you mister president thank
you center told me
said it all decent you know
thank you very much mister
one of them go ahead and both of
you stand up one of them is
celia florida cecilia began last
year's our committee chair the
committee secretary for the
actually been helping guide us
through the the tough times that
the committee sometimes faces in
getting our lengthy committee
reports out on time but she was
going to graduate in may with
the
m d doctor of medicine degree
she wanted to spend a month at
Um allison
maker anderson is interested in
becoming a family practice
she wants to come back and work
here and uh we can't wait to
have her come back and help us
with her mental health issues in
this state so will the members
may be helping us analyze bills
doing other work that we we
require so with the members
please welcome our two guests
this morning that city florida
and allison anderson thank you.
resession is waiting for the
senate as well as the governor
prepared to deliver the state of
the state but I want to make
sure that we'll miss any members
here so will have a senator do
hake followed by center period
thrilled to have four guests
here with me today
the first is my my great friend
are already baskets who she
moved here for a mexico and she
was eleven years old and we are
josephine breakman who is in
seventh grade at does it ridge
middle school and she serves on
the student council there and is
very interested in politexan
we're helping to convince her to
grade and she is a veracious
reader as she was reading this
big thick novel and I asked her
and it's a series and I asked
for how many in the serious she
her as my son jacked do her
canadia is probably the most
politically intuned ten year old
you will ever meet he has a lot
please help me well welcome my
guess
thank you mister president in
its devil in honor to be back in
this chamber with all of you and
today I have some very
been present every single every
single opening session since at
two thousand thirteen mister
president so have been here a
while it's been a a hot minute
um and so i'm just really
so I I think it's happened more
than once and then also with me
today I have my partner mckinzey
luna my sony zekial my other son
george hamish dorthea and the
henry purdle if you'll help me
welcome my guest.
Senator brent
thank you mister president I
would like to introduce a couple
of guests with me today is
walton and ellie is graduating
from you and him she's got one
more semester left are in a
degree in political science and
is looking at doing her master's
degree and in government policy
Senator had a meal
mister president i'd like to
introduce them community leaders
from two of my counties santa fe
ravaging northern new mexico and
next year her is light of
martinez heard shilly and her
son and her husband feedel is up
in the gallery their chilly as
violent one of my mentions who's
earning a degree in political
science from brown university
and attended especially of ali
high school and next to him is
harvey meganis who's earning his
santa fe high school and ladies
and gentlemen in the senate both
harvey and dominic have dreams
of becoming president of the
united states they've said when
one becomes president the other
my former chair leaders may give
our skis ladies and gentlemen of
the senate if you can help me
welcome my guess.
thought you called on another
senator
so good to see everyone this
afternoon mayor jennings and
senator jennings welcome back
it's good to see
my mum korea o cartoon mechanic
is right here and are very good
friend keller must grave they
is working with them with our
language revitalization program
for number winger and we're
getting really close to getting
Send their neighbor.
Thank you mister president i'm
surprised you called on me
because i've already messed
which I did not but anyway
i'm pleased to be part of this
body and certainly honored that
many of you have have spoke on
here she has all the tough jobs
at home harvesting percons
taking care of a farm and
variety of other jobs that uh I
tend to leave or where so I want
Thank you mister president maybe
you send it and I would cynical
zelos.
guess and
starting is worth them doctor
miguel and silence or he is a
cornal elementary school and aps
and my other grandson sunday I
always take in an app
and he's the first grader at
and m doctor honor on sellers
she's the cnm and instructional
coronator
and my guest her
mister president and members I
so manager for tough county and
we have mister louis
who is the ceo for a car so in
my guess than my family thank
you
thank you said it was others
centers I born.
Thank
you still are as a blonde bomb
shell and now she's stalling as
a barnet so get a few confused
likes but anyway i'm re
introducing to you the level in
through the years rachel is an
expert in sleep medicine.
So she will gladly talk to you
at some length about sleep
apnear make a recommendation
during covered uh was a first
responder at a hospital that
could only be called the war
zone and there is no part of
what we experienced as a society
anyway I love it very much in I
hope you all help welcome rachel
here this morning
thank you.
rachel in the context of still
app and I I just want the
members understand what when you
see me sleeping back here in
your speaking it's not because
of a medical condition at all
it's simply the length of the
centers are about this senator
my assessor thank you mister
president and I want to
introduce a three wonderful
guess I want to thank each and I
remember this chamber for
the dominican republic went to
manhattan as a child not
speaking a word of english it
did two things he read
everything you could and play
baseball so we ended up coming
to new mexico on a baseball
financial services and we're
very grateful that he's back
into mexico to spend time with
the grandkids please welcome my
father not robert though I mean
this
and raised in vegas her great
grandfather oh hang out a metal
from the from the famous rometo
family and was a delegate to the
state to the constitutional
be attributed to her mister
president my mom am a masters
and then of course of my wife of
vanessalor many of you know
she's a.
democratic party back in the day
and has a successful a
government relations firm
lawyers do probonal work mister
speaker mister president
apologies the lobbyist lobbyists
don't but she's going to be
thank you mister president they
get similar to seeing no further
centers on the list ideal to
senator peter worth thank you
mister president thank you to
all the families for being here
fifteen minutes after the state
of the state and conduct some
business here on the floor today
so with that mister president I
moved to senate resolve itself
into a committee the whole for
many of the whole but we'll do
as well meet back here and
follow each other into the
chamber
