Roll call is closed we have a
quorum.
Members please rise for today's
indication that by the generated
Spel or his these.
May god give you for every storm
a rainbow.
every problem live seasons of
play for free and this year.
For every side the sweet song
and an answer for each prayer Mr
speaker if the body would like
hallowed be thy name thy Kingdom
Come thy will be done on earth
as it is in heaven give us this
day our daily bread and forgive
the power and the glory forever
amen.
The gentleman from Santa reserve
and and this is in the pledge of
allegiance.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Trujillo lead us
in the pledge The New Mexico
flag.
Gentleman from the young
Representative Lara.
We shall not speak of a game
that took place last night and
we shall not speak of the
referees either.
Mr speaker it is with great
honor I introduce a very special
day is guests today and if she
will rise this is Mrs.
Mr speaker in the camera grew up
to attend Cornell University
while at Cornell she competed on
the varsity seek the quester in
team worked in a research lab
analyzing data on immune
molecular diagnostics upon
graduating with honors in may of
two thousand and twenty one she
began working as a commute
commodity risk management
now works in diagnostic
technology for the animal health
company so with this in the
future she will attend law
southwest when she is not
working M. and joys rodeo ing
showing ranch and reined cow
horses and weightlifting.
Now being back in New Mexico she
cherishes competing in the same
area she grew up in and is so
grateful for the honor
opportunity to ride in them with
privilege to compete at the miss
rodeo America pageant in Las
Vegas Nevada this December on
her horse George.
the ladies and gentleman of the
house you can supporter
throughout her here by following
her journey on the financial
miss rodeo New Mexico social
media channels.
point of personal privilege
please state your point.
Mr speaker and I think most of
you know I don't I don't share a
whole lot about my personal life
years and three beautiful
daughters.
And I have my life back here
with me tonight as we get to
share.
Something and and we'll find out
daughters brain Taylor put a
group.
Would like to tell you a little
bit about her and her heart.
in Lovington New Mexico.
She found her calling.
She would come home most days
From this the pain that she sees
in some of these kids.
And
thousand twenty one million
Taylor graduated.
And now teaches special edition
for six times greater cultural
to three jobs to pay her way
through.
For the last few months on top
of her teaching role playing is
been organizing and planning a
basketball game for her kids
to share news share with you the
Special Olympics pledge.
A pledge to look for the lonely.
I choose to include.
Today while we sit in the
chambers probate if it is here.
She has her mother's of them
finding skills.
Chair of brought together the
boys and girls.
The student council play the
role of the hype squad.
With posters of each of her
athletes.
In the entire school will be
there to celebrate these
athletes.
As you can see I hope.
Think of parents things aligned
for greater than watching the
metamorphosis process.
And lead the charge with respect
to teaching our society to brace
the diverse requirements of our
But what she does and how she
works with her kids just
continues to amaze me and her
Welcome to the lovely bride to
the house chambers.
house district eleven Garfield
middle school and and my little
buddy the national capital and
Garfield middle school can you
all please rise second recognize
you.
See how to my neighbors for me
tell will be back soon.
Those men's gentleman from what
that'll thank you Mr speaker
we're celebrating women and all
the great contributions they
made to our great country in the
state and so I just want to tell
everybody tomorrow at twelve
thirty they will be having a
prayer rally outside of the
can get Mr speaker and although
discussions as we can get to the
gentleman that's correct.
Our important per person
provision state your point.
Today in the house I'm proud to
introduce
Of the pin up it's been a few
years since I've been up here
because of the pandemic but I
have a good time talking to him
earlier and came back and they
came back to win again.
designed by them tested by the
that works with a smartphone.
It allows ability to let you
know if you've got a situation
another one in which they were
addressing our flood issues and
it was a great idea of what to
do always those think of the
community and so it provides me
now we're really freshman the
started high school.
That's just Corona.
Senator.
Some models.
The rules post with us.
Should I say motivation and
these are people every year come
out of the special school New
Mexico in these competitions and
because school programs and I I
rollers to say that because I
said I also like to say that the
reason this is always been done
this way as a fine teacher that
we have we don't we don't want
to this she's been a part of us.
By our.
To Senator and she does a lot of
great things and still in the
young people.
clause to the rest of the mesa
team of several middle school we
please send a.
Let's examine the gallery rise
they had to do it by virtual
cluster so it goes without
saying that much more attendance
has to be in the attention given
this program could not be what
there are the people that keep
it going for us from the New
Mexico tech department we please
stand up.
a approach was me we started off
Senator softball together so
it's pry disease it makes me to
see sure the house that's a
Garcia.
The chairman.
Sometimes I can read depends on
the day but the clerk and always
thousand twenty three New Mexico
mesa day.
Whereas New Mexico mesa
incorporated is a nonprofit
organization and a mathematics
engineering and science
achievement program and where as
ethnic groups and where as
currently New Mexico mesa is
active in almost one hundred
schools statewide and has grown
dramatically since its
introduction in six schools in
guidance and we're as New Mexico
maze activities include tutoring
advanced study college and
career counseling field trips
and academic competitions
Mexico Meza provide support not
only to students but also to
their teachers families and
communities and whereas through
the efforts of New Mexico means
a participating students receive
engineering and science now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to New
Mexico mesa incorporated and
mesa incorporated be recognized
and applauded for its dedication
to preparing minority students
for careers in mathematics
engineering and science signed
to students from chaparral high
school I've I've visited high
school before it is a beautiful
campus and your community is
just as beautiful and amazing
thank you for taking the trip up
here you've got a great
is Isay and got to see a rise to
be recognized.
Announcements agility from Dona
Armstrong and myself would like
to celebrate the lady warrior
golf team of Socorro high school
secara has won twenty one state
team championships and has held
eleven individual championships.
Today we celebrate the following
Vonn anayo yesterday signed with
the university of south west to
play golf.
Natasha Apodaca.
In addition to being mentors and
coaches to this team Kristin
Griego is here with us and on
the rostrum.
Not only are they Sanchez to
these girls they are mentors and
then they go beyond that.
these very professional and
strong women to join them for
their great because in Chicago
on April first thank you also
Some of us need them we do.
Thank you gentle lady.
Generally from Chavis are you
consent that house memorial two
twelve be removed from the
speakers table and they made the
next order of business.
the gentle lady to explain the
memorial.
Mr speaker.
Some very good friends money
Representative there on the
rostrum right now I've known
cowboys for cancer research for
forty years.
Serving as co executive
directors for more than a
decade.
tirelessly dedicating themselves
to organizing events traveling
is speaking and representing cal
boys for cancers research across
the hope of finding a cure for
cancer.
Appreciate your dedication.
Mr speaker if we could have the
chief clerk to please read the
memorial.
House memorial twelve introduced
by Representative Ezzell in the
morning recognizing cowboys for
research today in the house of
representatives were as cowboys
for cancer research was
established in nineteen eighty
two and is the largest cancer
research fundraiser in New
And whereas cowboys for cancer
research started as a humble
team roping fund raiser in Los
crucis honored alma cohort a
lifelong resident of New Mexico
research endowment was
established in nineteen ninety
nine to support cancer research
at the university of New Mexico
comprehensive cancer center
which is the only national
New Mexico comprehensive cancer
center for more than forty years
and one hundred percent of the
money that has been donated has
gone toward cancer research.
projects at the New Mexico State
University and whereas New
Mexico State University partners
with the university of New
Mexico comprehensive cancer
center and the Fred Hutchinson
whereas Dini and Geraldine
Calhoun co executive directors
of cowboys for cancer research
have been involved in the
charitable efforts at cowboys
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico the cowboys
for cancer research be
recognized for the contributions
representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
cowboys for cancer research.
Hi just wanted to rise this
morning to congratulate the
calzones and the if you don't
know this about me I'm a cowboy
just thank you you folks are
models of people that we ought
to look towards and be more
live.
Thank you for your service thank
like to rise and support of this
moral of this family like and
they have no.
Our kids should.
ago when my kids are showing
that this this calls.
For cancer they have been this
is the driving force in this.
debate on the memorial.
The gentleman from Chavis any
and all that Representative
Townsend thank you Mr speaker I
to rise to support this I would.
as well this couple.
Does not only this but they help
many communities in many ways
I'd like to add my sentiments as
well thank you to Danny and
Geraldine Cologne for all of
your work in this very important
area and thank you for joining
whenever they are out there
working they do have a matching
shirt usually on the back of the
chair you can always see it kalb
was for cancer research and the
started so one of four H. and
the Geraldine was telling me
that she had one of the best
male she's ever experienced last
night at my daughter's
restaurant appears to thank you
the house that the record show
that out the role has been
called and all members present
voted in the affirmative there's
been a motion to show all
members of the house present
voting in the affirmative seeing
Is now closed level of seventy
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house memorial twelve
has duly passed this house.
Internals mince.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
To read.
it under consideration point
same as recommendation that a
to pass as amended.
Respect of and that's referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair.
high those me yes Committee
productive.
Mr speaker consumer Public
Affairs Committee was referred
Senate tax business and
with recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair.
Mr speaker move for adoption
amended all those in favor say
of us and I.
Close maybe we just have a
committee board up to.
recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair.
Mr speaker move for adoption
word optional Federal committed
for the Senate bill three ten as
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred Senate tax business and
reports it was recommendation
that it to pass respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair.
Mr speaker move for adoption.
Word optional favorable
committee report on.
percent about one thirty two as
amended all those in favor say
if it's a nine.
I was named the S. seven point
four.
Yes.
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill three
forty five is that it under
consideration point same with
recommendation and to pass
respectfully submitted a that
forty five all those in favor
say of us in line.
Propose needs the as of a
committee productive.
Mr speaker you appropriations
and finance committee to ms been
referred Senate finance
Word optional Federal committed
for the Senate finance committee
supposed to present a bill nine
of those in favor say if I was
in high.
Propose maybe we just have a
good productive.
submitted a that small chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're not
option of a federal government
for the Senate bill seventy two
as amended all those in favor
say if I was and I.
recommendation that do not
possible that house taxation
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill I will I do pass
respectfully submitted during
House Bill five all I all those
in favor say if I was in high.
Was a test of the committee
board opted.
For the record I had nothing to
do with the five oh five area
consideration point it was
recommendation to do poss
respectfully submitted third
with the chair Mr speaker please
of the record for we're not sure
Was named the as I could afford
up to.
Mr speaker you're rolling in and
grossing Committee to ms been
referred house bill nine as
amended has had it under
consideration reports that same
has been duly enrolled in gross
Were in adoption of favorable
committee report.
On house bill nine as amended
all those in favor say of this
and I.
Billy rules any girls copies of
house bill nine as amended or
signing by the officers of the
house in open session.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
it's someone very special's
birthday today.
Who's that is the gentleman from
San Juan Representative Anthony
Alison's birthday today.
One when we get a teleserye
going to keep it a secret.
You know there are no secrets
around here.
Later saying.
That was the announcement double
brick table birthday wishes
delayed from Bernalillo in
Torrance thank you Mr speaker to
reminder the weather was great
and those of us to ride
motorcycles are starting to hit
gravel out there on the road
thank you Mr speaker.
Motorcyclist.
The where and drivers we were in
the cyclist.
Any other nonsense before we
move on to the next service.
we are within the final week of
session so we will be working a
lot more we had a great meeting
this morning with some of our
should also be planning for
floor session tomorrow evening
as well.
We are at crunch time so we can
Sierra and Sienna present of
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker
just a heads up that the
Magdalene of steers we'll be
playing against the fort Sumner
their third year in a roasting
for playing for the state
championship they wanted two
years in a row and best of luck
meet today at one thirty or
fifteen minutes after the floor
session and we are scheduled Mr
speaker for a meeting tomorrow
around noon so look forward to
meeting with everybody thank you
Mr speaker thank you generating
any other Nelson Stiller familia
J. lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker we go to that order
of Business third reading of
legislation see no objection it
is so ordered.
Yes Mr speaker I am ready and if
you will get me to that point
that the record reflect that
elections are for placing House
Bill for sixty six as amended on
does essentially one thing at
this point.
It.
Substitutes the general counsel
of the ethics commission as
As in past years gone on that
there needs to be some
separation between the role of
those who investigate and
that out of the role of the
general counsel and putting it
in the hands of an independent
hearing officer analyzed why is
it that hearing officer makes a
of the the education so we think
that provide some adequate to
comes at a good distance between
the
of professionals in the ethics
Whether or not the issue should
proceed.
I'm kind of waiting for my co
sponsored her for.
some recent events and I think
the ethics commission itself has
a supported this effort they
also see the need for an
independent hearing officer to
engage in that activity and at
this House Bill is is really for
a fair process this is about
ensuring that not only state
agencies and public employees
reported and so when it comes to
the accountability we want these
ethical standards to be of the
highest source and when we know
that folks that may have
how this as education was
created this is really improving
the process with the revision to
ensure that there's no
handedly oversee an ethics
complaint and one assessment
because what we had previously
was basically investigator judge
to to so in favor of this for
all the reasons that it creates
fairness not only for this
legislature for but for state
agencies and for the people
involved on both sides of that
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis please
yield Mister speaker I certainly
yield to the gentle lady from at
craft the state ethics
commission legislation that was
in twenty nineteen.
And Mr speaker gentlemen I think
bill is emblematic of that Mr
speaker gentle gentlemen.
I I do very much agree with the
let me ask the question first of
all Mr speaker German so who
will be determining probable
cause now if this bill passes Mr
speaker and gentle lady of the
commission they felt that their
commissioners should not be part
of that process and they did not
want to exempt them from the
Altman hearing and so we have
District Court judge.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentleman I I am I think that's
a good information first could
you tell us a little bit about
ethics commission does hire
independent hearing officers to
be involved in the process on
occasion and so these would be
that's needed in the process and
so would be one of those people
that they would reach out to
once I reach out to that person
for a probable cause
are by the commission itself Mr
speaker and gentleman I I think
that information is very
important and I think it helps
ensure that the process will be
about on page two of the the
bill.
where it talks about the
questions that the idea of the
jurisdiction of the commission
and so that material actually
speaker and gentleman would you
be willing to tell us a little
bit about.
Article for The New Mexico
constitution secretary sections
twenty seven and twenty eight so
deleted because frankly are
concerned that we were expanding
the role of the ethics
commission.
terms of the Legislative Council
Service came up with
we determined that it was an
expansion of that role and so we
aware of the ethics commission
and its role and and frankly
in the process that is ethical
that it is by law in that
they're conducting themselves in
an appropriate fashion and so I
their role so to speak and there
been several issues brought up
to me and some others that
indicate that may be expressed
some concern that they're doing
thank you thank you for that I
do see the amendment that
section two of the original bill
was was taken out
so let me just close Mr speaker
with the a few comments about.
On political body and
So we just want to be sure that
everything is always fair and
that
be open to the possibility of
perhaps some other amendments in
the future if we feel that those
are needed so will close with
that Mr speaker thank you so
the.
Majority whip from Santa Fe
County.
Thank you Mr with minority with.
I gentleman from Chavis do you
Well if if if I recall the the
issue originally was debated for
a couple years before we had the
act to
Establish the commission after
that constitutional amendment
was passed so that probably be
at least three or four years if
of years and many of us were
involved in the crafting of the
enabling legislation after the
constitutional amendment passed
large one
a very large piece of
legislation many things sort of
rose to the top of the list and
which specifically states that
the general counsel would
determine a probable cause
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
don't actually recall much
since then is that you have
someone who is investigating a
complaint compiling documents
potentially of the person that
kind of a a doctorate of set of
files and then Mr speaker and
gentleman the way that it works
now is that that same person is
then saying there is probable
cause is that correct.
director but the they receive
the complaint the general
counsel them is supposed to
investigate to determine the
best whether or not there's any
prosecuting the action that they
found probable cause for so.
I think what.
We found is that that one person
issue and so I think they
themselves have would like to
not have that additional burden
on them or the criticism that
Trier fact actually and they
felt that some distance was
necessary and so I think that
they would be I and they
testified in committee that they
would be comfortable with with
an independent hearing officer
Some further comfort knowing
that an independent person is
looking at that to determine
whether or not that complaint
should should be forwarded for
further investigation and then
potential prosecution.
me as we've been with the
relatively new ethics commission
watching some of the proceedings
that it's been the top of my
mind that we really need to make
procedures that really ensure
that things that are brought
forward are
absolutely grounded in the
information and that there are
outcome and ultimately the best
possible result for the people
of New Mexico which is elected
and gentleman the independent
hearing officer would then be
coming into that presentation of
the information that the general
right they would not know
anything about it it would be as
of of magistrate judge were were
receiving information from
a police officer to determine
exactly what this person will be
doing.
Thank you Mr speaker I I just
want to thank the gentleman from
Chavis and the gentle lady from
Santa Fe for bringing for this
standard as well thank you
gentlemen thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I now move that house bill four
listening to the debate.
Seen over the debate gentleman
close.
Mr speaker I did.
Does not close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Is that a furry.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
Was on one of sixty two in the
affirmative zero in the negative
ready on item number fifty.
Yes Mr speaker when we get to
that point the record reflect
that election Mr for placing
House government elections
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House government
thank you Mr speaker this bill
continues our work of two
thousand twenty one in updating
the New Mexico statutes around
licensure with that will stand
Indian Affairs substitute for
house bill three eighty four do
now pass.
Passage of house government
election Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
The clothes.
But the members of the recorded
vote.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
yes is now closed level of sixty
one in the affirmative during
the negative house bill three
house House government election
the first committees of the
press with three eighty four has
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer and public
affairs committee substitute for
House Bill three zero six on
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
degree felony if you do one of
the following well purchase of
farm if you knowingly.
my expert witnesses with me I
have deputy chief when major
larger both from DPS and
Elizabeth Johnson chief legal
gentlemen are our great leader
over here he'll this time Mr
speaker I I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo in Torrance
Mr speaker he makes me say that
expected Mr speaker gentle lady
so.
We have here a lawful purchase
and transfer of a firearm for.
those are ready a straw purchase
which is punishable by ten years
in prison and two hundred fifty
thousand dollar fine do are you
So that leads me to my next
question which is a real this
question some on the federal
level.
Which will get into all the
you decide to go softer on crime
and do a fourth degree felony
and swith eighteen months versus
ten years on the federal level
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
Mexico so the feds to prosecute
it certainly but right now state
prosecutors cannot prosecute
this crime and so actually
there's there's no penalty
whatsoever on the books for this
already have the rights to go
after somebody for straw
purchase and give them.
Ten years and turned fifty
She's looking at twenty years
please explain to me how it
would be fair and how explain to
a law enforcement officer that I
voted for this bill and the
person that killed their partner
person could still be prosecuted
under federal law in federal
court if the property of the
police officers want to go that
route so they could go that if
we do not pass this bill there
it becomes a part of life it
becomes part of law would give
state prosecutors the ability to
actually prosecute something
that right now they can on.
your own site which is a
beautiful thing
TJ yes Mr speaker and gentleman.
My heart burn with this.
we're trying to say but the
problem is.
I cannot look a law enforcement
officer in the eyes and know
that I what I know is that
sometimes the feds don't pick up
the case.
giving somebody who bought a
fire arm.
And the only give it to somebody
who should have had one.
And now that person kills a law
enforcement officer I can't I
this bill did not pass through
in the feds don't take the
prosecution what I would submit
is the inability look at someone
dies that would be the problem
because now there will be zero
know when we purchase a firearm
knowing you're going to give to
someone who's going to commit a
crime with a firearm.
They get off Scot free and so
this would at least put
something in place so that we
reduction and that is my point
and also I also have a problem
with the fence not picking up
cases and understand what they
do and they have a very high
conviction rate when they do
it's very problematic so the
I wanted this to be exactly like
with the feds have descended
have absolutely no issue with
this whatsoever and this is such
a huge discrepancy between ten
sometimes served an ankle
bracelet you know what I mean
it's it's like I want something
Stockert aha.
on the street you also know that
they will negotiate that down I
don't want that I'd rather see
something with a much stiffer
penalty so when it comes to time
to go she ation they can't do
stiffer so that they can plead
down to nothing and ankle brace
that Mr speaker dumb it but
let's go through I want to go
this is the form you have to
fill out.
And it says right here in twenty
one Hey are you the actual
transferee buyer of the firearms
listed on this form.
the licensee cannot transfer the
farms you know there's an
exception to this which I'm
going to read.
When we get to that page Mr
speaker and gentleman.
otherwise acquiring the firearm
from self.
Person is also the actual
transfer if you she's
legitimately approaching the
fire arm for a third party.
The eighteen and the federal
code eighteen USC ninety to do.
So.
An example of this would be if
somebody bought the gift and
and we're putting this in here
but we don't have any of that
language of saying that there
are exemptions I don't see the
part where it says exemption is
like it says knowingly but I
gentleman Mr speaker generated
from Bernalillo Torrance so I
don't think an exemption would
apply because again as I and I
crafted is very narrowly and
ended that intentionally so the
That the time of purchase the
firearm you intend to give that
farm is someone that you know.
Is a felon or you know intends
to commit a crime with a firearm
packet that goes with this.
This is something I didn't know
of and I was trying to get
answers for for my FL's and here
it also says a person is not
other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business
practice we're aware that that
was in there and exemptions Mr
speaker and gentleman Mr speaker
the second part of my bill says
you have to.
Intend to use the farm as a part
of the crime so those type of
white collar crimes I think
would not be
utilize using a firearm.
just knowingly the problem is I
know when this goes to court we
have to argue over knowingly so
what I'm trying to make sure
that everybody understands that
it there's nothing in here that
says that it can't be a felony
does not use those words a diss
anyone convicted of a federal or
state offense pertaining to an
I'm trying to get at is.
What it does to have that right
in there so Mister speaker
German what I'm trying to get at
here Mr speaker and gentleman.
The license you should not
contact next when that when they
are to provide as a violation
they must stop the transaction
so if they feel that there's a
Bernalillo Torrance so yeah
there there's a separate set of
statutes and standards for the
federal firearms license or in
those who are selling these this
that is doing this job purchase
they have the ability to stop
there right there.
So there's another question on
here that asks on the form you
Mr speaker and gentleman.
person described so it goes
through that all the prohibited
and we talk about doing tend to
sell others purchase dispose of
farmers and important for any
the interesting thing that is
another exception again you are
going to go back to knowingly
which I fully understand which
is going to be debated in the
served and what I'm trying to
say is you don't have anything
in here you address and here's
another thing that's usually
problematic for me Mr speaker
German.
Berlin Torrance are you talking
about page one line twenty two.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if you're just a
The **** if you've had a court
martial or dishonorable
discharge why didn't you include
that as well besides just felony
firearm based on someone whose a
felon or who intends to commit a
crime using the farm so that's
the behavior trying to curb
I don't know enough whether if a
Mr speaker and gentleman the
problem I'm having is when you
read this ATF form the four four
seven three is very very
more than one year so he did not
include indictment are
potentially looking at a year or
more and longer for felonies
that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
point and so I'm not sure why
you be prohibited from
transferring or buying the farm
for somebody else unless you
know they intend to use the farm
in the commission of a crime.
Or any other crime which to
judge would impress you from on
the year received a shorter
sentence you're going to say
even though they're very
explicit is a reason why you did
excluded using those exact words
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo Torrance so so again
look at paragraph two starting
to you who's been disorderly
discharged and you're prohibited
from possessing a firearm
paragraph two would absolutely
address that situation.
would be having as much problem
Mr speaker and gentleman so.
Does your question ask here in
section F. R. U. fugitive from
justice Mr speaker and
gentleman.
very situation.
Mr speaker it asked here in
section eight have you been
adjudicated for mental defector
of you ever been committed to a
mental institute that's not a
it's felony or misdemeanor right
and so we have specific state
statutes that say a couple of
different things if you're
subject to a protective order
laws and you follow the court
order that and you possess a
firearm that's a misdemeanor
that catches under paragraph
two.
not competent our state courts
inter as part of the order that
you're prohibited from
possessing a firearm that order
if you violated and into
possessing a firearm is a
gentleman having been discharged
on a dishonorable discharge I
know for a fact that's not a
misdemeanor felony that is not
in this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I don't know if
enough about disorderly
they're free to possess a
firearm.
The gentleman the exact wordings
in here have ever been
discharged from the armed forces
under dishonorable discharge and
that could be a multitude of
things actually knows a few
can't have this but your bill
does not Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker Julie from Berlin
Torrance so if you are
aware that in here it asks a
very important question.
I now understand that marijuana
other drugs as well warning the
possession marijuana remains
unlawful under the federal
courts and one more thing I have
here.
Of a controlled substance from
shipping transfer receiving or
possessing a firearm.
Now one is listed as a
controlled substance as a
regardless of whether his or her
state has passed legalization
authorizing marijuana for
medicinal uses it is unlawful
for the user of a controlled
subjects to be in possession of
problem I've had Mr speaker.
When they legalized here huge
debates arose and this is a
hugely important issue I ran
into a bunch of people who
why.
That that is not included since
it's such an important issue in
a state that has legalized is
there a reason why you did not
specifically at and this is why
Torrance so possession of
cannabis is not a felony so
number one does not does not
with those folks and number two
in less you can tell me how
lied on the form and intends to
purchase a firearm and still use
cannabis than they can prosecute
them federally but again we're
trying to curve and so if you
want to smoke cannabis.
That's on you between you and
your employer whatever but
you're not going to use that
Transfer device purchase
transfer any farmer have to the
question demand of the person.
So as a felon.
For.
A grandma goes and buys her
grandson a gun.
She doesn't know all of these
things she has no idea if he
smokes pot or not.
circumstance this bill would not
apply to her okay Mister speaker
madam no she he smokes marijuana
but problem is.
Ninety percent of my arguments
No one can go in can't go in
there and live because we do
you're looking at ten years in
prison and to our fifty dollar
fine.
Also.
we have no idea how impaired is
to impaired.
So we have someone who may know.
That they are purchasing a gun
they don't understand and I'm
medicinal purposes I mean they
might think well while he spoke
for medicinal purposes
purposes.
And now it says knowing that the
Drop purchase it's still no
matter how you cut it is a straw
purchase so why isn't that in
this bill Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo Torrance so
really what you're saying is if
paragraph two it is transferring
the the fireman Sam when that
you know is going to commit a
crime involving the farm so I
buy a firearm and I'm planning
on transfer to someone and I
Again Mr speaker and gentleman I
don't know why it wasn't written
exactly like it is on the
federal level because there's
other things in here too the
same thing why did you exclude
convicted of any court of a
misdemeanor crime of domestic
violence or have you been a
member of the military convicted
crime clean L. but mostly what I
wanted those but the domestic
order why is that not included
in here.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo Torrance so that
there's two parts us the first
part is if you are being
prosecuted for domestic violence
So if you in fact end up
possessing a firearm that in it
of itself is a separate
misdemeanor from the underlying
domestic violence and so
paragraph two with loop in that
prohibited from far from phoning
or possessing a firearm in less
there is great bodily harm to
rose to level of felony.
That is correct and that there
is an exception on here if
That does a lot more than what
it just says on paper.
It says knowing that the other
person as a felon for they
States citizenship that's also
on there as well Mr speaker
Dillman are you an alien
illegally or unlawfully in nine
states you can't purchase a gun
us basically goes on about the
straw purchase.
Again I'm gonna go back to all
of my heart burn on this.
I don't understand and I cannot
wrap my head around it.
on the wrist I look at someone
like the wife who gave up.
set cuss words gave a gun to
man who should have won any of
representative I absolutely
can't get on board with.
Eighteen months slap on the
wrist nothing.
they not prosecuting the things
that they need to prosecute is
it because they don't want to I
would love to hear their
explanation is because they
don't have enough money is
because they don't have enough
somehow get something to the
resources whatever they need or
if you came to me he said you
know what I have look through
this form we're gonna spell it
out in detail because I'm
still illegal on the federal
level and they do make that
transfer no matter how you slice
it it's still a straw purchase
properties properties you're
looking at two different things
I'm looking the straw purchase
gonna make this exactly the
Feds we're gonna spell this out
exactly it's identical but it
gives are awesome officers are
sitting right here the power to
is a crime issue of trying to
punish the people that are
giving fire arms to people that
should have any any straw
purchases straw purchase I don't
care how you cut it how you
worded it should include all of
why and that includes a straw
purchase of somebody who goes
out and buy something for
someone because it doesn't say
found here diss period you do
become crime but Mr speaker done
in Iraq I I know you're saying
is better enough than I can't
agree with that I have to say
given these officers the same
exact tools that the Feds have
person email them on it and give
them the same.
I think of the word I want to
use without using a bad word
some really anger at this point.
What what this person that gave
that person a gun to kill my
brother sister.
I got to walk on the charges or
with six months of the tunnel a
addressing only in certain
situations it's not listing it
out and I feel to be fair for a
law enforcement officers so they
don't have to be angry about
if this ever gets amended to be
exactly what the fans and it
just addresses the issue Mr
speaker gentleman a straw
purchase period which would
cover all of this.
enough the charges for something
as horrific as that Mr speaker
gentleman and I I'm done thank
you there's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Does this bill just deal with
straw purchase and nothing else.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
exactly what it is now if the
young lady of wants to write a
bill that includes all those I
purchase in Mr speaker gentleman
are you aware that department of
justice did a study on where
felons obtained their firearms
So you're addressing the number
two way that they obtained their
weapons is that correct Mr
speaker tonight from gentleman
from Bernalillo that is correct.
good legislation I would point
to that the house Judiciary
passes on and nine zero vote and
I stand in strong support for
this legislation thank you.
yield to the gentle lady from
Travis curry and Roosevelt.
Mr speaker and gentleman are you
aware of how many crimes are
crimes under the state and also
state statutes but as to how
regular I'm really not sure and
Mr speaker and gentleman
although I'll tell you there's a
lot and are you aware Mr speaker
gentleman that the elements are
different from what the feds are
looking at and specifically
specifically Mr speaker and
gentlemen I would like to talk
about felony possession of a
firearm are you aware that that
that the penalties for a state
crime a felon in possession of
firearms were for the longest
time when I prosecuted eighteen
months I think they've risen
maybe up to three years now but
the point I'm making is as a
prosecutor we often do want to
take a case like felon in
possession of firearms federally
that Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
get the federal authorities to
actually take a state crime like
felon in possession of firearms
to get a higher penalty is
almost impossible Mr speaker and
prosecutors the ability to have
another Avenue to to prosecute
somebody other under and so
Mister speaker and gentleman for
example fireman felon in
possession of a firearm what
from Travis curry and Roosevelt
of we don't pass this bill the
feds turn for nor the referral
then essentially there's nothing
to stop which corner the
gentleman from Bernalillo the
months for some the inverse ten
years Mr speaker and gentleman
but that just isn't the reality
of the world we live in today
knowingly which means if I'm
correctly understanding that Mr
speaker gentleman that it has to
be intentionally.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
tool I I can't agree with the
gentle lady's arguments that it
needs to be ten years or the the
all that needs to be listed out
like the Feds because it's just
gentleman promoted
Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
thank you would you please yield
Mister floor leader Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
to Mr speaker gentleman but the
question was regarding so this
would if you would infringe on
this new law that we're creating
it would be sixteen.
maximum penalty of in terms of
incarceration of eighteen months
okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so this could be
played down theoretically is
that correct Mr speaker Mr
other like kind charge on the
books when it comes to straw
purchases so it I think the
prosecutor have to decide
whether they're going to
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and I to my co sponsoring
this and one of the things that
I would like to ask Mr speaker
kind gentleman is.
did you drop this legislation Mr
speaker generally Dona Ana so I
I know this is one of prior to
bills for four of several law
enforcement agencies I think it
so is is this the the fix of
course not I think we need to
tackle career criminals obtain
firearms and a number of ways
but this is certainly one of
thank you for your efforts and
and thank you for including me
in this I think this is a really
important piece of legislation
it's a very by adding me to it I
think Mr speaker and gentleman
it is a very important
move the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three oh six do now pass
where final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer Public
What's about to close.
But those members without a
recorded vote Representative
Ferrary yes Representative
Ferrary votes yes Representative
Hochman Vigil.
What is one of sixty two in the
affirmative three in the
negative house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
consumer public affairs
committee substance rounds with
placing House health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill five twenty seven
as amended with an emergency
clause has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
of the opioid crisis the bill
complications to important needs
first the legislation creates
distinct funds for opioid
settlement revenues to ensure
For ongoing needs together these
two measures ensure that
appropriations of opioid
settlement revenues will help as
many New Mexicans harmed by the
opioid crisis is possible.
million to support medication
assisted treatment two million
support housing support linkages
and four million to support
Brandon gray who's a fiscal
analyst LFC and I'd also like to
defer to my co sponsor of the
bill Representative Herndon
early from earlier.
understand the wonderful bill
that you have brought forth and
how the funds will be utilized
as a part of this legislation
that what is it is important to
that is correct and the with
pending litigation that's still
going on that amount is likely
to increase to about two hundred
million is that correct to the
to utilize the funds from the
settlement the state has access
to about forty five percent of
all opioid revenues is that
what it is responsible for but
also that the local entities
also have some aspect in state
so and how these settlement
funds are dispersed and
currently the vote the opioid
The only Mr speaker gentle lady
yes at the AG's office that has
administrative responsibility
for this state share the funds
which this fund has been put
together in the way it would be
utilize but most important
gentle lady I'm really proud of
the fact that the bill provides
for the emergency clause to
on this legislation and thank
you Jim lady I yield back to
you.
Thank you Mr the generator also
like to thank our House
As we grow older gentleman from
Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I kindly appeal to
the gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker and
you're kind of creating the two
funds.
No one is immune to the
restricted funds.
and as the opioid crisis
Missing from all of these from
the urban settlement.
No the only the settlement
portion of consumer settlement
fund.
The
fund that we go to the S. I see
Spiegel speaker gentle.
And then the most because this
fund would be.
will be also
the
Wall Street than the other
investment.
Of pertinence Madam source the
as much speaker you know
I've been kind of a the
legislator in terms of
settlement monies for rural very
viable.
The state of the art initiatives
here in our state and we've got
one bill on the Senate side
of process is that correct some
of the speaker gentlelady from
Santa Fe Mr speaker of German
you are correct.
Most because
speaker is the vetting process.
And I see that the legislation
has.
lessons that are AG initiated
Against things reciprocal
companies and over prescribed.
So my question to you is the
most Baker.
Is that this legislation was it
The most because I'm speaking
about the health and Human
Services interim committee.
Mr speaker and gentleman give me
just one minute I'm gonna confer
with my experts.
talked about during during the
interim and health and and.
Human Services Committee and the
funding only came forward in
part of a national opioid policy
task force and we met in
December and we were talking
about this and coming up with
policies
it wasn't known exactly how much
money was we were going to be
receiving Mr speaker gentle and
so is the most frequent question
was if this if this concept that
And your answer was that it was.
Speaker and gentleman I've been
signaled to get that yes it was
talked about not that it was
just like we didn't know all the
and Human Services interim
committee cause us the most
because I think it's significant
that we're looking at a
significant piece of legislation
the money's that'll be coming
into our state.
And it's it's crucial.
You know that this initiative be
vetted.
For the you know in terms of the
mechanisms estimates because
This process and this concept
and as well as speaker
Also concern of mine as well as
speaker and and not so much in
terms of the intent of
as most people doing in Santa Fe
was a collaboration.
With the attorney general's
office in regards to this
legislation.
Much bigger dealing from Santa
Fe
when is the news that there was
no collaboration.
And the AG's office is not in
does not happen is the most
speaker.
And
Mr speaker
The manufacturers.
Speaker
Yes money's.
madam is not apply to the
settlement monies.
They can go to a.
private entities can go to a.
Are not like general fund
monies.
So when they're not tied to
vented donations some of
speaker.
But I think that's driven by the
LFC.
And
I think
Initiatives that are involved on
a day to day basis.
With a substance abuse disorder
speaker.
Not to say that there are good
elements of the legislation
really are.
I think that the vetting process
is crucial.
As the more speaker.
And
Opioid settlement monies.
To go in the path of the tobacco
settlement fund.
This speaker.
Something playing and I would
appreciate it if we could
please.
Gentleman from Chavis on you to
begin.
There is.
Apologies doing proceed.
Speaker.
Of all things in the the
Michigan for those fighting
some.
And so we're just going to do in
This must occur again I was on
the point of
This this remain once in a
lifetime.
Fund.
Mr speaker I was on that point
that I I I can not see or
tolerant.
Basically be what the prop the
state budget and the general
fund.
And it's not being used for the
purpose of it was created.
There is that tendency is the
most speaker in house bill two.
The the settlement fund who was
rated by the LFC.
Not for.
That is in House Bill to.
That is coming in.
From the point Madam.
Money's.
Or recovery of drug addiction.
They're going to general fund
projects that have.
settlement fund about this from
a speaker.
So don't lady from Santa Fe.
You spent over to the Senate.
And even after if it does pass
the Senate.
that we still need to engage in
Or wanting to initiate
programming estimates speaker
regarding opioid addiction.
And also that are.
contribute.
To the further enhancement of
what we're trying to do here.
With House Bill five twenty
seven as the most because.
does the gentle lady from Santa
Fe yield speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
we have of the bunch of money
coming from an opioid settlement
lawsuits coming directed
directly to our state is that
correct.
Mr speaker generally that's
transfer of those funds through
an attorney that the attorney
general's office who does not
appropriate to the legislature
so that we have a program or
mechanisms mechanisms of which
you speak of.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and so if we have let's say
different proposals for use of
and and various different I
count that jails and and other
agencies throughout the state Mr
speaker gentle lady this would
recovery fund may only be
expended upon appropriation by
the legislature and shall only
be part.
competing for utilization of
those funds it is a way to use
those funds for different
programs that have already been
brought through the legislative
programs that we know that are
going to be of priority and be
more of most benefit for our
state and the answer is yes.
Thank you Mr speaker that
This is the health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill two fifty two no
I twenty seven do now pass and
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
Representative Hochman Vigil
those yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
has duly passed this house.
Gentleman from Cibola McKinley
Representative Alcon are you
ready and item number thirteen.
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker House Bill
so desire at their expense an
extra disabled veteran played at
their expense to they so desire.
I will is the gentleman who
doesn't like the license plate
metals but this is not making
additional car not an additional
type of license plate is that
correct Mr chairman Mr speaker
gentleman from Santa Fe that is
exactly it of a veteran veteran
fourth one for your RV or
motorcycle whatever for your
fourth or fifth car you can
purchase but but no this is not
making another play Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you see you
sixty six the vote is now open.
About to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary yes
Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes voters would have sixty four
in the affirmative zero in the
negative.
point the record for that
election as a server placing
House with three ninety five as
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle person to explain the
bill.
built a very simple bill
it has it will allow the
department of health to collect.
phenomenal bills because it
brings all the stakeholders
together who all agree on this
bill my expert witnesses are
Adrienne Smith from the care
Mexico disability rights and I
yield.
There is a gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr gentle lady I'm
just wondering of.
I I did not hear this bill so I
don't have any great questions
on I'm just trying to figure out
If you tell me a little bit
about the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you Representative currently the
department of health does costs
latest seven and it is of for
all in the all
costs that provide services that
pertain to waiver services this
provide this information every
other year
our direct care providers I have
to.
trying to raise the level many
of them are doing CNA work
sometimes even LPN work and we
want to be able to make changes
be shared with the data not like
personal information and not
Not classified as if I if if if
I were someone whose data is
you Representative currently the
cost analysis or all the
individual items to go into the
cost of providing the services
legislature the true cost of
providing the services so this
bill has the all the direct care
providers support providers are
data as legislators we want to
understand what the true cost of
this thank you Mr speaker in an
ideal so the cost to gather this
information
speaker gently so thank you Mr
speaker and thank you
Representative well this is what
makes this bill I think so
extraordinary that we have so
many stakeholders who do agree
services are saying that there
is no appropriations needed for
this bill because they're
gathering that data already of
for the board of directors or
for other things but and this
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so the the information
isn't just coming from the
department of health or their.
Multiple departments that we're
so what thank you Mr speaker and
and thank you Representative
currently we are getting passed
through a department of health
That don't necessarily have.
Information about the work
force.
As well as.
We are gathering we being
providers gathering.
Demographics on their work force
but they are not rolling it into
legislators so we know it does
not require us to funded that
range ages we.
Provides a process in which
Santo interaction I know very
little about this bill so I'm
I'll be listening intently to
the rest of the debate for the
debate the gentleman from of the
representative block.
see on the FIR here we had we
had an amendment that we added
some language so Mister speaker
gentle lady I believe it says
the amendment was on.
on some tracks subcontractors Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative I believe that we
were getting and let me defer to
my to my ex for one this is but
I believe that the costs the the
vacancy rates and they would not
be necessarily at a hundred
fifty percent of state minimum.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you a
gentle person from a terra I
want to make sure that I'm clear
we've been getting what is costs
that those details information
are in there we're in a crisis
points right now in our state's
providing individuals with
very mission driven the
individuals are skilled and
they're very hard workers and we
I see we strip some language
regarding department reporting
to the legislature based on
service reduction plans steps
that will be taken to reinstate
Just Mr speaker and and gentle
person hold on.
just to reiterate I believe the
gentleman from San Juan asked
what kind of information we
would also be obtaining does
this add any personal
information regarding these
many hours they work.
it with their the vacancy rate
is there level education when
what kind of certifications they
have okay thank you Mr speaker
speaker thank you Jim of ours
thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate the information and I
look forward to.
Some more spirited debate I see
gladly yield to the gentle
person from catcher thank you Mr
speaker so we have this and I'm
trying to remember all the bills
that we went through in labor Mr
remember correctly is that true
Mr speaker delivered thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle
person but we do of the
department of health and DDS di
the budget there is a federal
statute that requires it to be
done every five years but it is
all right it puts the cost of
the room for the executive
of you today is more specific
about how are workforce works we
are as I stated Mr as the
speaker and gentle person is are
we are in a crisis situation
make some strategic asks for
next legislative session Mr
speaker gentle lady and I and I
understand that and I and with
all due respect I think the
their their salaries and with
this this cost Mr speaker gentle
lady of half of of increasing to
they they obviously are not
taking care of their employees
properly or we wouldn't have
this this issue others more
issues beyond that but I think
that's one of the main issues
would you agree with that Mr
understand you Mr speaker gentle
person catch on let me clarify.
It this.
Bill is not it's costing the
data on into professionalizing
director care for support so
that is legislators we
a way that will be able to
gather the data Mr speaker
gentle lady who pays for the oil
and fund whose budget is that is
this a study because I mean
that's going to happen is going
whites the department of health
DDS tee and so the individual
providers across the state have
agreed to is that they are
can at least have real data on a
on a bi annual basis thank you
Mr speaker generally and I think
I think so the department of
jelly.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle person I do only have
three seats for expert witnesses
and I don't have an expert
witness from the department of
health or DDS tee here but they
FY twenty six will be
approximately half a million
dollars and of course in the and
it's a will become a recurring
the the we originally have this
probation and there were what
happened was that the department
of health and and DDS di said
only be conducted if the funding
is available.
Speaker gentle lady and that's
just why
in.
time it passes by the time it
they get the collect that in the
the work with that it probably
won't be necessary until the to
get funding until twenty twenty
six does that sound.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
I I I don't want to the speaker
gentle is not to be too up I'm
just.
My biggest
opposition that I had on the
speaker generally that that's
this isn't the only Department
that is lacking in in employees
forth we've got others sectors
the Veterans Services and so
forth yes souls that are the
positions are filled because
they have this position rural
there's any money because it is
going to cost to to filter
through this this this
information even if it's given
to them by other people Mr
In twenty twenty six that they
will require about half a
million dollars to shuffle and
and calculate all those
biggest part thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady there's
further debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
lane thank you Mr speaker the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
couple questions is because my
ring the bill I think this is a
good concept but as one make
sure understand what's happening
here so Mr speaker my understand
really the heart of what this
bill is trying to do is let's
through the state and the state
contracts out those services
through a third party there is I
think maybe some concern that
the rates for those third party
providers are too low and so
correct thank you Mr speaker
thank you Jim person on this I I
I believe that that's a big part
of this bill yes Sir it also
appreciate that because I I
think that.
These are such vital services
offered to someone most
vulnerable populations but the
into these types of businesses
from going into those businesses
are the ones that are there
having a hard time making ends
meet and also that's going to
affect our most vulnerable
populations that need these
services so I like the idea of
speaker there's a gentleman from
San Juan Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker will gentle
lady you.
Gladly yield to my colleague
from Santa.
On page eight to strike the
contingency upon appropriation
Is this money in house bill two
or.
the provider group that is
advocated through add cap that
they would be able to absorb the
cost.
no need gentleman thank you Mr
speaker thank you donated to the
for the division lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker.
amended.
Do now pass we are on final
passage of house bill three
ninety five as amended the vote
is now open.
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
ready and item thirty eight Mr
speaker can you give me to the
point that the record reflect
that elections are for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House with three
thirty seven on final passage
has been taken it is now subject
Department is in line with the
requirements of the FBI's they
can do a proper at the I.
background check and without a
stand for questions you know to
be deleted close thank you Mr
three thirty seven the vote is
now open.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
yes representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
What is one of six eight in the
affirmative during the negative
Mr speaker I am will you give me
to that point that the record
reflect that elections are for
placing House agriculture us
sick yes and water resources
Speaker of the house agriculture
SA keys Water committee
committee substitute for out
House Bill five twenty five
authorizes the New Mexico
finance authority to make loans
manage the loans through their
established process in
recipients must comply with the
terms and conditions established
by the water transport in the
HB five two five.
Do now pass final passage of
house agricultural second some
water resources committee
substitute for House Bill five
twenty five with an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
the negative house agriculture a
second so what this is Committee
substitute for House Bill five
twenty five with an emergency
clause has duly passed this
house.
the record reflect that election
is there for placing House Bill
one eighty nine as amended on
final passage has been taken it
is still subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
all Mr speaker it allows
eligible employees of southeast
New Mexico college to
participate in the alternative
retirement plan without this
would conform the required
minimum distribution age for
retirees to the federal Internal
Revenue Code basically
conforming us with federal law
final passage of house bill one
eighty nine as amended the vote
is now open.
But those members of the
recorded vote.
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
One of sixty seven in the
affirmative zero in the negative
no objection it is so ordered
click to read.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred Senate
committee report we're on
adoption office will committed
for the Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
bill four as amended all those
in favor say about us and I.
under consideration point it was
recommendation that do pass an
it's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair the
speaker move adoption of the
committee report for an optional
The I just have a quick report
on.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill seven has had it under
consideration report same with
substitute for Senate bill seven
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Was me the as of a committee
reported opted.
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair with the speaker move
adoption we're not sure if it
will come in report on Senate
bill sixteen of those in favor
budget Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five has had it
under consideration point it was
were British the team Haas
respectfully submitted was a top
denture Mr speaker move adoption
Because of those name the as of
a committee formed up to.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred Senate bill eighty one
has had it under consideration
point seems recommendation that
all those in favor signify this
and I.
I was in a test of a committee
for doctor.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
adoption we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
the Senate Judiciary Committee
substance for Senate bill ninety
two of those in favor signify
the state line.
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respect was middle of
the Thomson chair with the
speaker move adoption reduction
of a federal committee for the
Senate bill one of six as
Services Committee too is been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one oh seven as amended has
had it under consideration point
I was recommendation to to pass
as amended and it's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
Propose may be a Senate
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house Education
Committee substitute for House
the doctor will favorable
commuter porterhouse Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill two eighty five all those
in favor save up as a not.
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
adoption word optional Federal
committed for now before seventy
one of those in favor say about
this and I was named the SO
recommendations on a deep pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
adoption.
Committees of supercenter fifty
it also favors and focusing on.
Wasn't a test of equity board
opted.
Mr speaker your government
speaker move adoption we're an
adoption of federal committee
report isn't able to twenty six
as amended all those in favor
say have a state line.
ordered to read a message from
the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the duly enrolled in gross copy
of Senate bill three eighty one
with emergency clause has been
read in full and signed by the
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty five.
Senate Bill endorsed twenty
on Senate chief clerk is a
serial.
What is legal.
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business in
addition is so ordered analysis
so talented I cannot believe
that they're all still walking
today.
Representative no matter
Representative talent Lujan
Representative bahkan
Representative Hernandez earlier
I I just don't know how
everybody's still walking around
especially representative of
was planning to move eight.
There were three referees on the
side of the Senate.
needs to be celebrated even
though
we don't necessarily have any
swag this year.
false so many times and ended up
on the free throw line and
somehow they were just fine and
they were never on the floor but
they were on the free throw line
on thank you Mr speaker your
house commerce will meet today
at two forty five we have a I
think it not a long agenda but
we think we're gonna be there
for a while so make sure to get
yourself someone should be
prepared to be there for awhile
evening on the floor for some
third reading and some
concurrence I thank you for good
morning session and I hope you
have a rest a good rest of the
Six PM this Friday March tenth.
Members will see you at six PM
this afternoon.
