Would also like to recognize
interpreters and New Mexico so
for the death or here with us
today director of instruction
Scott behind.
Students in New Mexico school
for their students as
Representative but.
Yes the minutes.
Gabrielle amasses.
Senator Franklin.
What a joke.
opening day are making over and
since the image this from the
RTC axes of occurred in New
Mexico welcome.
president bite in this year miss
Smith is an award winning singer
song writer and original from
Hobbs I'd like to welcome
Hillary Smith for her
Judge second judicial district
thank you for joining us today.
As well as very Michael grant
city councilor.
The indication was done today by
Joseph's children's thank you
for joining us as well.
Ceremonial drums and it was
black with the singers from some
NCSL and Sheldon Velasquez.
While we await the governor
coming in and like to the game
once again thank everyone of you
for being part of today's
ceremony thank you for the
with the annual state of state
address.
The honorable Michelle Lujan
Grisham the governor of the
state of New Mexico this is
going
governor Mr speaker madam pro
tem distinguished senators and
representatives it's an
incredible privilege to be with
you today I also want to
Fernandez.
Melanie A. Stansbury.
thank my adorable little to keep
appreciate that brother Gregory
lu Han and his grant guests in
the grid.
My husband wherever he went off
You're welcome
It is the every single session
but this one is been a long time
since I've been right here and
it is always my honor to address
my fellow New Mexicans I just
over four years ago I began my
governorship with a simple idea
that we have the power to decide
build our state together and
reach for New Mexico that would
allow us to achieve our god
given potential that we could
have prosperous aspirations and
turn the men to prosperous
always been our north star.
Setting out to make that vision
real has met addressing
injustices and inequities in our
we did this by stepping beyond
old fights and rising above
predictable conflicts with
defined our state many states
for decades by looking for new
common spirit the burns brightly
within all of us over the last
four years we have made once
unimaginable strides and today
It feels good to everyone let's
take a moment I wanted to just
remind us where we are in New
education more accessible than
in any other state in the
nation.
I
clean energy sustainability and
protecting our environment is a
model now for the entire nation.
That is the miracle of New
Mexico.
people in this room but by tens
of thousands of New Mexicans
across the land of enchantment
who stood up and spoke out who
live there sites and stiffen
for New Mexicans and every
single one of us should be proud
of all of the work that we have
done and the impact of every
single one of our efforts.
in this room I want to thank you
each and everyone of you from
legislators and staff to the
sovereign nations to community
leaders to residents who have
Mexico
this is the state of our state
isn't just about today it's
about tomorrow it's about what
we're creating for the future
for the next legislative session
we have more to do.
Thanks we've more do
more to do in order to protect
our land and our institutions
and make New Mexico the best
place in the world to live to
of a better writer state state
where there is no limit to what
they can achieve.
That's why I'm laying out
innovation it is our straight
States greatest asset so let's
begin with the economic well
being of the state over the last
four years we've transformed our
thirty thousand new jobs in the
last year alone.
I'm very proud of that work and
record seven billion dollars in
annual visitor spending and
we've enacted four hundred
million in permanent tax cuts
investing further in a dynamic
growing economy in my budget
priorities I'm asking for one
billion dollars in economic
more New Mexicans four things
they need righ now.
consumers save money helping
businesses and implementing in
addition common sense anti
pyramid the measures to make
goods and services more
affordable and delivering
taxpayer gets a fair shot and a
fair shake everybody should be
asked to pay their share but
nobody should face a bird if
they cannot afford for limits
That same principle applies at a
time when New Mexicans across
the state are working hard to
rent or purchase homes that are
too often out of reach whether
we're talking about the over two
homeowners as the rising home
costs outstripping their dreams
my administration is taking
action I'm asking requesting for
Including Google homelessness
response teams that serve on
and investments in the mortgage
finance authority which are
matched exponentially by federal
funding we need thousands more
These programs are real and
pardon the pun concrete
investments like the support
people like Cheryl Anderson from
Gallup.
But not before she made Sheryl
promised that she would one day
purchased a home of her own
today with the help of New
Mexicos down payment assistance
children have a place to call
their forever home let's make
that available for every.
our state that's why I'm also
calling for a hundred and twenty
eight million dollars and water
infrastructure improvements
hundred forty six million
statewide broadband expansion an
our investments incredible
critical workforce development
and job training programs but I
believe and I know you do too
that New Mexicans of the fast
bring them life long careers now
in order to fill those new jobs
we have to help our students
develop the in demand skills
that they need and that thank
and every age well that is been
my priority since the first day
of my demonstration which is why
over the last four years we have
investments in child care and
early education are bringing
quality pre K. to three and four
year olds across the state and
our commitment to making
on a path to success.
And frankly years of being
Mexico now earns the highest
salaries in the southwest.
The opportunity scholarship is
providing free higher education
for New Mexicans of every age
college New Mexico college
enrollment has increased for the
first time in over a decade and
the number of first time time
students has grown by nearly ten
percent.
second highest college
enrollment came of any state in
the country.
Rating it's amazing new
possibilities and a new sense of
promise for what we can achieve
together are cradle to career
approach has been life changing.
Charlie will be turning three in
just a couple of weeks in his
wife needed access to high
quality childcare during hours
when they were both at work and
And will was worried the cost
would be impossible to afford.
The help of our child care
assistance programs expanded
state run day care right here in
Santa Fe that is a top not staff
and followed his work schedule
to our programs will is been
able to stop living paycheck to
Well thank you.
Challenge you that we should be
doing even more starting from
the beginning so to speak with
the universal child care.
internationally recognized early
childhood education Department
and trust fund and asked that
grows and with our new nation
We will provide child care and
early education for each and
everyone of our families by
investing more than half a
billion dollars in targeted
through twelve classrooms and
provide the resources are
teachers and administrators
required to do that work right
now too many kids are forced to
free meals for every student in
the state.
With an additional twenty
million investment in school
kitchens so they can offer the
freshen nutritious foods our
kids need to thrive we're going
this program New Mexico is
literally providing food for
thought.
Yeah.
support for special education
teachers because every student
deserves a world class
education.
I think we need to do more in
order to show our appreciation
for the amazing people who work
in our schools I'm also
In that we give them an
additional four percent raise
you know what we ought to be the
highest paid educators in the
United States.
learning without worrying about
their salaries being drained by
health care costs are quite
frankly anything else these
stability investments are
country to achieve those smart
Public Education fatal to career
investments so that's.
and it supports every student
every day in every classroom
across the state thought vision
not only is achievable.
Many of you know my dad was a
dentist he was one and I think
had no health care services of
any kind at all and growing up
my brother and I saw first hand
how many communities across the
underserved communities that we
thank you guys a great.
We created a health care
affordability fund that saves
New Mexicans money because they
We increased Medicaid
reimbursement rates we cap
monthly insulin copayments and
we are rebuilding our
behavioural health system after
build on that progress.
I want us to look again and
invest two hundred million to
establish a rural health care
delivery Fund.
There's so many of our partners
health this is a game changer
for these local investments from
places from Carlsbad and Clovis
We expanded Medicaid assisted
treatment so that we're taking
and tackling the really
and community safety services
that are frankly critical to
each and everyone of us in the
room.
twenty five thousand more
students in
in a minute you to make good on
our commitment to invest ten
We do that and we make it clear
to practitioners to women and
families that in every corner of
And we this is the big one.
And I say we create.
under one roof and brings us a
step closer.
To universal health care in New
Mexico.
New Mexico is the only state
where more than half the
population is on Medicaid
state and that's exactly what
this administration intends to
do building a healthier longer
living more prosperous New
Mexico where we can live for our
Thank you sheeting that
quality like we say we do and if
we believe in justice like we
say we do we ought to make sure
that every New Mexicans of every
background and circumstance can
from the federal government to
provide better benefits and care
for every single New Mexicans so
I propose that we declare right
Please hold transformative.
Life changing investments and
You and your family can't thrive
when you were worried about the
safety of your child in school.
detector.
There are elected officials in
this room today.
Whose homes and families were
shot at in this the global acts
John Allen and the state police
who are here today for working
quickly and tirelessly to
apprehend every single suspect
in these heinous attacks.
We have supported law
enforcement from day one to get
a thousand additional officers
in New Mexico communities and
make our state a safer place to
year it's the most in recent
memory.
And I'm a lot master what we're
preparing to train the largest
we provide law enforcement with
the tools they need to get the
job done.
Is clear that we have so much
more to do because quite
literally lives and livelihoods
And the lawmakers in this room.
This is a tough thing to ask
for.
Because frankly we all expect
The challenge you to do much
much more D. ease the burden of
crime being placed on far too
my view a rebuttable presumption
to make sure that high risk
violent offenders stay behind
bars before trial.
New Mexicans want the tools to
tackle organized crime and the
criminals who funded through
retail and commercial theft I
want to smash the syndicates
We will continue to expand our
police force to make sure our
law enforcement has the
personnel training and tools to
continue supporting the hiring
and training so we get to that
one thousand false law
enforcement officers all across
we're doing to address the
sickening scourge of gun
violence that is infected our
nation.
We all know that we cannot keep
our people safe thank you for
police officers and their
families safe if weapons of war
purchases of guns because people
with a history of violence
should not be able to exploit
the system to get a fire
they should.
to win on supervise minors which
has happened right here.
If we were bold and clear
pretty relentless I'm not going
to let up and I know there will
be other ideas and other
strategies I know that we're
gonna work together we're gonna
debate
this room who should lead up for
one minute in these debates and
efforts until New Mexico is the
And I want to make clear that
these efforts to keep everyone
too many lost lives not just gun
violence to other issues
accidents and for too many
fallen heroes in New Mexico and
you to meet any.
The need is husband Bernalillo
lost his life in a helicopter
accident alongside three others
under sheriff Larry current
deputy Michael Levinson and
Bernalillo county fire
Is that I can offer that really
do ease that loss for any of
that paying for any of those
families and so many beyond but
I believe New Mexico and I doing
includes five hundred thousand
dollars for the lieutenant Fred
beers honor guard memorial fund
to help New Mexico departments
purchase clothing flags and
police officers are not the only
state grid public safety
officials who were asked to risk
their lives for others we know
there are many women in the
military we also know that there
first responders including by
creating a state fund for the
families of firefighters killed
in the line of duty.
We have a sacred obligation to
heroes like Fred who put
themselves in harm's way and the
grateful for your service and we
will always stand by your side.
Always.
The danger to our first
responders the communities they
our state in these devastating
fires impacted frankly far more
than the thirty thousand people.
Thousands of others indirectly
and it is storing those lives
and livelihoods homes and
lifestyles which I said security
and stability our respondents
women in New Mexico who stood up
to support those residents.
New Mexico has already led.
By making sure this horrific
event does not occur in other
million for communities affected
by the hermits B. cap canyon
fire.
Those that we make sure that
that fund is available so that
we can begin rebuilding their
homes their lives or
infrastructure without waiting
for the federal government's
federal delegation getting two
point five billion which I think
I mention in a minute again so
you might have to hear it again
I apologize he's an amazing feat
because it's really clear about
we do not rest into the federal
Emergency Management Agency FEMA
does right by New Mexico we're
not going to stop as a program
taking care of them now and it
female wants to fight.
By the governor and the
legislature of the state of New
Mexico.
We know the fires were
intensified by stream weather
impact protect our environment
ramp up clean energy production
there are thirty by thirty
initiative we are guarding New
Mexico's natural resources
increased increasing access for
creating exciting clean energy
opportunities and jobs that are
powering our state.
enchantment legacy fund to
create sustained funding for
state programs that protect our
environment combat issues like
drought and water scarcity
address the roots of climate
This fund will bolster
initiatives like the river
stewardship program which
this generation and those to
follow Wall Street thing
strengthening our fragile
ecosystems you will support work
like the healthy soils program
which promotes resilient farming
resources to endeavors like the
outdoor equity fund.
Which allows young people from
every background and every
community to take advantage of
hundred and thirty organizations
that are introducing thirty
seven thousand young people to
transformational recreational
entire nation.
But ways we will also take
another step in our
sustainability efforts by
codifying our zero emission
school in state statute.
the coming months and years we
intend to design and implement a
range of projects and
initiatives to achieve just that
that critical.
bold and innovative spirit is
always driven New Mexico forward
in all these areas in all these
ways New Mexico is on the move
environment New Mexico is on the
move not rushing to catch up but
ready to continue to lead the
of extraordinary prospects of
the indescribable beauty and on
rival prosperity.
Of course I have no illusions
have no doubt that if we need
this moment we seize this
momentum that we can continue to
create the New Mexico we know
and we've always believed in we
every single new Mexican New
Mexico Family.
We can keep building economy in
security of natural beauty and
abundance a legacy of
possibility for all New Mexicans
ultimately that's what this work
is about that's who this work is
retention lexicon is for the
small business owner an artesian
who sees great things ahead if
they can get a little support a
little momentum to push them
forward for young people like my
as a land of boundless
possibility a place to build a
life for themselves and their
families it's for New Mexicans
filled with love and admiration
for we can.
And should be like all of us
these New Mexicans are just
thinking about today there's
thinking about tomorrow we do
progress for greatness for big
dreams to be made real a place
of wide open spaces where the
situation you come from doesn't
willing to dream it and design
it and work for it my god
deliver it tomorrow the sun will
rise over the land of
enchantment and from Silvercity
the journey that we have but on.
Thank you and god bless.
There's a big round of applause
for governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham.
Representative Chasey.
Mr chairman.
just a moment Mr chairman.
I ask unanimous consent that the
joint session of the house and
Senate being out in San.
regular business here in the
next twenty or so minutes please
house members stay close.
House bill one at some point as
