So we will put together we're
calling each office whether you
want to email packet or way
whether you want these package
hand delivered to your office I
will try to get him out the
night before early in the
morning if they can and that's
our goal.
And this is just an
organizational meeting to in
order to talk about how we want
to do this.
You want to proceed so I think
we'll start the first thing I'll
ask.
To introduce Christina
McCandless who has just
recording in progress Romero.
Has really done that.
Recording stopped.
And we have to wait until we get
the recording back in.
Is that true other people know
that I'm not sure of that but I
think that's pretty for an
organizational meeting I'm not
sure that's true you know Kelly.
Representative Fajardo I mean
I'm I don't think it's right
organizational meeting I really
don't think there's a question
that I think is disrespectful to
communities reported.
All right.
Wait again until we have this
recording on.
Reporting for.
Representative reported to be on
okay thank.
The sound is coming out I'm
sorry.
Reporting on yes okay all right
so I think the first thing I'll
do is at this Terry called real
estate.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Representative.
Representative.
Representative locked.
Here.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Andrea.
Senator.
Present Representative.
Present.
Representative Lujan.
What's the present okay okay got
thank you really
hard.
I'm sorry.
Representative Fajardo.
And I think you and
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Welcome everybody welcome to the
first organizational meeting
will get is that what get is
that colitis staff hopefully
even down by next time in as
organizational meeting I'm very
grateful for the membership I
have I think it's going to be a
great committee and looking
forward to the session also to
the interim with all of you and
I guess I guess since we've been
in COVID for almost two years
it's been hard lots of times for
people to get to know each other
and I just thought we might take
take a moment in a couple
minutes for everybody to kinda
introduce yourself tell
Tell us a bit about your
district and what your
expectations of our our this
committee and what you'd like to
see and why don't we start with
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you.
Work hard Representative alleged
County thank you for.
Rural area on the east side of
the river I'm in to me this
staff there which is like forty
five minutes.
I'm and so the area I represent
is very well a lot of farming
communities.
Provided as we make it here
thank I'm excited about this you
know one of the issues that we
always have an urban versus
rural and the role of these get
kind of site to site because
most of the representation in
Santa Fe art Irvin
Representative and they don't
really always understand the
issues that we're facing you
know they don't have to you know
slow down because there's a
tractor in the middle of the
road we do and so I need to
see some of the issues nine that
we're dealing with an address
and I do see as it is changed we
do business around the country
and more people are moving to
areas that need for
infrastructure.
The state so.
Here and.
The general areas thank you
madam chair.
Thank you now go to vice chair
Linda Serrato.
Hi everyone sorry about that
camera get that back having
internet issues right now but I
represent the legislation Senate
bay in a bit of the county as
well
my background is that would work
for a few years for now senator
Ben ray Lujan on his natural
resources and land grants issues
and so I know the number of the
communities in the north more a
less biggest across the internet
so it's been a real pleasure
being able to do that and
serving on this committee
committee with all of you all
I'm looking forward to it thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair we will now
go to Representative black.
Good morning madam chair
committee
Issues and you guys are cut it
out so.
How the.
so I am representative rich
black I represent district fifty
one point is out of order I
don't have any I can't really
say community is is.
Rural urban so it's it's kind of
a strange mix orders at a
smaller towns so I actually that
was on this committee for the
local government portion
my mic is my passion and I've
learned a tremendous amount on
land grants and in the history
of New Mexico and I look forward
to seeing here okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative black
Representative Castellano I'm
sorry I didn't.
Of the representative Ms
customized about district
seventy which with the new regs
redistricting incorporates us
seven gallon Torrance County hi
I really if those yes in being
in this committee you know.
We got a new chairwoman and that
you know I have land grants that
I represent in my communities
and like Representative Fajardo
said I think my main concern and
goal is that we help our rural
communities as much as we can
and that's who I represent is a
little community and I'm
ecstatic with the new committee
and welcome.
Madam chair.
Thank you thank you
Representative stay on
Representative Montoya.
Good morning madam chair and
congratulations on this post.
You have my firm commitment to
support your success as well as
all of our our work thank
absolutely agree that the rural
urban divide is fast.
Was recently told again by a
high level executives that.
The notion that when Los crucis
in Albuquerque or Santa Fe are
strong that rural areas are just
fine.
The notion that some sort of
trickle across effect is in.
I don't buy it I didn't buy it
from the beginning before I ran
an answer we don't now.
What are the key pieces that I
helped to initiate along on.
Representative Sweetser was the
creation of the world task force
we now have adopted a study
hundred fifty pages plus that
outlines an architectural.
Booklet.
That highlights the gaps the
needs.
Hope that that will drive this
new work I appreciate the name
rural development is the lead in
because I think it focus like a
laser that we have serious work
to do.
The fact that the by did
administration in our federal
leaders have pushed through
unimaginable funding as our
governor said it's time for us
to claim that we know that the
and equity is do.
We know the clear signs that we
have to focus on so I will I
will stop their by saying that.
Our land grants are foundational
to this state.
We also have to think how can we
modernize them in ways that will
protect them into perpetuity.
Thank you so much for the time
to speak out this morning and
what a joy this is going to be
to serve on this committee which
address yes.
Thank you very much
Representative and run to I just
now Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair school
juggling.
I'm.
Representative Terrazas monster
serve of house district forty
eight which is in Santa Fe
County this means that there are
metro thank you area and some
part of our county as well on
the south side of the way.
to the New South capital area so
I'm happy to service another are
here on this committee it's yeah
we did a lot of interesting
legislation last year and I'm
glad that we came back in and
and reformulated on kind of a
new title to.
So what we need to be focusing
on in our rural communities and
as part of the work that I've
done over you have more than ten
years of working in our northern
New Mexico counties and rural
communities I think this is
really
Essential time for us to
focusing on what's going on and
and really put our minds
together and and and look at the
legislation and and things are
coming down the pipeline so to
speak to see how we can really
the more.
But this is with with our
policies so I'm looking forward
to working with everybody and
getting
getting everyone together to to
really focused sent out on on
our rural communities on our
communities of interest and I'm
I'm I'm thankful for the
opportunity thank you.
Thank you Representative.
We're getting some background
noise I don't know if that so I
don't know who's that's coming
from but if you can mute
yourself based when you're not
on the speaker I think that will
help I'm Susan Herrerra
I'm I'm I'm very honored to take
over the chair of this committee
I am I'm filling big shoes I
drive a former chair Miguel
Garcia yesterday and I said
That we would still need his
help when it came to land grants
so he is like the professor of
land grants in the state and
the.
He said that he would be glad to
help I needed so I
Representative Senate district
forty one which is really the
rural North it says central
north New Mexico I represent the
county of Rio Rico almost all of
it now and.
three precincts and tell us and
one precinct in Santa Fe all of
it we I only have two cities in
my district that's Espanola and
trauma
my precincts inTaos are outside
the city of Taos it's really
that precincts north that the
blinking light rail Honda
between between quest at and the
billing what else used to be the
opening King Live in yes and I'm
I'm I'm very pleased that this
committee focuses on rural
development we have to leverage
your offices this study that was
done at the request of the rural
economic opportunities task
force
and that was delivered to all
your offices and I think it will
serve as a very well or the
interim meetings when we go I
would like to go through the
fourth quarter we're all
quadrants of the state in the
whole committee hearing center
and and talk about how we're
getting close together this you
know federal state local
Group so that we can get these
requests in so that we can
somehow let people know what's
available to them with the money
is and how we can access that
money and how we can bring that
cool and that's that's really a
critical part of that I think
this legislation certainly this
committee certainly will
continue to focus on land
requests and cultural affairs
which also brings huge economic
opportunities to rural parts of
our districts I think I think
the design is this committee is
going to service well and.
And before I go on I am now in
New introduced the staff and
have them tell you a little bit
about themselves I'm very happy
that we all together the staff
we did in such a short time and
I'll start with our new
committee director then we'll
take it a.
Your muted then we can't hear.
How about now yes all right.
Thank you madam chair
I don't know what do you want me
to talk about my educational
background my professional
background of both the.
Everything all right
educationally I just graduated
from high school in casa Grande
Arizona.
I just graduated from the
university of Arizona and three
and a half years double major I
beta Kappa I have a law degree
from Stanford University.
Professionally I work with the
department of the navy doing
business commercial out for
about two years I then went to
the hill and worked as a result
legislative assistant to
congressman Edward Roybal who
although he Representative
downtown and you still a was
actually in New Mexican and at
that time New Mexico had to
congressmen and he was known
unofficially as New Mexico's
third congressman.
I move to New Mexico after that
service and went into private
practice as an attorney.
And then my friend not Tony and
I I was then governor asked me
to come in B. W. secretary the
Human Services department which
I did and for the last five or
six months of Mr Nye's
administration I was the cabinet
secretary.
Went back to private practice
another friend of mine was
elected Attorney General Tom
Udall he asked me to be his
deputy chair I served as deputy
Attorney General for the state
for eight years when back to
private practice another friend
of mine governor bill Richardson
was elected.
He wanted me to lead the legal
bureau at the wrist Management
Division which is in charge
really a supervising forty or
forty five law firms under
contract to defend state
employees a state agencies were
in their shoes under the New
Mexico tort claims act.
I did that for a eight years
under governor Richardson in one
year under governor Martinez I
then retired.
And that's Friday another friend
of mine chairwoman Susan added I
became chairwoman of the
committee she asked me to be
staff director news you can see
from my history I have a
difficult time saying no to my
friends and they ask for help so
here I am here.
Thank you.
It's good to have you should now
we're all I don't know Capitol
Hill staffers about thirty then
Manuel was sacked I'm working
for
Edward Representative all and I
was director of the
congressional Hispanic caucus
with teacher so we do go back go
a long ways together and I'm
going to introduce
are major analysts said Shoshana
Shoshana can you come on.
Tough acts to follow hi everyone
I'm a newbie to New Mexico and
from New England originally and
lived in that at southeast for
awhile.
I have a masters in holistic
thinking and a law degree.
I am barred in New Mexico are
sort of the security just route
to get here it was generated
faces and I've spent my my
previous.
I'm doing social civil liberties
Human Rights I've lobbied and
Connecticut I've lobbied in
Nevada my background lobbying at
it encompass marijuana reform
and drug reform which led me
after law school to move out
west and I have been doing a lot
of regulatory and business
consulting in the cannabis
spaced for years I'm and have
stepped away from that not
completely but I'm I'm very
happy to be returning to policy
in a broader way than just
cannabis and I'm very much
looking forward to being able to
contribute whatever knowledge
and skills like and the work of
this committee thank you so
much.
Thank you.
I'm more minority analyst is is
that gentleman by the name of
Carl foster I have yet to meet
him we're trying to get him on
that I'm sure she'll be on by
the next meeting and I will be
meeting this morning and that so
I think I think we have a really
good group of representatives on
this committee and excited about
I think we have a great staff
and I'm want to start the
meetings on Tuesdays and
Thursdays at nine o'clock that's
okay with everybody and that we
will be calling you
later on today to see if you
want these hand delivered or set
up an email the night before and
a half I realize a lot of your
working for home so you can
download those ninety four and
read the bill said and the
analysis of the bills and the
night before early that morning
and if you're in the building
like I am and I think
Representative part of this will
hand deliver those packets okay
so we'll go through and we'll
call each one of you and make
sure that you're getting the
right information and you're
always free to call me and that
I've got all your cell phone
numbers thank you for that and I
think that's all I have to say
does anybody else want to add
anything.
Okay everybody we've got our
work cut out for us
You don't think of this is just
state Roger did you raise your
hand yes I I would like to say
just now is having both would be
very helpful hard copies at at
our offices and of course an
email version the night before
would be tremendous I don't know
if we just get that done right
now since we're all on.
Sorry.
What we don't have any bills yet
Roger just so you know I think
this one bill but I'm not even
sure it's online yet so I'm just
saying and it's starting up
pretty.
What what but that will do that.
I mean in terms people say what
they want is for on the call now
okay all right is what I'm
sorry.
Okay that's fine all right
misting
business I just want to thank
everybody for joining us this
morning and it turned out thank
you staff and
Aireon state everybody.
Everybody.
