Will call is closed we have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
Presented to us by.
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker let's bring
a regretful we come before you
this morning lower grateful that
we have the blessing of living
in the state and the nation we
have the opportunity gather
freely.
Lord to represent the people of
New Mexico and to work towards
improving everyone's life lord
and just bring got for your
wisdom for we know that we need
that greatly.
And we pray that you lead and
guide us and the lord and we
also bring this this maybe
asking for Mericle hand in a
sense but that we could.
Put aside party politics and
focus on things that that are
potentially impactful for for
all the New Mexico border I know
that your heart serves prefer
that's important we love it's
increasingly president.
Gentleman from current about go
a little bit Roosevelt and some
again Representative somewhat
for the pledge of allegiance.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
percent on your non of for the
pledge The New Mexico flag.
Playable.
Good morning members.
Happy Friday.
Good to see everybody.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
we go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business I see no objections so
ordered.
Announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Good morning Mr speaker
I am pleased to announce that I
have to guess the rostrum today
Alexis artery who's the
president of the New Mexico
society of professional
engineers.
And Janet Williams who is a
fellow with the society of women
engineers and just for all of
our members and they and their
organizations are providing a
boxed lunch today that will be
delivered by our sergeant of
arms box lunch from John those
so thank you very much and
welcome to our guests.
Thank you Julie.
Would you like to introduce them
by name.
Sorry I'll do that again on the
rostrum you can introduce okay
perfect and they should stand is
that right.
Excellent okay.
So Alexis artery is the
president of the New Mexico
society of professional
engineers she's a native New
Mexican from Albuquerque and has
a PhD in engineering systems
from MIT and she's a licensed
professional engineer a point of
interest her great grandfather's
home was where the capitol
building parking garages.
And then
G. as Janet Williams is a fellow
of the society of women
engineers the society promotes
girls to pursue engineering and
related fields throughout region
scholarships and promotes stem
education this is ít has awarded
more than one point two million
dollars in scholarships annually
thank you both.
The house of representatives.
For instance.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker I rise for a point of
personal privilege six point
thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker.
I believe that New Mexicans.
I believe that a student's
educational future should not be
determined by the zip code which
they're born into.
And I also believe that that our
parents in New Mexico
want more control over their
children's educational future.
And under New Mexico's current
system.
they're actually abundant
choices for families for their
their children's educational
future.
The problem though is that those
abundant options are are limited
to the wealthy among us.
And Mister speaker I think that
children who are born into the
poor or working class families.
They are the ones that.
Are limited to whatever school
happens to be within the zip
code in which they were born.
Some of those are great schools
some of those are
underperforming schools and some
of those it codes are are
extremely limited so maybe I'm a
student who is interested in in
specializing.
But there's no such high school
like that in my zip code.
And so Mister speaker I think
that we as a body should
consider this issue.
For the families that have
little to no resources for the
working families for the poor
families.
And that we should strive to
give more.
Educational options to parents
to give them more ownership over
their kids educational future
thank you Mr thank you John and.
A for their nonsense.
The gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval.
Is item one Representative
Lente.
Mr speaker good morning good
morning members I just want to
the because of my vice chairman
for taxation revenue is not in
the building that is under the
weather and let's make an
announcement if I may early on
that are taxed revenue committee
will meet on Monday at eight
thirty and we will have a
presentation on tax policy in
New Mexico thank you Mr speaker
members signal Digimon the
gentle lady from Los Alamos and
Santa Fe Representative Chandler
and Santa apologies
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker I'd like to alert
all we need to see you house
judiciary members that are room
has been changed from our normal
make reading meeting room to
room three fifteen.
So we'll be meeting in room
three fifteen.
Thank you David.
Gently from the house Mr speaker
my youngest seat the the the.
Will turn nine on Sunday.
She's really upset that her
birthday is during the session
it'll always be during the
session and I'm gonna do this
again in two weeks for the other
one so I would love for you Mr
speaker and the body to wish her
a Happy Birthday.
Happy birthday can we sing we
sing.
Please.
The the.
Legislative related to sing
Representative Chasey.
I will do that if everyone joins
in Mr speaker okay have petered
day to use that bureau the two
of you happy.
Bureau the two.
Thank you so much Mr speaker
gentle lady in the body.
Thank you gentle lady.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker Health Human Services
will meet Monday at eight
thirty.
Number signal the gentle lady
from the.
The lady from patrons in a
support role in but instead
representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker I just wanted
everyone to to know that today
is library legislative day here
at the legislature and without
libraries especially in rural
New Mexico where children gather
to use the internet to use the
books to actually be in town
possibly in my area for a couple
hours we would be in real dire
straits so I would hope that
everyone would support libraries
across America New Mexico and
America but New Mexico
specifically and I'd be Stover
is the librarian at the
Magdalena library and your at
the end of so many and they do
so much and I have to mention
shall not Niemeyer who is a true
advocate for libraries but the
chocolates on your desk come
from the rural libraries and
everyone should have received
their pen I believe in the power
of libraries so thank you Mr
speaker and I would also add
that the Republicans will be
having a caucus at the close of
the gavel before one thirty
hopefully thank you Mr chair
thank you gentle lady.
Other further announcements.
The gentle lady from Santa ready
of a in Los Alamos
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker through the magic
of our one to four clerk Lisa we
are back to our meeting rooms
three oh nine at one thirty
that's all it took so of the
committee members has come house
Judiciary three oh nine one
thirty.
Members signal.
Deleted from Santa Fe
representatives to Penske thank
you Mr speaker Mr speaker I just
wanted to introduce my shadow
for the day a she'll be with me
on and off during this session
her name is Validea Ramirez and
she's a senior at Santa Fe high
so if you all would help me
welcome her.
The lady from canton said US
court of answers and Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker I was
remiss in introducing some gas
welcome Julia Kaslo from Vista
Grande librarian from Eldorado
Teresa Ortiz Deming high school
library Lillian Chavis Mescalero
community library.
Samantha villa New Mexico State
University from Carlsbad and of
course ít Stover from the
Magdalene a library thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you Jim lady.
Like to recognize guests in the
gallery yes Representative block
we have been from with that
county with the organization
Lexus.
Welcome to the house.
Members I have I have news meant
and I'd like to a couple
announces first will remind you
that financial disclosure forms
or do electronically to this
because secretary of state's
office by Tuesday January thirty
first every state representative
must complete the form for
twenty twenty three and it needs
need to be submitted online
using surface once again
generate thirty first financial
disclosure forms due to the
secretary of state
also on social calendar we've
got New Mexico every Association
baby in the house and Senate
chambers and then there's a
reception tonight
at the Eldorado hotel invitation
only Mexico State University
alumni of the guest line by that
one.
I think the union ones later
enjoy and he's enjoyed members
I'd like to record digital
rostrum I've got a very special
guest with me today and and of.
His family and friends that are
here to join us but I'd like to
recognize somebody who has been
very important not only to me
but to the hundreds of thousands
of New Mexico used over the
years and that is Mr Vance go to
the doctor some of you might
also know him as coach for the
money's a legendary basketball
coach that coaching was with us
for many years and then the
Albuquerque academy he has been
a mentor to many people and a
great basketball mind if you
have any questions about the
game of basketball for
mathematics he's the person to
talk to and I do have a
certificate that will be read
and I'd like it to be read right
now thank you.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes the in support of a
whereas Vince quarter by a rural
remarkable educator coach mentor
and community advocate who has
worked tirelessly to improve
public an independent education
and to expand opportunities for
students and people with
disabilities throughout
Albuquerque and beyond and
whereas been screwed up in the
whole area and attended the
university of Albuquerque and St
Joseph's college receiving his
bachelor's degree and residents
also received two master's
degrees in education from the
university of New Mexico and
we're as a budget taught high
school math and coached
basketball and track in Los
Lunas for ten years and
residents maintenance most
significant impact or teaching
math at Albuquerque academy from
nineteen sixty nine to two
thousand two and whereas Vince
provided advanced educational
opportunities for countless
under represented students by
creating and expanding the
diversity equity and inclusion
program at Albuquerque academy
and whereas with Vince's vision
and leadership thousands of
students were brought into the
fold of Albuquerque academy who
may not otherwise have had the
means to attend the school.
And we're as part of his vision
included creating Albuquerque
academy summer honors program
and developing parent support
groups for native American
African American and Hispanic
parents to better understand the
needs and experiences of
students of color within the
independent school system and
we're as Vince also coached
basketball and track them of the
nineteen seventy eight to
nineteen eighty one and nineteen
eighty four Albuquerque academy
boys basketball teams to win
three state championships and
whereas with the creator of the
Bernalillo county summer
recreation programs which
extended educational supports
and supplemental services to
young children across the
country and we're as other
community community commitments
included serving on boards of
many organizations including
partnership for community action
the national association of
independent schools A. RCA and
Special Olympics and we're
Aspin's also served on the
admission committee of the
university of New Mexico New
Mexico School of Medicine
bachelor of arts and doctor of
medicine degree program and
whereas Vince as also work
tirelessly to advance the needs
an expensive this is for people
with disabilities which included
for members included working to
establish Kerr poems for adults
with disabilities to live
independently.
It was part of the effort to
pass federal legislation to
protect students with
disabilities and to allow every
child to learn within the
confines of the child's
abilities and we're as Vince was
a leader in organizing and
hosting the national association
of independent schools people of
color conference in New Mexico
in nineteen ninety four and
residents has also been a guest
speaker at multiple national
conferences to share the
importance of instructions to
implement diversity and
inclusion in education and
residences work both the public
and private education and across
the community has all been
framed within the vision of
advancing the education of
students of color and providing
more representation and services
to do to individuals with
disabilities and residents has
served as a mentor for many
community organizing advocates
sharing his visions and
strategies for building a more
equitable society now therefore
be it resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the recognition to
extended to bins court of a a
few years an effective advocate
for children students and people
with disabilities sign in sheer
but the capital in the city of
Santa Fe.
Thank you
thank you Mr Cordoba coach
quarter of
and I'd like to give the
opportunity to any member of the
house if they wish to speak or
or state
words of encouragement to to
coach for about a please do so
now and I'd like to yield to the
gentleman from.
Valencia reserve Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you for the support actually I
just confirm that Mr Cordoba
coach quarter was actually my I
my dad's basketball coach in
nineteen sixty three nineteen
sixty four and most honest and
so I've heard about him he's a
legend it it's great that he may
and we have this opportunity to
thank him for his contributions
to athletes about school players
and the learning institutions
across the state so.
Mr Cordoba thank you.
The gentleman to also recognize
some of miss of is guess you
with us today is his wife of
many many years then we go to
the doctor.
His daughter Lorraine Porter
behinds.
His grandchildren Russ increase
Hines.
His granddaughter and he got or
the gun.
In his friends and colleagues on
a good C. in of them but also
welcome to the house of
representatives saying
congratulations miss a.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative but.
Thank you Mr chair I would like
to congratulate Mr court of a
foreigner keeping our children
involved in sports I think it's
really important especially this
day and age that we encourage
our our children to stay
involved as much as possible and
I just wanted to mention to you
that my grandmother board but
was a court of us so ninety
somehow be related so we'll have
to investigate that a little
further thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Any other announcements.
The gentleman from doing in
Representative small thank you
very much Mr speaker I have to
announcements Mr speaker first
house appropriations and finance
our subcommittees will meet
today at one thirty Mr speaker
one will be in room three zero
seven I apologize I'm looking at
my phone Mr speaker the other
will be in room three fifteen so
HSC subcommittees also Mr
speaker members just a brief
announcement please be on the
look out as we go through this
weekend for an email from the
house appropriations and finance
committee staff Mr speaker we
will be again doing a
supplemental appropriation where
amounts for each the house
district are available this is
also known as junior Mr speaker
members the email will have
details and guidelines that
focus on impact on efficiency
and transparency Mr speaker what
more to discuss but I just
wanted to flag for members keep
an eye on that we do were very
fortunate to have
caucus chair ranking member
Armstrong vice chair Dixon
myself as any sort of questions
come forward and of course our
credible house appropriations
and finance committee staff and
the individual staff for both
caucuses thank you very much Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen
could further announcements.
Right.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
on Winston.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation see no objection
it is so ordered of all of.
House bill four introduced by
Representative how they're
Martinez Representative Chasey
Senator Duhigg and
Representative Johnson and act
relating to you elections in
amending and acting automatic
voter registration and updates
to registration provisions.
I see the driver's license voter
registration provisions of
repealing and replacing the
registration and voting location
prior to voting provisions
defining the unlawful use or
disposition of further data
billing labels are special order
list the use and disposition of
further information providing
that inmates are at eligible to
vote and register to vote upon
release eliminating a
requirement the voter's
registration be cancelled upon
felony conviction and confirming
the restoration of citizenship
provision accordingly creating a
voluntary phone Terry permanent
absentee voter list providing
requirements for the provision
of monitored secured containers
and acting the native American
voting rights act to protect
polling place access and address
other election issues involving
borders on Indian nation tribal
and pueblo land declaring the
day of the general election and
the regular local election a
school holiday making conforming
and technical changes amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight house bill four introduced
by Representative how they're
Martinez Representative Chasey
Senator Duhigg and
Representative Johnson House
Bill for having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee prevents the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to thirteen
introduced by representatives
care at lunch from and brown and
act relating to public projects
and acting the public private
partnership act allowing public
partners to enter into public
private partnership agreements
to facilitate public projects
creating the public private
partnership board creating the
public private partnership
project fund providing for an
exemption to the procurement
code authorizing grants loans
and bonds providing powers and
duties of providing a delayed
repeal requiring reports house
bill two thirteen introduced by
representatives Garrett
Lundstrom and brown House Bill
to thirteen have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house transfers
transportation public works.
And infrastructure committee.
Thanks committee apologies
advance the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill two fourteen
introduced by Representative
small and act making general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures by state agencies
required by law house bill two
fourteen introduced by
Representative small house bill
two fourteen have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to fifteen introduced
by Representative Rubio and act
relating to insurance directing
the workforce solutions
department to study and provide
recommendations on issues
relating to providing
unemployment insurance or wage
replacement to unemployed
workers who are ineligible for
insurance benefits making an
appropriation house bill two
fifteen introduced by
Representative Rubio.
Fire house bill two fifteen have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
thence the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House Bill to sixteen introduced
by Representative G. Andrés
Romero and representatives
Roybal Caballero Trujillo these
at all and more about Maria.
An act relating to education
providing for the legislative
education study committee to
study issues pertaining to New
Mexico's public educational
system House Bill to sixteen
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero and
representatives Roybal Caballero
Trujillo he's L. and we're about
million House Bill to sixteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education
Committee.
The house bill two seventeen
introduced by Representative
Trujillo New York has an act
relating to elections permitting
persons sixteen and seventeen
years of age to be qualified
electors repairing sections of
the NMSA nineteen seventy eight
House Bill to seventeen
introduced by Representative
Trujillo and Ortez House Bill to
seventeen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections in in an Affairs
Committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to eighteen
introduced by Representative
Ortez Senator Stewart and
Representative Rubio Lente and
Borrego and act relating to
public utilities requiring
certain public utilities to
provide affordable latest
affordable rates too low income
residential customers requiring
the public for regulation
commission to establish criteria
for affordable rates House Bill
to eighteen introduced by
Representative Ortez Senator
Stewart and representatives
Rubio Lente and Borrego House
Bill to eighteen have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then it's the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to nineteen
introduced by Representative
Chavez how to meal and Matthews
and act relating to children
requiring the children youth and
families department to implement
caseload standards for
investigating case workers
permanency planning workers in
home services providers and
placement workers requiring the
children youth and families
department to provide additional
compensation when the department
does not adhere to caseload
standards hospital to nineteen
introduced by Representative
Chavez a meal and Matthews the.
House bill two one nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee advance the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to twenty introduced
by Representative Cates how to
meal and Thompson and act
relating to taxation creating a
gross receipts tax deduction for
environmental modification
Services made to the homes of
Medicaid recipients House Bill
to twenty introduced by
representatives Cates how to
meal and Thompson.
From the house bill two twenty
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee thence the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House Bill to twenty one
introduced by Representative
Lord and act relating to crime
providing for exposure of a
child to schedule one or
schedule two controlled
substance to constitute child
abuse providing for taking
newborn children into temporary
protective custody under certain
circumstances house bill two
twenty one introduced by
Representative Lord
House Bill to twenty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to twenty two
introduced by Representative
Trujillo Hernandez Dixon Serrato
and of course and act relating
to taxation creating a gross
receipts tax deduction and
governmental gross receipts tax
deduction for the sale of
diapers House Bill two twenty
two introduced by Representative
Trujillo Hernandez Texan Serrato
and I'm calling.
House Bill to twenty two have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed on the front of
the house health and Human
Services Committee thence the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House Bill to twenty three
introduced by representatives
Brown Nyberg ECL Townson and
Mason and act making
appropriation from the
appropriation contingency fund
to the department of
transportation for
infrastructure projects and
certain portions of United
States United States highway
three eighty and New Mexico
highways thirty one and one
twenty eight House Bill to
twenty three introduced by
representatives Brown diverted
T. cell counts and and Mason
house bill two twenty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed on the front
of the house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee advanced
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill two twenty four
introduced by Representative
Garrett Senator Hickey and
Representative little and act
relating to crime creating the
crime of unlawful carrying of a
firearm within a high population
jurisdiction and while under the
influence of an intoxicant or
narcotic amending and enacting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight House Bill to
twenty four introduced by
Representative Garrett Senator
Hickey and Representative a
little.
House Bill to twenty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer and public
affairs committee invents the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill two twenty five
introduced by Representative
Castellano and redeem an act
relating to crime revising the
definition of a criminal offense
for the purpose of the victims
of crime act to include certain
crimes against a peace officer
house bill two twenty five
introduced by representatives
Castellano and re.
House Bill two twenty I have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer public
Affairs Committee then it's the
house insurance committee.
Full house bill two twenty six
introduced by Representative
Lara an act relating to
procurement exempting certain
purchases of instructional
materials from the procurement
code excluding the purchases of
instructional materials from
procurement through the state
purchasing agent House Bill two
twenty six introduced by
Representative Lara House Bill
to twenty six have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
state house appropriations and
finance committee.
Of house bill two thirty
introduced by Representative
Ferrary Senator Sedillo Lopez
Representative Johnson Senator
Pinto and representative
Thompson and act relating to
taxation increasing liquor
excise tax rates eliminating
rate differentials for
microfibres small wine growers
and craft distillers indexing
the rates to inflation
distributing a portion of the
revenue from the tax to a new
alcohol alcohol harms at Levi
ation Fund can get appropriation
house bill two thirty introduced
by Representative Ferrary
Senator Sedillo Lopez
Representative Johnson Senator
Pinto and representative
Thompson.
House bill two thirty have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee vents the house
taxation and and Revenue
committee.
House joint resolution ten
introduced by Representative
Borrego a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
article eight section five of
the constitution to Mexico to
increase a property tax
exemption for honorably
discharged from members of the
armed forces and their widows
and widowers house joint
resolution ten introduced by
Representative Borrego.
Scale down.
House joint resolution ten
amendment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
more.
The house government.
Elections in in the Affairs
Committee this House excision
and Revenue committee.
House memorial twelve introduced
by Representative these L. A.
memorial recognizing cowboys for
cancer research for its
contributions to cancer research
in New Mexico in declaring March
tenth twenty twenty three
Calvary's for cancer research
today in the house of
representatives House memorial
twelve introduced by
Representative these L..
House memorial twelve having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
All.
Following okay thank you.
Gentlelady from.
Leo Representative Chasey.
Budget.
The
HSD Mr speaker we go that order
of business committee reports
in addition it is so ordered.
Yeah.
The fact that there are benefits
are.
Mr speaker your consumer and
public affairs committee to whom
is been referred house bill one
thirty one has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and then just referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
We are adoption of a federal
committee report for house bill
one thirty one all those in
favor say aye Representative
night.
Opposing the eyes have it could
report adopted.
Mr speaker agriculture as sick
as and water resources committee
to Mr referred house bill one
fifty three has had it under
consideration report same
without recommendation and the
answer for to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Susan K. and at a chair we are
on adoption.
The report without
recommendation for for house
bill one fifty three.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose name the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to is been
referred house bill thirty two
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that do pass as amended in
answer for to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are on adoption referral
Committee port for House Bills
thirty to all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those bills may the eyes have it
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to was referred house bill sixty
seven has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it do not
pass that House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill sixty seven do
pass an answer for to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair.
To go door to.
We're down here on Mr speaker
move adoption it could also
generated we are on adoption of
an unfavorable committee report
on house bill sixty seven but a
favorable committee report on
house energy and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill sixty seven all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose may.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business intervention it is so
ordered.
Members I believe a delicious
box lunch has been delivered to
your deskside.
On the enjoy.
Members electrifying the capital
outlay projects will be due next
Thursday February second you
should already received the
project listing your email from
the capital outlay division of
Legislative Council Service
please review this with you
provided assistance about your
form is ready for submission
next Thursday.
With
any other else was a gentle lady
from.
someone in Santa Fe and also
tells Representative it at a
thank you Mr speaker the
committee on agriculture a
second is and water resources
will meet next Tuesday morning
at nine o'clock.
Members take note any other
announcements committee meetings
happening this weekend or next
week early on Monday.
The gentleman from Santa Fe and
from.
Santa Fe Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee will
meet Saturday at nine o'clock
the bills are on the golden rod
thank you Mr speaker.
Neglect the from the chamber.
Thank you chairman members
signal to any other
announcements.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative set up it'll
thank you Mr speaker of your
house commerce and economic
development committee will meet
today at one thirty in room
three seventeen and again on
Monday at one thirty in room
three seventeen will have a
couple bills rolled over but
we're getting through thank you
thank you delay members take
note any other announcements I
believe there is a Republican
caucus after the floor session
gentle lady from.
Caption Santa Fe sport of an
answer Representative Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker I hate to
be repetitive but yes there will
be a Republican caucus
immediately following the floor
session in room three eighteen
members signal
generator the Democrats invited
to the meeting.
No thank you.
Members take note.
Any other announcements.
Members next Tuesday Wednesday
and Thursday it is picture day
at the Legislature wear your
Sunday best call in your hair
it'll take place in the lounge.
Please.
Believe me when I tell you you
don't want a bad picture of your
freshman year because it'll be
there forever.
And no one will ever take it
down a picture day next Tuesday
Wednesday Thursday in the
lounge.
The lady from Santa Fe reserve
role metal thank you Mr speaker
your house Judiciary Committee
will be meeting at one thirty PM
we have several bills to discuss
IT help will defer to the madam
chair if we are hearing anything
over the weekend I don't know
yet thank you madam Mr speaker
additionally member signal any
other announcements.
Investments going once going
twice.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move the home stand
in recess until eleven on Monday
morning that is January twenty
nine the thirtieth to thirty
three thank you for take that
motion thank you members for a
great day good productive floor
session and the rest your day I
do have a question wiser Senator
on the floor.
Hi Senator.
Hi Senator.
Welcome to the house.
Members there's a motion.
For now stand in recess until
eleven o'clock on Monday.
I see no objection it is so
ordered have a great weekend go
eagles.
