You have thirty seconds to a
poll or approach in opposition.
Okay.
Okay it looks slide.
Like our call has ended and
we're doing this now and what
changes are you making to
employment and support.
Okay we have completed our poll
for how house joint resolution
twelve and we have thirteen and
support and to an opposition.
And now we will go to.
Representative Lord and to
present your bill and introduce
your expert witnesses.
Thank you madam chairman make
sure everybody hear me.
Okay I got I got I can see
Representative is a more shaking
his head up and down.
Okay is Representative Pettigrew
and as analyst.
I am on okay.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative
my other experts today our our
entire state of New Mexico and
the constitution I also have my
husband here the record he's
retired he's also sitting next
to me is very familiar with this
bill as he sat with me the whole
process of drafting agency and
my co sponsor Representative
Pettigrew is here today as well.
So madam chair I want to tell
you and the rest you why I have
presented this joint resolution
to you today.
I have traveled all over the
state of New Mexico as an
activist and as a candidates
I've been rallies in defense of
and large and small gathers
gatherings and consistently
there been three complaints that
I've heard from people across
the state one they really want
to stop tax initial security
benefits.
The other question is we're
concerned if their vote is being
counted correctly and the third
I hear consistently is why did
not have the ability to recall
politicians.
Now what do you mean by the
recall is we do have a limited
recall ability in New Mexico
constitution article ten section
nine says that elected official
over Chianti is subject to
recall by the voters of that
county.
However we also voters whether
they really need what they're
talking about is there
frustrated that they don't have
the ability to recall
legislators they mean that
they're frustrated that they
don't have the ability to recall
public officers and executive
legislative branches they need
that they're frustrated they
can't recall the secretary of
state or the AG or the governor
anybody else they want to.
People are what they mean is.
We are currently exempt from
being recalled.
Honestly I agree with them
hundred percent I feel the same
way it feels pretty elitists
that we are being excluded from
being recall.
If we have legislators make
campaign promises.
And then both the opposite of
what we separate deal.
We have to ensure that people
and that would include a recall.
If I don't show up to the
roundhouse if we don't do the
job we said we're going to do if
we do anything that our
constituents feel that we are no
longer Representative that they
should have the right to be
called us recall is very
important way for constituents
to make their voices heard.
I just like any other job.
They have the right there are
bosses they have the right to
fire us at any time.
I want to address we do have
impeachment.
Management requires a crime
misdemeanors and malfeasance it
doesn't stay for it says ANZ
crimes misdemeanors and office
equipment the sole power to
impeach rest in the house of
representatives but the crimes
misdemeanors no fate malfeasance
is tried by the Senate with a
two third majority which pretty
much is assuring that no one's
ever gonna get impeached.
The problem is impeachment
doesn't give the power back to
the people for a long.
As for costs we spend a lot of
money after the round house this
past week millions of dollars in
bills of castor committees I
just recommend things that we
from money at however this bill
is for the people.
Majority of people New Mexico
want the ability to have recall
that we should give them the
option to vote for the ability
to recall.
And this bill is very close to
the bill that passed in Colorado
what Colorado did which I
completely agree with.
As a added paragraph when you do
that additions that tells people
exactly how much it's going to
cost to do this I think it's
fair this is taxation without
representation as a people are
made aware that my sinuses
acting assistant cost and we can
do the same thing here in New
Mexico.
All of us here answered for
extensions we all know that we
can't make everyone happy
because voters have different
opinions on issues however the
office we become someone that we
didn't percent ourselves as
candidates and make that
policies for boaters New Mexico
then the people should have the
right to fire us.
People deserve the right to
remove anyone from office is not
doing their job and this process
is not easy someone has to go
out and get twenty five percent
of the voters for the state of
the district.
I like what Colorado did by
adding that you have to include
the information the cost that to
get the signatures to be
verified after percent argument
the recent recall process goes
the people and they get to have
their voice heard and that's
what matters the most.
Marcus is defined by as
government by people majority
rule and recall is democracy in
action with that I yield for
questions Alliance
Representative Pettigrew has
something to say before what's
that portion.
Representative thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Lord for you
for your.
Intro I think everything's on
point
Madam chair committee members.
Make it clear I'm an engineer
I'm not an attorney I didn't
play one on TV.
But what I can do is
Representative the constituent
voice that I that I hear
consistently.
Madam chair committee members
this bill should be nonpartisan.
Bill.
It's this bill is not in my
opinion about retaliation.
It's about voter rights.
And elected official
responsibility to their
constituents.
Madam chair and committee
members I I take you first to
article two section three of our
bill of rights.
Three sentences state the people
of the state and the sole and
exclusive right to govern
themselves is a free and
sovereign independent state.
As I look at that we talk about
us new state of New Mexico being
an independent state.
The first part of the students.
The people of the state have the
sole and exclusive right to
govern themselves granted
there's no comment there.
I think that's very important to
look at with respect to are we
truly allowing them to govern
themselves.
All the way through the process.
We'll be arguments today madam
chair and and committee members
that yes the L. we have a recall
election every two four years
and our child to serve them.
But I think that needs to we we
need to expand that capability
for voters.
Madam chairman and committee
members also.
Point used to article four
section one.
Which stocks very clearly about.
As voters we have the ability
now.
If we disagree with the bill
that's been charter.
To try and and change that
legislation.
So I look at this we have the in
our statute we have our
framework.
That voters can actually come
back after bill's been charter
and attempts to change that.
Process change that bill no
there's there's a whole bunch of
exemptions with respect to that
I and and I understand those
exemptions.
But
I do believe that.
Just like we have with respect
to being able to change
legislation from from the light
towards electric motor electric
standpoint we need to be able to
do the same thing with our
legislators.
I also believe the probably
today there may be some
arguments that
This is an attempt to create.
Direct representation.
Rather than maintaining our
representative democracy.
I don't think that that's true
providing this process where we
haven't engaged elector we can
voice that can voice their
concerns that are being properly
represented represented by their
elected official.
This change would strengthen our
representative democracy.
Madam chair and thank committee
members we have nineteen states
in the United States for
currently have the ability to
recall their elected officials.
Mrs again like I said this is a
part of some deal those are
strongly held.
Conservative areas strongly
held.
Democratic.
I think this process which good
I think it's process with the
state needs yes there is an
expensive goes along with it the
As I look at this and expense
allows our.
Constituents are voting
electorate.
To have their voice heard at
whatever time in the process
they want is is critical to us
to be truly be a representative
democracy thank you madam chair
thank you committee members for
allowing
us to present this bill today.
Thank you Representative and
that representatives and
colleagues I.
I yes I didn't have enough
coffee this morning and started
with the poll so now we I just
pardon me my apologies now we
will go to public comment.
And just see if we have any
comments supporting or opposing
the bill and we will start with
comments supporting the bill.
I will begin with John block.
And then there are you and
meeting on here and.
Thank you can hear me.
Hi my name is John block I am an
Alamogordo resident and the
native New Mexican and I am
supporting Representative Lord
bill I think that the recall
process is important to New
Mexico I think that it as an
added layer of accountability so
that our elected leaders cannot
as vote however they like and
then just say well I'll just
wait till an election year where
I can just put these things
under the rug right now I think
it's a not really a good system
that we have allowing
impeachment being the only thing
that holds people accountable in
our legislature and in our
executive branch and I think
that this added layer of
accountability would give the
people a lot more voice and it
would give the people the
ability to recall their elected
officials now I'm pretty sure
this is not gonna be use a lot
this is gonna be used very small
periods of time but I think it's
crucial that we have that right
because it gives more power back
to the people so I appreciate
you for considering this bill
and urged passage of this
legislation by Representative
four thank you.
Thank you next we have can
straddling.
Hello.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
This is actually under
struggling I am calling from
florist in New Mexico up in
Farmington and we are very much
my husband and I of support in
support of this bill we have
watched the last few years as we
have not had much of a real
voice with our representatives
they have not had the
opportunity to
We are our and I would like to
dryer attention to the
governmental conduct Act NMSA
nineteen seventy eight chapter
ten article sixteen it's a
compliance guide Hector Balderas
are Attorney General in New
Mexico.
Wrote.
Is an ethical and democratic
government encourages
participation by the people in
nature and in Mabel's people to
examine how public officials and
employees perform their public
duties and hold all government
actors to equally high standards
when public officers and
employees know that the public
joins them and keeping
government open and honest
everyone is safer in the
government is healthier.
I bring your attention also to
The federal estate papers in
particular letter number fifty
one the script structure of the
government must furnish the
proper checks and balances
between the different
departments.
From the New York package Friday
February eight seventeen eighty
eight the author was Alexander
Hamilton or James Madison the
federalist number fifty one
addresses means by which
appropriate checks and balances
can be created in government and
also advocates the separation of
powers within the national
government fifty ones most
important ideas is an
explanation of checks and
balances and is often quoted
phrase ambition must be made to
counter act.
Thank you next we have
Representative Kokkinakis.
Thank you madam chair this is
Breck okay not as recalls are an
important part of our democracy
in fact watching the recall
events in California against
governor Newsom was democracy in
action nineteen states have this
ability to recall the recall
elected officials in New Mexico
voters must have this right our
elected representatives will be
less likely to make unpopular
decisions if it may make them
more likely to be subject of a
recall campaign directed
democracy provides voters with
the continued opportunity to
make a democratic decision about
who governs them participate in
the government and since we only
have one opportunity every three
to five years to elect people
who will represent them well the
elected retain a degree of
control over their decisions for
the duration of the office this
is an extremely important part
of legislation process I urge
you to support Representative
lord's house joint resolution
twelve thank you.
Thank you next we have Gary
Kirsten.
Amanda can you have fun you.
Thank.
Mr Pearson you need to New York
on your end thank you very much.
I am in support of the recall
bill lecture Act representatives
work for the people as any
player can the people should be
allowed to fire the people
working for it this bill is
passed our elected
representatives will be less
likely make unpopular decisions
making our elected officials
more likely the subject of a
recall campaign recall will
provide voters with the
continued opportunity make
democratic decisions about who
governs them since thank you not
only have one opportunity every
two to four years to the elected
people who will react
Representative them but Rick K.
need degree of control over the
decisions for the duration of
their office nineteen states
allow recall elections this bill
is very similar to the recall
bill passed in Colorado and
should move through this
committee and go for a full vote
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have terra.
Thank you
Slide fire putting this bill out
there and
I am in support of it I also
would like to see like
judicial.
Employees of judges and stuff
like that be able to be voted
we have a choice and who are
judges are or chief judges
instead of their friends voting
on them without us even knowing
so I am in support of this bill
because
When our when our like
government who we elected to or
who the people elected to be
running our government when
they're not doing what they say
it's very disappointing or when
they're not doing what they is
that
When they are doing things that
appear to be.
The the the regular there people
would get in trouble for they
are still in office continuing
to do the thing and I feel we
should be able to have a state
if we want them in government
and I appreciate it thank you.
That's all.
Thank you next we have.
Rhianna direct.
Hi good morning my name is to be
on a direct line and house
district twenty one and I am in
support of the bill the agency
that led up Representative Lord
is but for each of for the exact
reasons everyone is that the
system of checks and balances I
I I don't need to rehash that
but what I want to point out is
that during this COVID shut down
and we may not be an emergency
shut down but a knowledge sex we
are going through a shut down
where we cannot the people
cannot access our legislator
madam chair we can actually see
one person we have to do so by
zoom and that is unfair to the
whole system of being able to
return representatives when a
representative is elected into
office the due at signing at at
these they swear themselves and
to serve the people to be a
servant and in cases where they
are not either up solving that
Their oaths or they are unable
to fulfill that
speech there should be a system
in place for the people to come
back and say yes we bill ever
call is appropriate in this
situation and therefore we don't
have that and therefore it
should be instilled and part of
law that is my comment and and I
think that that is very
important part as holding our
specials accountable as far as
their Oakes I I think that's I
was just at this time but I
believe that that is a key part
of being a sworn in
Representative of the people
because they are representation
of the body of the whole of the
district thank you.
Yes good morning and thank you
for hearing me I am not an
eloquent speaker like many of
the.
Previous speakers however I am
in support of this bill
especially in this time of
COVID.
As Representative.
I believe mentioned.
We have little access to our
representatives and.
Pretty much no access at all to
the roundhouse.
especially if we live at a
distance and don't meet the
requirements.
For the past several years I
have felt totally
disenfranchised.
And I believe.
That this joint resolution will
help ease that feeling amongst
not only myself but other voters
and it will encourage more
participation in government by
the people.
Anyway as I said I'm not
eloquent but I am in support of
this bill thank you for hearing
me.
Thank you next we have Josh what
James.
Hello this is Josh with James.
I am in support of this bill
thank you very much Stephanie
lord.
But I will point to to article
twenty two section nineteen of
the New Mexico constitution.
And before this bill can even
take place we must first have
our elected officials uphold the
electoral process of New Mexico.
That is you get elected by your
leftovers and then you take your
oath of office and then you have
thirty days to to get your oath
personally bonded with what's
called an elected official bond
which can be purchased for about
a hundred fifty dollars at many
local insurance companies we
only have three elected
officials in the entire state in
New Mexico that up held this
process those are three
sheriff's therefore every other
elected officials forfeited
their elected office after
thirty days of not getting that
bond.
So the only way that this recall
could happens first we must have
elected officials are bonded the
blanket bond that is currently
in use has been rolled down
three times in our history by
the Supreme Court the last time
was in Nebraska.
Those three elected officials
that are officially in office
our share Ferrari of San Juan
County.
Here Schaefer of quake county
ensure Hamilton of Sierra
County.
I am running for Bernalillo
county sheriff we will make sure
that all candidates it's a poll
this electoral process once
again thank you Stephanie lord
and all those in support of up
holding the New Mexico and the
United States constitution and
our bill of rights thank you
very much.
Thank you next we have Daniel
thanks.
See I done this correctly.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you committee members.
This is an important issue.
You heard people talking about
the effect on them individually
COVID COVID shut downs and
particularly the restrictions
for attending.
Our legislative sessions
committee hearings when bills
are being presented when they're
being debated.
The public the electric has been
excluded I want to zoom call I
can't see any of you I can't see
any of your reactions I can't
hear any of your side comments
to each other.
I we can't participate there is
no meaningful participation by
the electric in this process.
Your resolution provides a
stimulus for our legislative
body our individual legislators
to respect the wishes of their
constituents it.
Every one of them thought that
all my gosh I could be recalled
if I support this exclusion of
our citizenry in the legislative
process maybe they would think
twice before going forward with
such a process I heard you don't
adopted passes resolution thank
you for your state.
Thank you next we have a
Rebecca.
Good morning my name Rebecca
Allen and I want to think that
the need for bringing forth the
bill.
I think needed to happen for
quite a long time and I'm I
definitely support all the
previous comment but admit been
made actually the the previous
point me we the people are
supposed to be in charge of the
government and the country was
founded on that principle.
We've been excluded from our
government for a couple of years
now we're not allowed to be seen
at that meeting of our
government which we the people
are to be at the highest level
and in charge of our commitment
and our representatives are put
into office to represent us
they're not being charged us
you're in charge now we will not
allow Danny and enter the brown
cow we're not allowed to attend
meeting we have to do the
meeting by the team call in
which we cannot see each other
with each other thank here
Representative thank.
All of that is part of
communication.
Yes I'm in favor of the bill I
think there needs the
accountability when
Representative are no longer
doing the will of the people we
need to recall when we need to
get rid of them and we need to
be able to bring in someone that
will do the job that we want.
Thank you very much.
Thank you next we welcome to
opposing COVID.
Anybody and attendees list.
I don't see any so committee
members.
Representative Eli I thank you
madam chair yes I.
I I mean really conflicted by
this because on the one hand
the we call
Provisions sorry.
from the down
were actually passed in this
country are around states in the
early nineteen hundreds as part
of a progressive government
movement to reform government I
I I mean I have to be candid
about it and say the
presentations by the public I I
just totally disagree with I
mean they they can come to the
roundhouse we do have a pandemic
having said that
I as much as I dislike some of
those comments I I have to say
that I respect the idea that
There should be a way other than
impeachment.
Of what we calling officials I
just don't want that to be just
a continue Alexion process
because people don't like the
policy so what stops
Representative warder
Representative Pettigrew maybe
you know a lot of these people
that were on the zoom you know
struck me as people that just
didn't like policy of what the
governor was doing or the
legislature and no they would
recall because they disagreed
with her and so the question
really is is how do we stop that
we are but or or do we stop that
I'm not rich the people have
honest principled disagreements
with an elected official should
that be the subject of a recall
many people say well I don't
want to wear masks and the
governor's making the war mask
for health reasons which by the
way I agree with on but they
don't should that be the subject
of a recall I mean we're right
in the middle of that I'm
curious as to your thoughts on
that are or should be.
Something like corruption or or
should you be some basis on
which we're doing a recall I'm
I'm just curious as to your
comments on that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Eli.
It's a great philosophical
question as we know a lot of our
staff is based in philosophy
because we're trying to
determine what's wrong what's
right with boundaries are.
They are not.
So when I look at this recall
bill the reason strapped to the
way it is it's the same as they
do in Colorado.
Are you when I have some
different beliefs of the we have
agreed on a couple bills this
week that.
I'm a little bit more of.
We look at it is there's eight
and profound amounts there's a
large amount of people that
profoundly disagree with
somebody I believe that they
should have the rights to recall
them I'm not just saying based
on one thing or minor things.
I would hope that the people who
do due diligence and it would be
and that because what I've seen
for recall.
Let's take new some more recent
example.
Ross says there should be an
overwhelming amount of people
that were unhappy with them it
didn't go through they were able
to do the process and I think
the process itself will.
Especially if we put on there
the amount of how much the cost.
We'll do the due diligence in
making sure we don't have a
bunch of for less
We call bills happy but I would
be happy to discuss with you
later if we can discuss it when
it back up to my house I would
love to sit down and talk to you
about that but I'm I'm more
reform leave that a majority of
people are super happened
somebody that they should have
the right to recall them.
You know our Madam chair
representative and I appreciate
that answer I mean I I
ultimately on the stretcher I I
think I'm gonna end up
supporting this bill to get it
out of committee don't know
where to go next you know I I
should have looked it up is this
your.
I am sorry I I'm I'm sure madam
chair by I can look it up I
thank you
yeah he goes to Judiciary so
so I'm yeah I I think to be
interesting to have this
discussion of our judiciary the
twenty five percent threshold is
that consistent with what other
states are doing.
Yes madam chair representative
Ely and was I tried to look at
what other states for during and
that and that seems to be that
threshold for that and like I
said I would I would be very
happy to sit down and talk with
you about all of the staff and
and I'm.
Where we feel
as this move forward is probably
going to have some growth to it
and have some changes to it as
it goes along and I'm open to
that I just wanna make sure that
we have a vehicle so that if we
do decide would go through this
process that is fair so yeah the
twenty five percent is what
other states are doing thank you
okay thanks that's all I have
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative work.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I do have
a couple questions.
If I look at the procedures on
this you know the way I look at
the.
Office that we serve them Madam
chair representative.
We are basically recalled every
two years and so by the time
that this process will go
through it really doesn't affect
the house of representatives or
the people serving as
representatives as I see it
because it's going to take some
time to
accomplish your yes so we're
really looking at the four year
our office terms are are we not.
Representative actually had
thought that through and with
that kind of stuff we have
I would imagine
because there has been a recall
on house representatives that
that could happen especially it
look at it this way if they did
there two years and the first
session let's say they were on
target it's a real squishy they
come in a second time get
reelected and Bowman media
please start doing that bills
all the way around that would
give the people the opportunity
to now recall Representative.
I'm and madam chair
representative.
To meet all the time lines that
I would see developing in this
They have to be pretty quick on
the gun after that the first
session for this director but
yes so I I really look at it as
affecting the four year terms
were to be of course the New
Mexico Senate the AG is reported
about the land commissioner of
the treasure the auditor and of
course the governor lieutenant
governor I think those are the
the ones that as well as the
Board of public education I
think all those are four year
terms so so so that's our
universe that as I see you
realistically.
But the second question I have.
Is on page four winds twenty to
twenty four.
And my question is.
If the officer is removed.
Thank you received the highest
number of votes for the office
vacated shall be declared
elected for the remainder of the
term so if I read that correctly
does that mean that yes I am
recall and I have an opponent in
the general election that my
opponent automatically serves in
my seat because they were they
would have the highest number of
votes because I got those but
the person who came in second
place would have the highest
number of of would they be the
ones that would serve the
remainder of the term.
Thank you madam chair and.
Representative Nibert give me
one second to review that
because I think I have any
answers that one second okay.
Deferring to my experts sitting
next to me to.
Figures on the sensors he said I
don't particularly care for that
portion and I can understand why
because in the other in our
constitution we have
It I believe I'm reading it
correctly if let's say the
governor would be recalls and
stepped down then the next
appointed with us would be that
is stepping down that would be
the next appointed person be
able to Senate governor takeover
but I would have no heartburn
and changing this section that
was a section that was in the
Colorado bill and I would have
no problem amending that are
changing that if you would help
me with that would be greatly
appreciated representative madam
chair.
madam chair and representative.
It just seems like that
provision is is.
Really not what the.
What the would be it seems to me
that if you're recalling someone
who served in office.
Maybe with the exception of a
governor because you have a
succession plan for governor
refer all the other offices I
name.
You do not have a succession
plan that there is no person
waiting to step up for a Senator
or for a.
Board of education or Attorney
General that there's battles
people that are in a succession
plan so basically
if I read this right.
The opponent.
What what automatic automatic we
feel that state I'm not sure but
that's what the public.
Would want either I think I
would want the ability to have a
the other election and every
vote for that the that that
paragraph H. just
seems to be a little little
strange to be M. particularly
for offices.
That many of the office holders
do not have any opposition.
that would be particularly true
with respect to a number of
seats and in our house as well
as a number of seats seventy
seven.
you are a lot of years there are
many seats so that there is no
opposition to the and comments
generally
how with that result M. someone
filling the remainder of that
term or with that term go I'm
still Madam chair
representative.
And representing is also in
conflict with in the bill work
talks about the reelection boats
and to put it back to the people
to after somebody's recalled we
have about so pretty much
conflicts as part of this market
actually removed by looking
further into the bill and the
only time it's acceptable is
if there was a portion there
that if somebody resigned
Within the time frame and I know
like with the governor there
somebody's and the next
physician I know with us like we
have recently had somebody quits
people can be appointed but the
goal of this whole thing is when
somebody is recalled there
should be another election and
not have somebody else step and
we're supposed to have the
people relax somebody to that
position Representative predator
did you have anything else you
want to add on that.
I.
Right now I I do think we need
to look at that section maybe a
little bit closer and
Probably work through it with
the house Judiciary on on how
this affects or is impacted by
some of the other rules with
respect to county commissions
appointments and special for
somebody that resigns I'm.
Please bring that with that.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative thank
you for answer my questions
because of the All I Want that
are thank you.
Thank you.
Okay thank you I do have a
message from Carey price quote
press.
Press.
From the secretary of state's
office she sent a message
stating that.
They are in the Senate committee
meeting this morning and they're
sorry they will miss the
discussion on this house joint
resolution twelve.
And as stated in the FY are they
oppose this bill so she wanted
to thank you and and make sure
that that message was relayed to
the committee.
So I see no further
and from the committee.
Madam I can't hear you okay I'm
sorry.
I did not know I was on mute so
we had a message from Kerry from
the secretary of state's office
yes we I think we got that part
yeah we just after that we we
also so I hear I.
I.
Representative Nibert.
Yeah I'm madam chair I move a do
pass on this bill.
Okay we have.
Also.
As you pass Representative Rehm
and a second by Representative
Zamora.
Motioned to table.
And we have a motion to table.
And.
I will second that.
And Amanda will you take role.
The table.
Representative Chasey yes to
table.
Representative Eli.
No.
Okay go.
Representative Nibert.
No to table.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative green no ma'am.
Representative Zamora no to
table.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair blue.
Three yes for now.
Okay that tabling motion fails.
And our.
Your bill gross on to the next
committee.
You madam chair order we we need
to go to the original motion to
their Reginald a okay the past
let's go back to original both
Purdue past.
Representative Chasey.
When to explain my doctor
please.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Nibert.
Yes and I would like to explain
more about.
Representative Ortez.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Zamora yes.
Madam chair Johnson.
Madam vice chair Johnson the
director.
Is that everyone.
I just need your vote thanks
chair okay I said no I don't
know if you heard me.
Madam chair blue.
Okay committee members now your
bill moves on to the next
committee my apologies I am.
Not in at I need my coffee today
Representative Chasey to explain
your vote.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the opportunity to do
that I personally thought that
representative Nibert again the
best reason to vote no on this
bill which is that we have those
of us in the homes are basically
subject to recall every other
year and the time frames on this
are completely unworkable we
have that Sanchez actually
saying that one of the sections
may need to be deleted and I
really don't appreciate getting
bills like this in the house
Judiciary so thank you.
Thank you Representative.
I believe that set for this bill
house joint resolution.
I just to explain my boat is
well.
Representative Nibert explain a
bill please I mean your vote.
Thank you madam chair.
I voted to pass this on I do
think the legislation.
Needs to be worked on and I hope
that the we see some some
altered language because it
doesn't work and it's important
not appreciate the
Representative working on that
hopefully between now and the
time it does get to Judiciary
your and the.
Really deal with that graphic
thank you madam chair.
Thank you anybody else to
explain their rent.
You have a do pass and we will
move to house bill one sixty
seven thank you.
If I just may say briefly thank
you so much I appreciate all the
feedback
Representative Ely will be
meeting with you about this the
help me with this bill and
Representative Nibert so we can
get this cleaned up thank you so
much and I appreciate
everybody's time this morning.
Thank you madam chair.
The same thing I appreciate the
committee's time I appreciate
the committee's comments.
Yes with other committees are
set on where where are
legislation is not quite right
and the heads to Judiciary next
lot of probably ninety to ninety
five percent of the time I see
that legislation move forward
and hopes the judiciary can help
all non tourney representatives
help get through some of these
areas and so I do appreciate the
opportunity to be able to
continue to work on this and I
appreciate the committee's top.
what's our next bill number.
Next we have house bill one
sixty seven and I believe
Representative Ely is going to
present this bill on behalf of
chairwoman Lewis that's right.
Yeah and if you could hi if
they're not already on the
participant list our governor
Joseph Sanchez was Santa Ana
pueblo and attorney Richard
Hughes are they will be able I
think to explain this bill for
rather than I will if they could
be are promoted to participants.
And then.
Can you give us an update on
those participants.
Madam chair Richard Hughes is on
and with the governor.
Governor Joseph Sanchez Santana
Pueblo.
Thank you.
Okay.
I see both of them I'm gonna
turn it over to either
Yeah attorney Richard use your
governor judges changes I don't
know they're both on mute so one
of you're gonna have to I knew
each I see governor Sanchez's on
your one we start with him
governor I if you could explain
the bill to the committee that
would be great.
Governor you there.
What it took to explain all of.
We'll start with all right sure
enough we'll start with the
Richard use hi Richard how are
you please if you could begin
that be great thank you thank
you madam chairman
representative Ely members
committee this this bill is
intended to of facilitate tribal
economic development in a way
that the legislature has
frequently agreed to in the past
in other contexts the.
And this originates from that
some thoughts the pueblo of
Santa Anna had about the
possibility of locating a motor
vehicle dealership on its land
as a way to broaden the economic
the the base of its economic
development activities
The but but the the.
When that plan as as so often
happens and and the efforts by
tribes to expand their economic
development activities is the
problem of double taxation
between the tribe and and of the
state.
Yes in the the ordinary
situation a tribe would enter
into a lease with a motor
vehicle dealerships for example
if the dealership.
Salfit to locate on tribal lands
and the tribe would just some
lease revenue but the right to
try but also want to generate
tax revenue from the
transactions that occur at the
dealership and other
particularly from sales of motor
vehicles but that would result
in taxation both by the state of
New Mexico with its four percent
motor vehicle excise tax and
also tribal taxed either an
excise tax or were gross
receipts tax and that would
essentially make the sales of
vehicles on tribal land
uncompetitive with sales that
occur off of trouble and.
No motor vehicle dealership
whatever wanna located on tribal
lands that that was going to
have to compete against with
but it necessarily charge higher
prices or lower the prices of
its vehicles in order to offset
the additional tax burden.
What this bill does is to
essentially allow.
any tax rate.
Then the tax rate to an Indian
tribe for sale of motor vehicle
on tribal land be credited
against the the state motor
vehicle excise tax just as the
state allows sales of vehicles
out of state of taxes on those
sales to be credited against the
motor vehicle excise tax.
I'm I might so it's a it really
creates the possibility of the
tribes could.
Try to attract.
The vehicle dealerships to their
lands there is no guarantee that
any dealership would wanna
located on tribal lands of
course but but it this is this
at least means that if a
dealership did reach an
agreement with the tried to
locate on tribal lands that
could do so with a level playing
field that there would be no
advantage to the to the
dealership on tribal lands or
off of tribal lands as far as
the tax burden is is concerned
they would both be paying the
same level of the excise tax not
next lecture let me correct that
the tribe tribe could impose a
higher excise tax on sales on
tribal land but there would be
no reason to do that you
wouldn't the tribe would want to
make itself one competitive with
respect to sales all of tribal
land the the likelihood is that
a tribe that was able to enter
into an agreement with the
dealership located on lands
within the act an excise tax
equal to the state's access to
actual would be awash but the
try to get the revenue.
As I said a moment ago the state
the state legislature has an
extraordinary record of working
with tribes to deal with the
double taxation problem in a
variety of other context of
especially for example gross
receipts.
More importantly on the
cigarette and gasoline tax
context where the tribes where
sales of cigarettes or gasoline
on tribal lands or totally
exempted from the state tax if
the tribe was enacted its own
tax meeting certain criteria set
forth in the state legislation
this proposed bill simply
follows that pattern exactly you
get a sense the allows the tried
to collect the tax revenue for
sales of motor vehicles on
tribal land of and and that then
the tax program poses on the
sales would then be offset
against the state tax I might if
I may just add one more point I
am sure that members of the
committee of seeing the fiscal
impact report that was chaired
by Mr razor.
And I I I have to say that with
all due respect to the
legislative finance committee Ms
Graeser the the assumptions that
are built into that report are
are basically fantasy first of
all there is a major error.
I'm very this Madam error in the
report in that Mr grazer talks
about the test look facility on
flocculant the test with
facilities not on for you and
it's on non bait trouble.
and and at the present time
there are no sales of vehicles
taking place at that facility of
strictly a service facility.
And Mr grazer assumes the.
The.
New Mexico projections based on
every single pueblo and tribal
nation in the state having a
motor vehicle dealership and
selling all over the state
apparently that that simply is
never going to happen the
dealerships are expensive
facilities they're not going to
be located in the pueblo
figurines or soon after going to
be located near large population
centers and there's just a
handful of of of it wasn't
tribes that really would be
suitable for both locations well
we're dealership could be
located but this bill would at
least make it possible the
tribes could negotiate.
Arrangements with motor vehicle
dealerships that would enable
those dealerships be located on
tribal lands thereby generating
tax revenue for the tried to
supports governmental activities
and also providing obviously
providing jobs for tribal
members and others to to work in
those forward so that's that's
basically the point of bill and
how it would work would be happy
to answer any questions of this.
Madam chair I see that madam
chair is back and social take
over sponsoring just let her
know that governance changes was
next and thank you for allowing
me to our present additional
that I have so much detailed
knowledge about thank you.
Chairman.
Madam chair you can go ahead and
continue during since it's my
bill and if the governor would
like to say some words please go
ahead governor.
Or go to you know see hope
my name is Joseph Sanchez and on
the governor of the of the
Santana the company in the back
is my lieutenant governor and
we're really own and on behalf
of the public sector and I want
to express my sincere
appreciation to Representative
Lewis for her support of house
bill one sixty seven.
Santana and other tribes
continue to modernize our tax
structure and diversify our our
economical development
strategies taxes at the state
level become more integral part
of tribal economic development.
This is this is crucial because
it would create conditions for
economic success by avoiding
double taxation this recognize
impact craters for taxes levied
by various of those tribes is a
win for New Mexico citizens and
the pueblos and tribes a light.
Again on behalf of the Pueblo
Santana thank you for present in
these changes we look for go to
a passage thank you very much
and what.
Do you have any further comment.
Thank you madam chair I know we
are we're ready to stand for
questions.
Okay thank you we will now move
to add conducting our poll.
And we will have conducted poll
and few is in favor and in
opposition.
Thank you and we have that.
I in support and one in
opposition and we will now hear
from public comment.
Well here supporting COVID.
And.
We have.
Randy train our.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Randy trainer of the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
automotive dealers association
at the New Mexico automotive
dealers association is in
support of health bill one sixty
seven thank you very much.
Thank you and our comments and
support of this bill.
And then any comments in
opposition.
I don't see any so committee
members.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and you madam chair.
Yes the state no longer receives
part or most of our those taxes
received on the sale of vehicle.
How much of that tax goes into
the state road fund.
Madam chair and representative
if the state doesn't collect
that taxed and that tax you know
doesn't go into the state
Representative on.
So if I understand that yes if
we pass this legislation.
Madam chair.
Them.
The money that goes into the
state road from sales of
vehicles.
That money would no longer be
going into the state road five
that would be going so late to
the tribal governments act
correct share madam chair Madam
chair representative that's
correct that tribes are
governments there it sovereign
nations so they do contribute to
governmental services with on
the reservations and a lot of
the times that tribes do have to
provide funding to.
fix the roads that are used by
the public and a lot of the
times even with the federal
funding tribes do have to put
forth some of that money so it's
not to say that you know it's
it's not going to serve the
public because taxation taxes
collected by tribal governments
do support
Public services as such.
Representative excuse me
and Richard Hughes can can add
on.
Madam chair representative
Nibert if I could just add a
couple of points that.
Of course what Representative
Lewis said is exactly correct
but I would note that at the
present time there are no motor
vehicle dealerships selling
vehicles on tribal lands the
likelihood that dealerships
would eventually be established
on tribal lands is we we just
don't know the prospect of that
actually happened and and in any
event of it they're they're not
going to displace the existing
dealerships which are large very
substantial and contribute the
vast bulk of of funds which
still good we still and will
continue to go to the state road
fund so this is this bill would
it as I say would.
It the possibility that
additional the new dealerships
could be established on tribal
lands but they're not going to
displace the existing very
substantial.
Dealerships that are in the the
majority of the population
centers of the state.
Madam chair madam chair.
My my my concern is yeah yeah
maybe
some or all of the tribes to
spend some money on on some
public roads or roads that are
access by the.
But it's my understanding
correct me if I'm wrong.
Most of the most if not all of
the state highways of federal
highways
are.
Maintained by.
General fund and special
appropriated funds of the
transportation department and
that the really that the
counties and the I would presume
that tribal governments do not
of the system the payment of
maintenance and other costs
associated with with state and
federal highways with with my.
Am I wrong in that regard.
Representative I'd like to ask
Richard to answer that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative number
Representative Liz.
Yes obviously state or county
Rosa DeLauro and within tribal
boundaries are supported and
maintained well not always
maintained but we hope they will
be maintained but by state
county governments but there are
there are a large number of rows
that are really tribal roads or
BA were within tribal lands that
would only be maintained by
tribal or but to be a tribal
governments are going to be I it
and as Representative Lewis
pointed out earlier of the the
funding available for that
purpose is yes very short of and
the.
Tribes uniquely and do not have
large property basically they
can't tax their their lan says
those the state counties.
so they have to look to other
revenue streams and no in order
to generate
revenues to support all of their
governmental services not just
maintenance of infrastructure
but also services to their
people.
This is just this this just
creates another.
Probably very modest but but for
tribe's potentially significant
for some tribes previous
potentially significant revenue
stream that can be used to
assist in supporting
governmental services including
the maintenance of that
infrastructure.
Yes I am yeah my my concern the
madam chair madam chair and set.
If you have a.
Significant dealership that
locates on on tribal lands.
And thank you Sir I'll get out
thousands of cars a year.
that may result in a fairly
significant here to the monies
generated of the rope funder
going into the road fund and and
yet the state is bearing of the
obligations to maintain and
deal with those the state and
federal highways that the may be
of running through that area and
and so.
Yeah I'm I'm I'm not the
objecting to.
Allowing.
The tried to collects some tax
but I think the portion of the
tax that goes into the road I.
because all of us
Or at least most of issues state
and federal highways.
That that.
Revenue stream.
Particularly in New Mexico.
Is very important and we can all
look at roads with that our
districts and and point to
maybe some lack of maintenance
and the need for more monies
that I just see this as a
as a potential to of the the
road I money so I guess what I'd
like to see is a that to the
extent you can I don't think
it's all of the to the extent
you can those monies that go
specifically into the road fund
of the state of New Mexico ought
to continue to go into the road
I and allow the track the this
tried to.
Receive the remainder of those
tax funds are that would be
associated with the sell the
vehicle on on tribal lands but.
Continue to recognize that the
road fund a portion of that
continue to be received by the
state of New Mexico for general
Transportation department.
Construction and maintenance and
repair of our of our highway
system so that that would be my
comments with respect to this
bill I would hope there to some
back and as of that that we
could accomplish that thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Eli.
Madam chair I would move the
past.
How did you pass motion by
Representative Eli and the
second by Representative Ortez.
We may just find a brief closing
yes.
Thank you madam chair I just
want folks to know that like
this is not a new concept I'm
sure that many members on this
panel by their cars from el Paso
and you know they are credited
with that and so you know this
is also a measure of equity so I
don't want to folks to think
that this is some exception
that's being made for tribes it
happens for our neighboring
states and and with that madam
chair I just want to thank
everyone for the discussion.
Thank you.
I see Representative Nibert.
Our Representative Rehm yeah
thank you madam chair and madam
chair madam chair I want to go
over some of the math on this
yeah but if we use of vehicle
that costs fifty thousand
dollars.
And we're using the don't they
have to pay gross receipts tax
if it were purchased with state
in Albuquerque.
Madam chair representative all
at Richard Hughes answer that.
Thank you madam chair
representative Graham no the
those sales are not subject
gross receipts tax only The New
Mexico the access to motor
vehicle excise tax questions.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair of.
What I want is kind of following
up on what Representative sniper
so that and
I noted in the FIR that in FY
eight twenty three is showing up
five point two million dollars
just to the general fund a one
point five million dollars get
to the state road fund one point
five million dollars local
government road from yes.
And
I think we need to put a little
thought into this I could see
the dealerships that we looked
at it and and perhaps correct me
if this is wrong but I think it
dealership could move to of the
Indian cultural centre down at
twelve denied forty and have a
lot there or location that sells
out of there perhaps that's what
they do is put an office there
and they hold the vehicle
somewhere else but thank you.
Conduct the business transaction
there are and you'd be selling
if you will write my heart
doctor yes you could they end up
doing that.
Madam chair representative you
know that's the that the
location there on twelve street
is owned by the the nineteen
Pablo's and I believe they could
but I think you know we're
getting off point where we're
talking about who's advantaged
and who's disadvantaged and a
lot of the tribe a lot of the
times tribes are often
disadvantaged and so now we're
talking about giving them an
incentive or you know an
opportunity to create economic
economic development for the
entirety of the state you know
we're not asking about how many
cars are sold out of state
especially el Paso where I'm
sure her again a number of the
people on this zoom call it get
there get their cars so I I just
don't want to go down that road
because
I think we should all be working
together for the entirety of the
state we're not also talking
about the other tax avenues that
the tribes find such as the
revenue sharing from all the
Indian casinos within the state
with the cooperative tax
agreements that the tribes do
have with the state or.
Excuse me G. R. T. so you know
there's there's a lot more than
what we're talking about here
again it's not a new concept
we're talking about partnerships
so that you know this tribe the
tribe in the state work to
benefit all New Mexicans.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair I think we need to take an
overall look at our state tax
code
and I think Representative
Harper is done that
but I think a no overall of the
valuation maybe this should be a
map discussion as well thank you
madam chair and thank you madam
chair.
Thank you we'll go back to our
motion for two passed and a
second.
And then there would you please
call the roll.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy a goes.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative green no ma'am.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Representative
Yes.
You can go back to our chairman
Johnson.
Madam chair Johnson.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair you have
it you passed on your bill and I
would like to say that closing.
You know so many of
my tribal members in northwest
New Mexico we by so many
vehicles year after year I grew
up watching my parents purchased
vehicles from grants Gallo
maraming Jen because we live in
rural communities and we run our
cars into the ground.
So quickly and so fast and I
think this will afford us an
opportunity to have a seat at
the table to have a voice and
maintaining our roads.
You know and then it's up to us
as representatives to work with
our tribal governments and our
our counties and our cities to
combine resources to fix our
roads and bridges.
An example is Bolger trust
micrograms that I've been
raising money for since I've
been elected it's taking six
years to raise one point three
million dollars.
And I combined resources so I
just want to think madam chair
for introducing this bill.
Thank you committee members.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members.
And I believe that is for our
Janet today.
We are adjourned thank you.
