Because.
A little bit of housekeeping
thanks for the recording in
progress.
Now it's that house joint
memorial fund is being rolled
until further notice plus the
Sanchez.
So we will not be able to pay
and welcome everyone.
Good morning welcome and
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair.
This house joint resolution
dining is basically at work
resolution that.
And that's our to sexual
constitution of New Mexico to
allow conditions for denial of
bail to be set.
Removed that requirement fails
dial decisions be made only by
for the record remove the
limitation failed the Nile to
spend its charge is a felony and
clarify the ability to be
decided no release conditions
will reasonably ensure the
appearance of the person as
required remove certain for
procedural decisions
madam chair I which I wanted to
go back to November of two
thousand sixteen when we were
all voting and have a valid
question and the proposed
constitutional amendment number
one said proposing an amendment
to article two section thirteen
of the constitution of New
Mexico to protect munity safety
right point the with forty to
deny released on bail pending
trial thirty years that is a
valid basis while retaining the
right to be pre trial release
came just that is do not pose
risks of and the purchase of
this amendment if you recall was
allowed bail to be denied for
the Vanity Fair Development if
the prosecutor to prove to the
judge of that poses a threat to
public it would also provide
that fended was not endangered
communities for flat with slight
risk cannot be denied bail
solely because of the
defendant's financial inability
to pose of money or property I
I bring this up because I have
been approached by so many
constituents with our crime
problem when we read this
constitutional amendment it read
like a judges would have way
more discretion in holding
criminals and making decisions
and alternative actually really
happened we're in a situation
our crime is out of control in
our state and you know we've
talked a lot of voters I I
myself voted for this I was a
prosecutor and I myself but for
this thinking this is going to
be something that would be a
tool for prosecutors to hold
offenders more easily and madam
chair and it just didn't turn
out that way so what.
House Lucien line does is it
brings the ability to allow a
judge to set conditions of
release for dangerous
individuals for individuals who
are keeping their outlay keep
committing crimes well and
release and for failure for most
fail to come for and it's still
states in this bill that excess
fail show off the required.
That bail may be denied paying
trial after hearing at the point
I slightly interested of this
but no release conditions.
Here's of a person or protected
community
it also provides for someone not
to be detained solely because of
financial the bility to close
the bond so pre trial detention
right now also controversy of
with all the current it's
happening what this does if it
passes to do this that the house
and also passes the Senate is
back on the ballot for voters to
decide if they want to put
failed back on the ballot I
think that's very important as
we take this back to work with
we take this back to the people
who really have expressed to me
that they did not understand
this constitutional amendment
and the facts that you know have
have played out how this would
affect prime and I don't think
there can be a major argument
that this change in the bail
system has not affected pride in
many many ways I as most of you
know prosecuted for awhile I've
prosecuted double systems are
prosecuted under the bail system
and I've prosecuted under the
pre trial detention system and
when you have a surety option in
place one thing you have is a
sure each person who can get out
the the the best possible get
out and find these people who
are taking off when you have
somebody commits burglary and
commit another burglary in my
experience the judge were both
physicians released from jail so
you end up not having twenty
burglaries the C. you know and
some of these cases in
Albuquerque where these people
are this committed more and more
from I firmly believe believe
that the citizens don't want
those people to be out
repeatedly Committee.
Again Sir property so I did see
the argument in the fiscal
report that said this would lead
to more work for everybody and I
just don't simply leave it's a
case because of pre trial
detention came around we didn't
have the funds to deal with the
the time constraints that
discovery requirements
you know it all of the district
for District Court judges office
became just.
Pre trial detention hearings
that way for long periods of
times where we could have an
advantage support wider stance
not quarter record the more
hearings their understanding
bonded the situation is and how
those abilities to to have more
options as far as what to do
with these individuals in front
of us and then remember after
they go back to support whether
exporters with it's not part of
wreckage I think what to
District Court and in this
report they arrangement and
Ramon this is another
opportunity to address
conditions of release of course
and dependent for conditions of
release be changed at any point
in time so I believe this was
actually more work for me as a
district attorney hiring people
deal with all the things that we
have to deal with the tribal
tensions I've heard that this
court judges complain in my
district that their docket days
are filled with these pre trial
detention hearings of extremely
busy they can get you know
because this can go hours
depending on what jurisdiction
you live in and I I firmly
believe that it's time that we
get this back to the voters
people go to jail sure where
people go to jail I don't think
that's necessarily a bad thing I
know it's a costly thing
but I think if you Bill voters
they would say it's okay for
people going to jail I'm gonna
be safer I don't want these
types of things occurring in the
state of New Mexico so I I I am
asking you madam chair of this
committee to to let the voters
decide whether they want to
bring the staff of the elector
judges have discretion and the
same with our district attorneys
and I think this is just
something just resolution should
pass through both houses the
house and Senate get on the
ballot so that the people of New
Mexico can tell us if this is
working or not and now for the
first officer Representative
right.
Thank you madam chair and.
Members of.
You need to understand the law
enforcement and the
The dust.
Examine the cases that there are
four K. they're not gonna push
their push that case it is
we have so much time and we
needed to voted for something
that that we can prove that we
can move forward.
Every one of us has our
constituents complaining about
what is happening with pre trial
detention I know the Albuquerque
journal had a poll last year
last fall prior to the walk
should be in there was an
overwhelming number of of those
of that were.
Hold.
Want to changes to the current
bail system.
What we're going to hear is from
the opposition the service very
few of.
People who brief them.
In that I just are the county to
go ahead and make this document
for me and everyone else.
Right.
All please press I'm sorry I do
have.
The other endorsed the re
offense while on three eight I
want to read this this is very
and the examination of two
thousand eight hundred forty
five defendants while denying
three the tension.
Show that approximately one is
five of twenty one point four
percent of released offenders
are charged with the new offense
committed while their original
pre trial detention motion is
still pending some of those that
work in the forty nine percent
for violent crimes Senator yes
you know us pages quickly the
top ten whatever give me
something switched over to the
next phase Mr retail
distribution hills charged with
aggravated assault re trial need
continues tonight he
subsequently charged again with
aggravated assault with a deadly
weapon.
Go to the next that you start
receiving of at a office
building.
I don't know what's the next
structure first degree murder.
What's so the next page Mr
terrorist eight aggravated that
tonight next search aggravated
battery the line again.
So this guy is just continuing
his saying the actions grow next
one Mr Tenorio trafficking in a
controlled substance
methamphetamine receiving is so
on our property firearm denied
what's his next one aggravated
that.
And shooting at or from a motor
vehicle so we struck back with
the governor here.
Next one is about this criminal
damage over a thousand dollars
the knowledge which is next one
Acura sold with a deadly weapon.
Go to Mr Chavis.
Breaking and entering.
The what's the next one
activated but reset with a
deadly weapon
Going into the session of a
firearm.
Go to ms latency.
Receiving stolen property of a
fire denied next one activity
the salt.
And armed robbery.
Mr Toros.
Everybody is so deadly weapon
the knowledge.
Next one activated battery with
a deadly left the line again.
This rule.
Activated battery with a deadly
weapon false imprisonment and
what's the next order.
Mister Jackson are wrong.
The night.
What's the next one
And I will give the examples one
one of highlight those examples
is.
While we're going to hear that
there is a very minor number
three if they have how do you go
to the family of someone who's
been murdered.
As they have a minor systems but
there.
Of course was another DA talk.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name is
Rick Santorum the district
attorney of the San Juan county
so fund respect shipped off all
those areas
it's funny that the A. reeve S.
need to come in that's for
because there's no on more next
for all of this stuff and she is
one second fiddle her knowledge
and do a re has mentioned
everything that I think we could
mention as district attorneys
the only thing I would point out
is.
This call in our offices.
For calling our offices daily
about pre trial release a
guarantee either your
constituents to.
There are tired of the small
petty stuff that is constantly
broken windows on their
businesses or burglaries because
of the damages that come out of
their pocket.
Both our offices due to see
calls just daily asking why was
everything else it has been
created to so much more work for
both sides.
The for all nine motion hearings
we are on the four oh three
motion give constantly dealing
we have not and not provide more
work to do it and it affects
folks are.
when our offices there the the
private attorney or public
defender there as well and so it
is just taken up so much time
the attorneys don't have time to
go back and work on the basis
those are constantly going to
get after hearing.
so so that's a Roadrunner seen
the last thing that doesn't get
talked too much about that I
want to point out one thing
about having the tail and
flights was a little out of both
sides so the low myself the
defense attorney.
Receive a phone call saying I
had a client arrested for this
you know would you guys agree
to help certain amount lost we
say sure and that person could
be released that.
Right now we don't have that
authority anymore even if they
want to so are you saying sort
of thank you trouble after four
o'clock on a Thursday because
you'll be in jail for money.
When we use the state and posed
this and percent sure he will do
it your clients out today.
Now if that happens you're
probably not seeing the judge on
Monday to have this year so.
That was a tool that both sides
could be used to get people talk
about getting people out right
away.
We've lost that.
And it was a very useful tool hi
the other thing we've noticed is
sure that tools it seems like
people get picked up on the old
warranty tickets for not to pay
twenty years ago on a Friday
before Memorial Day or a long
weekend.
And now the guarantee is well
sorry if you don't get more of
a.
In the front to see.
So that.
Bill did find that at and it
wasn't that was used both this
for example but there's for
private attorneys for the
clients so I did just want to
point that out as well as there
is another tool will be working
well right away.
On on things on on non serious
some other things that we don't
have the ability to do.
And on that thank you for the
opportunity to speak and.
All truly defer to my experts so
there.
R.
S. with that madam speaker would
stand for any question Sir but
the.
Okay thank you let's go to the
audience do we have a.
Let's see who is supported a
bill.
Please raise your hand was in
opposition of the field okay
thanks start with supporting
comments let's begin from the
side of the room.
Go ahead Sir.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee good morning my
name is Judy will accept and I
am speaking to you this morning
on behalf of the
chamber of commerce according to
data that the chamber has
obtained police in our state are
resting two people a day who are
reinventing Committee crimes
whether out of pre trial frankly
I think some of the sample and
data that Representative green
has presented of strictly for
more concerning
I think it's pretty clear it's
clear to the chamber of the the
current policy of pre trial
release this is creating new
victims daily and it is simply
not working the chamber supports
this resolution sherry alone
cannot continue to be the sole
overseer of this issue.
The system is broken this
resolution would ensure that the
legislature has a seat at the
table to provide direction on
pre trial detention as and when
it is not thank you.
Sir Richard committee members
thank you marks into a judicial
district attorney also president
of the New Mexico educators
association may surprise you
here that I do support this bill
what another consideration is
this we've heard a lot of these
allocation and a lot of the
remedies on how to address.
The current state of of release.
We have a lot of those options
burden of proof faced aces and
rejecting this doesn't happen a
lot of that just another vehicle
the most common vehicle for
addressing what we're all
talking about so for all the
reasons stated maybe for this
under consideration is widely
support thank you thank you.
For the comments from the back.
Okay let's go to the webcast for
supporting COVID.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Carlos contact
with the New Mexico business
coalition we strongly support H.
G. R. nine.
You know the costs for repeat
offenders has been very high in
our communities and it's
affecting all New Mexicans
people don't feel safe anymore
and you know there may be a
report that.
Percent is re offending but
that's one percent too many if
one additional New Mexican is
killed by a repeat offender.
Or sexually assaulted it affects
all of us people don't feel safe
in New Mexico and from a
business perspective.
Our crime rate is.
Really concerning nationwide.
Businesses don't want to come
here and I think it's time that
we get this straightened out
again there were some unintended
consequences many people
supported this when it went
through but it's time to give
the people a voice to say
whether or not they want to get
it fixed and get it right and I
think that is the answer in this
bill to take it back to the
people and let them decide and I
think you would find resounding
support to get this fixed I urge
you to vote yes on this bill
thank you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you I don't see more hands
rates let's go to the closing
comments let's begin with the
side of the room.
Good morning madam chair of the
committee reviewed the fathers
of the Mexico and squares
Association perspective this
servers and their advocacy for
public safety respectfully of
need to oppose this legislation
commenting bedrock principles of
our justice system is that you
are innocent until proven guilty
up detaining people for they
have been found guilty in a
court of law of four flies in
the face of that constitutional
protection.
Incarcerating more people in our
mail system for predominantly in
our county jail systems that are
already facing staffing
shortages and unsafe conditions
especially in light of the
pandemic also wrote those
constitutional protections we
ask that you consider this when
making your decision us holders
look at this issue again thank
you for your time and we
appreciate your support of this
issue thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marshall Martinez the
quality New Mexico we're
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization.
LGBTQ people represent roughly
forty five percent of
incarcerated individuals
individuals across the country
we are not shockingly forty five
percent the general population
as a community that has
consistently been over
criminalized over policed and
over incarcerated we must urge
you all to oppose this amendment
specifically because we know
that there's no jail or prison
in this country we're very
transferable or state with
respect to what we just said we
consider LFC training a lot of
slack of staff has the
especially queer and trans young
people over please over
prosecuted and over incarcerated
looks variants consistent
physical verbal and emotional
trauma just by spending
additional time in jail to
happen.
Committee.
We work with.
Tom wolf and we also know that
this for the
Disproportionately.
we cannot.
The people's right I will then
have an investigative state
without me even if you want to
move forward any motions to move
order charges over the.
Part of intervention we have.
This.
Further the comments in the
house.
Sen
records.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is a
rock on the policy council chair
of the ACLU of New Mexico based
out of Los crucis and I'm here
to propose this bill today.
This bill will cause more harm
to our communities most people
were released pre trial did not
offend but we don't hear about
them in the news holding
presumptively innocent people in
this will not create a safer
environment our state I urge you
to oppose this legislation.
Thank you.
Okay let's go to committee
members.
It is a more.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters.
So.
Questions stock the magistrate
court.
Can not.
Hold people in jail right now.
If they go in front of the
magistrate.
Because they're not a record and
I get that correct and madam
chair representative for it
partially so
What what what was explained if
you get arrested on Friday for
D. W. Y. you're not gonna see
judge probably till Monday or
Tuesday so those type of people
to sit in jail and but the
measure courts are basically
they're not for the record and
so what happens is when the
prosecutor's filed a motion for
pre trial detention which is
required then they don't hear
Boston it goes to District Court
District Court decides whether
actually save on they decide
what they're gonna be held are
not held whether any conditions
of release that would ensure the
public safety basically and
whether they're dangerous so
when we had bail.
Those measures judges we would
address the conditions of
release at our first year in
office they have a first
appearance the judge set the
bond or whatever conditions they
wanted then we went to rural
areas hearing what was just to
get the interviews judge heard
the sorry hearing given the
facts of the case mom was
arrested yet and then eventually
went would allow
that for at currently right now
they don't here they they don't
they don't here conditions of
release that for somebody who's
dangers they go right up into
district for does that make
sense is that your question the
thing that makes sense and how
long of a time span does take to
get them to District Court to
make that decision.
So I would say it's like to
just.
Yes Madam chair representative
representative of our everyone
make sure have changed but lives
like seven days so that
persisting in jail first those
seven days madam chair Mrs Maria
so that District Court judge
decides on the pre trial hearing
and if this goes through.
The judge to make a
determination right then and
there and maybe go ahead and
release some of the madam chair
yeah and and representative of
more they could be released it's
a Friday afternoon they could be
released on Friday or.
And oftentimes that doesn't have
anything to do with the dust you
know those the judge will
release on minor things or we
can you know look at look at a
call from an attorney say can we
get my client out it's it's a
criminal trespass so I actually
had a lady who was arrested for
compulsory school attendance
Thursday and didn't get it or
not her kids before the
launching for not actually get a
kid to school she said a day in
jail for five days because of
there not being an ability to
get an arrangement Madam chair
representative more so there
there's a bad answer that too
free trial detention it's it's
innocent I should say this is
for the non very nonviolent
people in jail for weekends and
and this is we're talking about
the current system we have now
that we feel is pro correct and
and and.
And I agree with a lot of the
testimony and and so the
testimony we heard here today
that.
The people of New Mexico are not
not for.
With the judicial system have
criminals are being released we
here at all over the Albuquerque
New.
And one of the things that
wasn't mentioned madam chair and
representative representatives.
And the.
Right.
Mr DA.
Is that.
What if somebody one of our
biggest problems we have in
society today.
Is drugs.
And I've heard it from parents
themselves.
My son my daughter's in jail but
at least I know.
At least I know they're saying
these.
And we also written testimony
the jobs are safe.
There we try to make it as safe
as as we can I have toward
jails.
And it's it's they try to keep
them as safe as they can.
It's probably not the best
environment in the world I'd
rather be at the restaurant
Eaton suffered in the jail but
but I we work on that if we have
issues there we need to try to
fix that.
I see.
Somebody that strong out on meth
or or Fayette mall or or some
other drugs.
That is taking over their lives.
I will say part of the
rehabilitation.
Issues that a lot of people.
Believe that we need and and and
and and it is the thing.
That if there if if we.
Arrest somebody as a society.
And taken to jail.
We could be doing that person
some good but not put it back on
on the street and put them right
back to the same drug dealers
and the same people that are
causing their problems Madam
chair representative for thank
you because as I when I
prosecuted and we had drug
addicts who you know we we try
to help often they are in jail
for their safety I I N. Xin
drugs can get into jails
obviously Madam chair
representative but it gave them
the ability to be claim to go
into a treatment facility and
then go at it be transported to
that treatment facility so that
they wouldn't get out and we're
down a wrong path it I believe
Madam chair representative that
it was very helpful and I saw I
saw and that made a big
difference and I know that the
average also wants to
set.
Chair thank you and
Representative Zamora I and I
apologize it was one of the
things I want to bring up and
it's exactly that.
Right now the way the system
works is.
The courts the judges hands are
tied and they have to find the
least restrictive.
You know conditions for someone
to be release and.
When we have people that are are
currently drops off and on that
because of federal.
So we're not dealing with a lot
of.
Addictions fan already gets.
both the other drugs.
We at least restrictive means
that we are for SCA's maybe okay
go straight to a rehab get
straight into something and go
right now that's not part of the
least restrictive so get out.
And.
We're seeing on but majority of
these repeats or saying are
probably people that are
addicted.
And we don't have the ability
to.
Representative.
What you have here for we want
to work.
and then my addresses a lot with
alcohol as well
we have the same drug problems
but we have a heavy out that we
would rather states are getting
out continuing to drink this can
get you over to for lands in our
area for example thirty days
incident which cleaned up and
get you know get your back up.
that is not that's a more
restricted means a lot of times
we can't do that now we're we.
Chair representative thank you
so madam chair and.
The a
So a person.
That is has a problem.
And we put some restrictions on
whether it's as harsh as being
in jail or a little softer and
having them go to a
rehabilitation center.
That under the current.
Law and what we're doing.
The current law won't allow that
for us to restrict that person
or we can guide them into a
better place right now.
Representative can't say that
there can be there are some time
situations work judge can sit
there and say all of you out if
you go straight here but it's
still the least restrictive
means that arguments made within
and now he'll be AT promises not
to use drugs or drink water is
going to that's least
restrictive and that's something
that we.
Right now and representative of
all Madam chair of the started
the families of these
individuals are calling us daily
because they're trying to figure
out how can we help our.
Our son or daughter their loved
ones and.
They know if they go in on the
Tuesday around by Thursday they
know they're not really health.
Those controls.
And it's hard so but I can't see
we've lost says it's just so
much harder.
Tool for us to overcome because
we have to follow restricted.
And madam chair and
representative.
What I liked about a house joint
resolution.
Is it goes to the people's state
of New Mexico.
And the people elect us.
But sometimes I believe we ought
to let these go vote go to the
people.
So that they can.
Make a decision.
Of this magnitude.
This is this is very important.
To the people of the state.
And I like that they would have
opposed this.
Madam chair for.
Are you.
That's all the questions I had
thank you Representative.
Thank you.
Committee.
Senator takes.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you both very much and your
expert witness I appreciate
having you as a colleague now
and I think that would be
helpful to us as an industry
have row I I can always count on
him to.
turning his word and I really
appreciated that.
I I do have some questions.
In the courts corrections and
justice interim committee it
seems to me when we have looked
at this issue we were hearing
that primarily.
The problem was with pre trial
detention.
Was in Burlington county.
And not so much the rest of the
state but I'm hearing you say in
Clovis and and Farmington also
and he tells.
Your encountering that is it is
it the same proportion
Bernalillo county.
So what madam chair
Representative think well this
is early county so much bigger
and you know there's a lot more
crime but it is stretches across
the area obviously in some
jurisdictions you have more
conservative judges who will you
know be a little bit better as
far as
to racial but it's I think it's
a problem that stretches across
the state for prosecutors it's
it's not just Bernalillo county
Madam chair representative okay.
Mr chair drover Mr latoya
Madam chair representative she's
good morning
I think the reason you hear more
about amber Leo then you hear
about it in my neck of the woods
or down south or anything like
that is is two fold number one
is just a bigger media outlet in
Bernalillo county but also
number two Bernalillo county as
the deal with the case.
Who which ties in a loss to.
Not only are released but
dismissals until cases can
before right percent and so I
think that the combination of
those really a fax Bernalillo
county the at the actual.
Pre trial release we're all
dealing with the issue I mean
over the years we've now learned
session rural areas.
You know will tell police
officers or downs this and we
have this judge we know they
will hold on this is a wonderful
on this so we've got to a point
where we're like we're running a
file it because we know they
will hold on this.
And nothing beats a victim
storming out swear in your name
up and down because you won't do
it but we're following the long
rules set stretch throughout the
state thank you madam chair.
Chair representative read I
think I heard you say that with
the bail system and allowed both
sides to negotiate affect both
sides to negotiate it allows
this Madam chair representative
with the best estimate it
doesn't lay out of the dust on
the public defenders to go share
and often these bail bonds it
sureties are extremely low on it
also takes into account whether
they can afford it or not afford
it matter comp those are
conversations as a prosecutor
madam speaker of Representative
that we had yeah I'm I'm not in
the office today where we would
have daily it just gave a more
options and also really help
with those.
Hughes did not come to court on
very large cases and you can
then could potentially madam
speaker Representative deal with
a bonds men who could find those
people so fast and and bring
them intervention support.
And madam chair Representative
Chasey of what we have also in
Berlin county is the District
Court was offering the sureties
bond at you know ten percent so
they didn't have to even go
through bonds they could go
ahead and New Mexico security
straight with court.
So madam chair and and and
Representative I guess I'm
wondering are you saying that
how these offenders been out on
bail they would not more like
they would be less likely to re
offend.
Madam chair of Representative
what I would say is that when
they do re offend they are
immediately are about the boss
men or the court knows about it
and let's say you have a
situation where flexible
spending twenty burglaries you
might see a burglary goes out of
conditions of release and then
the next thing you know the
Boston street headed for the net
the other burglary wanted off
the bond and you slow that
revolving door around we're I
think there's a basis for Leo
that at twenty burglaries I mean
Madam chair representative that
is just that is so much work and
can't get ahead of it as a
prosecutor or public defenders
because of this out and they do
another and they do another I
just don't believe that the
citizens of this state we
believe that that something is
which the opt out for out on
that are on a test Madam chair
representative I'm not saying
this is perfect and I love it
and that we shouldn't do
anything I think we've we've
been trying to look at it in the
interim today the house
Judiciary Committee is going to
spend the whole day talking
about this not about available
but about the issue and there
are
There are bills to tweak the
system as it were.
But
I guess.
What is a couple of things about
Before we have this system.
And and I I can't remember who
who.
Again is this simple during the
interim but somebody did.
It may have been someone from
the sentencing commission.
That the difference between what
we had what we now have.
Is that what we what we had.
R. Kelly the rapper whose serial
sexual offender would always
have been out on bond.
And now R. K..
So I just you know that was one
of the.
examples that was given to me
and that's kind of powerful if
you if you consider that
Resources allowed a serial
offender like that to be out and
and
And then perhaps not somebody
with a lesser sentence or lesser
excuse me a lesser charge
I'm wondering if we could untie
the hands of judges another way.
Without state revival
presumption that's what I'm
going to be listening to our
discussion the in the in the
Judiciary Committee this
afternoon I know we have some
folks proposing.
Changes to the
Oral to all are perhaps the way
it's used.
But
I'm also thinking Representative
free because you can have a
really good example we need an
alternative.
For non violent detention like
over the weekend for the for mom
I mean granted she didn't get
our kids to school but she was
probably struggling with a lot
of things that.
Most of us who have greater
privileges wouldn't even be able
to imagine.
So you certainly wouldn't want
her the table all weekend if
there's a way that we can.
Give a magistrate some latitude
here that way I think we need to
look at that.
And
Hi I have
It's been it's been argued.
That because there's federal.
provision for about of all
detention astute the end result
of production sorry
that it is constitutional and we
can and use it.
What I understand from the
federal defense is that those
who
defended federal court this is a
huge support system in the
federal system that when someone
is released pre trial in the
federal system they're reporting
weekly to a magistrate they have
drug testing they have housing.
They have the kind of support
and somebody mentioned for once
we set you
up to yeah I have I have
uploaded images with our system
who.
I'm blesses hard he was not in
love with his two year old but
he was able to go to four wins
in the state.
He stayed ninety days he is back
with this and you know there are
some wonderful programs out
there but he realized.
Once he was there thirty days
was not enough and he had been
eliminated from this family.
He then all kinds of trouble but
in this case he just really
wanted us on that this was two
years old at the time is I never
saw anybody so hard and and that
is a testament to the
The treatment center and my
heart goes out to the families
who are concerned when their
loved one is released.
And then they're they're back
out nobody can.
Assist so I certainly hope we
can
on the one hand build up our
service system white the four
winds programs I know we're
certainly trying to.
A recover of hit a whole system
in the state and beyond
Do some do some changes I I
I'm not sold on this yes I'm
certainly willing to listen back
to I'm not ready to go.
Back this far although there are
a couple of it the incident here
that.
You know willing to of.
Look at but they do not need to
go and constitution thank you
madam chair Madam chair of that
point.
Madam chair of ideas and respond
short on that I really like to
see the still pass.
Judiciary where we could have a
wider discussion you know with
the
that community thank.
Representative Zamora madam
chair if the.
Representative Chasey would
allow I'd like to ask a
question.
On on the point that that how
how.
I believe it was R. J. Kelly the
to the two stated his name that
he would be able to get out on
bail system and is it because
of.
Is a.
Financial stability that we
would be able to bail out every
time.
And to be able to be released
Senator yeah.
He was a very wealthy man okay.
That's that's all the questions.
Committee members Representative
little yes as I was reviewing
the bill Warren.
Section he Martin particularly
about the moving the
requirements that the decision
would be
The requirement that decisions
will be made by a quarter of
record so if it's not.
If it is not part of the record
how a person yield.
A decision will.
Madam chair representative
There's an automatic you know
right from match sure course to
yield up to District Court sent.
Yes in madam chair and county
the Bernalillo county detention
center of set up the of Video
raiment so the defended didn't
have to come to court he could
be a range of.
Of through the through the video
and consequently that
arrangement was timely they did
those either in the morning or
afternoon and so he could be
before the court quickly.
Thank you.
Committee members Representative
Zamora Madam chair
representative.
If we go to this bond system.
Back to the Google system.
A judge can deny.
Bail for a person that he
determines.
That is dangerous to society
here I don't know exactly how
the world long range.
This is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
of some more yes it actually
gives a quarter more latitude to
look at the totality of
circumstances not only the
office but.
What is his past history for
appearing in court so in the it
gives a the court moral
political views at this
individual in and what is our
support system I mean Nero were
you we have a lot of family
involved stuff like that they
can they can help you know for
that individual follow the
directions of the court so so
madam chair and representative.
So.
The structure of the system.
Or they require mon.
Then that's why those tools are
used for the set such a high
bond or denied bond so then.
That's.
Relative to the the testimony
that we heard earlier about R.
J. Kelly.
Not necessarily he would have
been able to get out.
Under this system am I correct
at Madam chair representative
more I believe you're correct I
mean it could be I guess right
there could be no bond set it
could be
hi Karen Sanchez I mean it's it
really depends on each person
and their circumstances about
subjects they look at have so
many more avenues in the thank
you for that answer not just
wanted to clarify and make sure
I understood it wrong thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
In the chair and move it to
pass.
We have to have solutions for
all sectors.
In the second Representative.
Representative on.
Representative law yes.
Representative.
Representative Harper.
Representative little no.
Representative right.
Yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Fresher Figaro.
Madam Johnson.
This.
We have a voter ID password.
So you just have.
Do pass.
We could put it on the table
temporarily.
Just to give us.
Matt madam chair would be proper
for me to move to table.
The.
the.
That would what the committee
considers recommend of do not
recommend no recommendations and
the news out yes yes it on the
table as know that.
He's asking you to move it with
the without recommendation I do
pass to Judiciary no
Representative.
What is the pressure committee
madam chair mood impassable
wrecked a second.
Okay we have the motion to.
Pass with no direct please take
your.
Representative on in order.
Pass.
Representative Lara yes Sir.
Representative Chasey now.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative a little.
Yes.
Representative re.
Yes all.
Representative Zamora yes.
The ship euro it Sir of the
representative on the line no.
Sen.
By Senator.
Madam chair jobs.
To to pass.
Representative.
Okay Representative you have to
do with no representation thank
you so thank you very.
Okay that's going to be zero
House.
Representative.
This is.
Of
There
These.
The.
Chair thank you committee that I
appreciate you all for being
here today is my first time
presenting a bill committees on.
The today have for you health
one sixty two.
And the this bill would simply
for New Mexico into compliance
with federal laws promulgated by
the US Congress Mr out by the by
the ministrations Department
homeland.
Over the past few years there's
been an influx of violent crime
human trafficking in arms.
And given rise to be systemic
from saturated Committee prices
other states southern borders.
According to US customs and
border protection CBP at least
one point two million migrants
successfully evaded authorities
twenty twenty one.
And that CBP also said that an
estimated seven hundred eighteen
thousand border encounters the
first Hundred Days of the fiscal
year and twenty twenty three
which began on October first.
There were two hundred fifty one
thousand four hundred eighty
seven encounters with the legal
immigrants at the southern
border in the month of December
alone that's about eight
thousand per day or three
hundred for our.
And that's about five minutes
so as someone who lives in the
county very close or something
for just tell you from personal
experience that the struggles
with drugs and crime are are
really a real threat that we can
counter at least in the southern
part of the state and I'm sure
that translates for out the
entire state and the fentanyl
related prices that we have with
the illegal drug smuggling
through our borders to the
concerned so would house bill
one sixty to New Mexico is
system federal government and by
the ministration was
concerned for order and unlawful
entry into the United States as
prioritized by the
administration and secretary of
homeland security all the under
oath then your guests with that
question.
Thank you go to the audience of
those in favor of the bill raise
your hand those in opposition.
Okay let's go ahead and start
senator Graham.
Your comment please opposing the
bill.
On state.
Okay.
Chairman members of the Mormon
church members of the committee
Really strong.
Thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my house of the
late leader as well.
Stated compositions.
Representative policies that.
Madam chair.
In Victor America with quality
New Mexico has the selfie
humana's agent
we stand against this bill this
is a matter of safety and health
or anything people
that.
People across the state
that we contribute to to this
end Christ with.
Webcast.
Madam chair members the
committee on Carlos contact with
the New Mexico business
coalition I'm in support of this
bill I always think it is a good
idea for a state to be in
compliance with federal law this
also goes with the other
measures that we have
considered.
Looking at public safety and
especially the influx of the
drugs coming across our border.
There's a lot of reasons that we
need to be more careful about
what we're doing with our state
and how we secure the people in
our community and we urge you to
support this bill thank you.
Thank you have a next will go to
near record for those in cost.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee this
near record from the ACLU of New
Mexico good based out of Los
crucis I'm here to oppose H. B.
eight sixty two this bill is
unnecessary as explained fairly
clearly in the fiscal and impact
report and it also does not fit
our New Mexico values of
welcoming people with dignity
and respect so I urge you to
vote now thank you.
Thank you I don't see.
For comments committee member
service.
Representatives are.
Madam chair and to keep up with
divers reputation is.
I can handle it.
Madam chair members of the
committee in a more serious
note.
In layman's terms.
What this bill is doing.
Is is New Mexico.
In.
Same with federal law on my
understanding that right thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative yes that's
exactly what we would be doing
with this bill.
So Madam chair representative
what that means.
Is.
Of the one simple maybe follow
through and maybe give some more
or maybe that's it is there's
for example it won't be able to
let.
Somebody claimed to be a
sanctuary city for.
Image the legal immigrants.
That correct thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative I think so in
general terms right now there
are certain counties in the
state of New Mexico the county
and certainly found.
Both the passwords is that they
will not work with federal and
helping to the hoping for
control to itself the from
individuals many of them and
since would be dangerous in our
communities and they would just
be in compliance with the
federal law by.
I was working with the federal
government and I agree that they
can do their job.
So thank you for that a
representative madam chair
representative.
How much.
Does it affect.
The state of New Mexico to not
be complying with federal law.
How much it is and how.
It affects New Mexico with.
Financial aid from the federal
government to help us with our
immigration problems that with
our problems that stem from
immigration such as drugs.
All of the other.
Know what I'm thinking but I
can't get it out of human
trafficking.
And and and problems that we
have of that nature.
How much does it hurt is not to
be in compliance with federal
law if we were in compliance
with federal law we can get more
help with these issues that we
have to deal with because of the
legal immigration thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative I yes I believe
that we are not taking advantage
of many of the federal
government's programs leases the
DEA with the customs and border
protection and I would just give
you one example Bernalillo
county which is a sanctuary
county for for a criminal aliens
right now as they have the
largest front of us last year in
state history maybe million
federal.
They had a hundred forty two
pounds of methamphetamine sees
one point eight million dollars
in cash thirty seven firearms
six vehicles including two that
were stolen nine ballistic vests
and ballistic bought baseball
caps and two hand grenades so I
would make the case chair
representative is that this is
very much is a concern at least
in these counties that are
popping the federal law and this
divided Station and we must
get compliance with them Madam
chair representative.
And the Madam chair
representative and I hear you
talk about the budget this
version time and time again.
Why.
New Mexico in your opinion.
Being such a damn strong
democratic state why would they
bulk.
And go against the wishes of the
by the administration when it
comes to immigration.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative that's very
cogent points have their I I
can't speak for all state
unfortunately but I say that I
can repeat to access some divine
inspiration also.
Hello two PM now invited
ministration on January fifth of
this year there are nothing new
important measures to increase
security at the border and
reduce the number of into the
fund lawfully between ports of
entry these measures will expand
access that legal pathways for
orderly migration and result in
new consequences for those who
fail to use the app.
They also drop on the success of
the Venezuela initiative which
launched in twenty twenty to
this result in a dramatic drop
drop of numbers of Venezuelan
nationals attempting to enter
the United States lawfully so
this comes directly from the
binding ministrations White
House and this is just this
month so I think that this is
critical that we get in
compliance with the
administration which is asking
us very much stuff to do the
will of the administration which
I grew and and thank you for
that answer and madam chair and
representative.
It might look kind of strange to
the people of the state in New
Mexico the to this bundles are
sitting here at this table.
And almost fighting back let me.
People of.
Let the no.
countries coming into this
country would they they might
think well water that one of the
why the fight against their own
people.
I had a group.
Your available grant come to my
office the other day here in
Santa Fe.
And we talked about immigration.
And the biggest thing was that.
That I was trying to get across
to them is if we do it right.
And we go through the gates and
we get our documentation story.
You will be better off.
When you come into this country.
They were telling me of all
their issues or problems they
had.
Because they didn't have
documentation they don't have an
ID they didn't have a driver's
license.
And that they were left out
during the COVID area era
because which were not out of
the.
According to some people.
Or some of the newscast that are
here but.
If.
We had here and follow the rules
that are set in place for good
reasons.
I believe that we will all be
better off not only the country
itself.
But the immigrants to come to
America for a better life.
Thank you madam chair and then
madam chair and representative
of that that's what we five
point not that we fight against
immigration.
What we fight for for following
the rules.
And that's what you're.
Bill for tasted it.
Yes
thank you Representative yes we
agree.
US Congress state I believe
there's been a dereliction of
duty on their part.
Easier completely through the
system and they need to work on
that however we're state
representatives and we need to
protect our state and especially
after Spencer selves course we
don't want the representative to
come into this country this is
shameful thing for anyone to
think of but you see the
ramifications of illegal entry
into this country many people
are taking advantage of some
people are given so human places
to live.
Be taken advantage of monetarily
getting a lot less money than
than someone who is in this
country as a worker who is
following the law maybe they're
taking advantage of and just
this week the Roswell daily
record they they reported on
drugs or human trafficking
smuggling eleven people into the
state and that two sixteen year
old boys.
That were found in a vehicle so
this is a humanitarian crisis
were up against this not being
against you know all the
rhetoric in the world can't tell
you that this isn't happening it
is and we need to protect these
people in our country we also
need to make sure that our
borders secure so that these
people can come here safely and
they can be protected involving
in this country Madam chair
representative.
Thank you for that answer
Representative and the madam
chair and with that are.
I've just always pushed thank
you thank you Representative
Zamora Representative Chasey
thank you madam chair
congratulations on your first
bill I hope you enjoy it.
what I've learned over the years
is don't take any decision.
To seriously whether it's a
victory or defeat just keep on
going.
So good to know madam chair I
I think take your work seriously
but not yourself this kind of a
good.
When
I'm wondering on this and I I do
commend both you and your
colleague from curry.
For your concern about
conditions and some of the
exploitation of those who seek
to
come to the United States and
I appreciate that thank.
It's it's it's a very sad
situation.
I have a concern about the
Language here on twenty nine
twenty one.
Eight to well it's just the
whole thing is one sentence so
nice to.
Down so that the station not a
doctor or continue in effect any
law ordinance rule or regulation
that would prohibit or restrict
the use of personnel resources
to assist.
And the enforcement of federal
immigration law.
So are you authorizing if this
were an act.
Non official.
Rupes white vigilantes and.
Some of the folks like in
Arizona and would never Senate
bill ten seventy two.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative now we're not
the local governments that would
have to comply with federal
immigration law not the personal
Senator.
Madam chair representative
you're familiar with the US a
promising for us yes chair.
And
Essentially.
Is the liability.
That.
And so I I think there's a.
Perhaps not a need for this.
for for that reason and
With that.
Sorry let me just tell you now
I'm not able to support your
bill but thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair there's
responded quickly thank you know
I agree I think that there is a
permanent loss but they're not
been too many lawsuits that
would have affected these
communities the shift on for us
from left are law so it may be
there in existence over if
there's no action taken to
staffing such as million
federal health of our best ever
taken in the state has three
very counting that action is
what we need to ensure that
working the federal office thank
you madam chair.
Representative will yes thank
you madam chair Representative.
Thank you for looking for.
It seems both sides
however my colleague
Point out
As you did as well documentation
process and I think that in my
mind is the biggest issue.
what I see is people resorting
who want to be here in.
Madam chair we want to be in
this country legally.
Enter in the proper way.
But the process that we have
that is in place right now is
our flagship.
I see that there is lacking in a
process
by which.
There are people to process
these applications.
And in my mind it seems and this
is a a COVID madam chair and I
will try to form a question here
in a moment.
It would be it seems on the
borders especially in our rural
areas we have a lack of jobs we
have a lot of it seems we were
continually promoting economic
development.
There.
It seems it would be serve these
areas well to put dollars in to
processing applications into
employing people.
creating jobs.
providing incomes in those areas
and promote the economic
development in these
communities.
Which would serve many purposes.
One of which would be processing
people.
Appropriate is what everyone of
us a lot I won't speak for
everyone is what I see is very
important to.
To.
How.
Well.
Enacting this bill.
The chief.
That.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I appreciate
the question and I I want to
stress what what you said we do
want the system to be as easy as
possible for people to come to
this country unfortunately right
now it's expensive it's a lot of
time and it's it's a burden for
migrants to come here legally to
this country from our current
immigration laws that
promulgated from Congress so
unfortunately there's as I said
if there is no duty on their
part to make it as easy as
possible for people to come here
legally as for ensuring that
this would help this crisis I
believe that places such as Dona
ana county which is on the
border they would have to work
with federal government and the
Bosnian ministration to make
sure that they have the
resources to ensure that people
who are trafficking drugs and
criminal.
Hello this is human trafficking
I know that in the country the
people who do want to come here
legally and people who work here
they can improve and I think
that economic development as you
mentioned is a huge aspect of
that we make sure that this is
as of welcoming and and of
council place to be as possible
for everybody and I think this
is something that we could
potentially get if we passed
this bill I think this is a good
first step but it's not a
solution by any means necessary.
Thank you thank you.
Vice chair.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize madam chair
representative from asking
questions.
An interesting present bill and
under the committee can
gradually.
See you during this
one of my questions is already
been addressed madam chair this
promising funds that it'd in
that sense we've already had got
that covered but just missed and
of the contradiction we are
creating in our own New Mexico
constitution here we have an
analysis from the Attorney
General that indicates this fall
it's another piece of the
constitution article four
section twenty four so I think
there language pieces in here
that would be addressed we don't
want to create an internal
constitutional conflict
That's not going to get you to
the end point of what you are
trying to do.
And madam chair that that was my
concern.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative be a
very good point and I did see
the analysis as well and I was
given any kind to make sure this
is as clear as possible.
Chair
of.
That was my only question
committee members.
Madam mode yes.
Also.
Four tax.
Representative please take.
In order.
Representative Lara.
Representative Chasey no.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes.
Representative right.
Representative Zamora yes.
By Senator no.
Madam chair the.
So today.
Representative.
We think it's a great
experience.
The motion was.
The motion.
Year two thousand.
Substitute motion to table
mountain.
This.
Table Representative Chasey.
Second this is chair of rules.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative no to table.
Representative Chasey yes to
table.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes to
table.
Representative right.
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair I feel like going
into more arguing mode again.
Another page.
By Senator yes it takes.
Roger Johnson yes the table.
Right to.
Thank you Mr.
It's for not being able to.
Madam chair.
May I ask the question sure so.
That built up to another table.
For does that put it up here
like we're talking the other day
they can be brought back.
Fifteen.
Madam chair any bills on the
table the move off the table the
next order of business is.
Members committee make the most
of those cities.
They're officially so that it's
got a report do we know where
this so so madam chair and
Representative Chasey in that
motion.
Is that a plus for the bill or
that would be if it if they do
not let it just it would just
stated in the past but it still
be brought back.
Madam chair representative if
there actually was number do not
pass.
Hello Amanda do pass to do that.
And.
And as I was trying to.
If we do yes mission fails and
we just stopped there there's no
official staffs to the bill
there's no committee report.
But there is
It it will show now on the
website of the bills tabled and
sitting in this committee the
locator service location is here
yes I don't honestly know what
she does the locator which show
with the failed to pass
emissions.
We generally don't leave it at
that.
Okay thank you.
Madam chair and thank you all
those cheques thank you next we
have the house bill one six
nine.
Representative.
Please enter yes.
Our colleagues of.
A lot of ways.
Of those managers.
We'll have to see the light.
With
morning madam chair members of
the committee.
I'm very.
Are you house bill one thing
that is still just as the
internet provided after the
process.
Existing law regarding the
complaints filed with the
interim legislative committee
completed
the committee staff for this any
information until after fighting
topical.
However you'll notice that in
current law the respondent has
knows.
House bill one sixty nine weeks
that were completed for silence
and for special staff.
And I'm bringing this bill to
ensure that our internal process
is fair and equitable and.
And also to ensure that our
policies do not run afoul of of
our friends to show all right
the speech.
it has been a long time focuses
minds you all I can to make sure
that this coaching in the
legislative process is excess.
Transparent and respectful as
possible.
I firmly believe that we're at a
fast rate tech to consider every
part of our state the state and
our process fairly.
And actually when I was
legislative staffers personally
have.
The complaint under the age for
legislative ethics committee
process do my role as a
supervisor in the individual
report.
Of the complaint that I
submitted was not do my own
respite or experience that
regarding the situation I can
wear out of my shell safrole but
this one hundred need for even
comprise one half off actually
even just friends so it have the
factors driving need the
opportunity to get that personal
support as I agonized over staff
complaint the financial results.
Which leads me to highlight that
an additional benefit of this
change is that it will allow
those who I.
The opportunity to access the
support they might need it's
just actuation so I just want to
mention that hospital one sixty
nine also gets a couple of
technical updates to language
that's not the purpose of the
bill that's routine after acting
practice of the policy to
streamline eleven is the
solution about word and I'd like
to introduce right expert
witnesses first I have money I
yes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am and I am
here today on behalf of myself
as a person who's going through
this process but I am also here
for in full transparency raises
a I also lobby for rain.
I just want to all and that has
this thank you.
As I have with me Matthew back
in two thousand.
The this.
Chairman ladies
practicing.
Right.
Last year.
Right as a United States.
Bank robbery.
As a.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you okay let's go to the
audience of C..
Since.
And this year.
Opposing.
All right let's begin with the
supportive comments.
Committee my name is Mason
Graham Mexico come hopefully
that transparency in government
buildings across the moxie the
card is that according press.
Committee approves that fanfare.
The disclosure for me regarding
investigations the strongly
believe that the current rules
of confidentiality about costs
was written at the changes are
for five boxes are five
languages by a person likes
to do that in order for
counter the success almost
disclosure that the effective
present policy here in New
Mexico state legislatures most
effective ways of those were
affected by the accident the
strong support.
Thank you.
Chair members of the committee
doing by the coalition of sexual
assault program but in my career
at work with sexual assault
victims for about thirty years
now and that's what I know about
working with them is that an
important part of their team is
to be able to speak or not speak
in addition to this the current
lofty constitutional it's
contrary to what we know about
him for survivors thank you who.
Further comments please madam
chair.
Martinez executive director of
the quality New Mexico statewide
through rights organizations.
We're in transformerless.
Isolation.
F. I.
Able to understand it long
before we're able to speak to a
lot of our lives regular basis
not having to Trask was eight
and where we do our selves we
are also.
Overly Representative instances
of sexual harassment this.
By not allowing someone was
filed is experience with contact
to speak to that experience
especially for queer and trans
people global world a request
for comment we were told not to
tell almost anyone post anything
about ourselves.
This is the situation of being
careful speaking to a counselor
is being very look inviting and
that support network that we
have and so we ask for the pass
on on this legislation because
it is good government is the
best interest of transparency.
There are more people don't feel
safe governmental interacting
with government databases we
should do everything we can to
make sure every member of our
community is in power to be in
this building and building
workstations about for.
The maintenance.
That means the sentence from
is we support all community
members having access to what
they need to survive and thrive
and that includes not being
separated from those racialized
our family and friends as an
individual who has experienced
sexual harassment and violence
throughout my life the vast
healing for me was confiding in
terms of advancing.
And mental health professionals
it shouldn't matter who you file
a complaint against be able to
have access to those resources.
Please.
Madam chair members of the
committee last of canal with the
lay
the brief they are in full
support of the state of the art
projects and form of silencing
survivors.
Have.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is lance a
policy director for the center
because of the.
Personally I come before you as
a survivor of sexual abuse at
the hands of the former.
As in two years so it's coming
for us the injustice I have yet
to be granted hi there I am able
to speak about my case because
my complaint was dismissed by
the SEC the jurisdictional
issues dismissively because the
Representative has committed his
after sexual abuse before July
first two thousand nineteen
where the mission is discussion
over such matters the contents
of my company a detailed
statement.
A signed document the
representatives for the mission
to the sexual abuse the list of
witnesses to the admission we're
not taken iterations however I
have found solace in being able
to find story despite for those
fighters to never here I'm just
process I was.
Although I have faced
intimidation I have been able to
express my rights in telling the
impacted hard I have injured.
Access Senator survivors.
We can create a change in our
society and create a world and
the legislature for we can no
longer fear for ourselves or for
our future generations of the
victims of sexual abuse we can
send in the basin
instrumentation and say that we
will not.
However without passage of house
bill one sixty nine.
This is harms to live.
I ask this committee through the
unconstitutional additions to
our suppliers we.
To seek their half point healing
change.
And.
Hospitals.
I
think you could retire I'm
reading it back and I'm here for
forever and Services legislation
funded.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Rachel taught some of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs as we mentioned
that also create a future where
folks are safe in their homes
communities and workplaces
secrecy is not there in the
future Office of know that these
are uses of power and that
secrecy truly is a co
conspirator in this realm
Bilbray's needed transparency.
We are coping safe throughout
all of sectors of our community
so thank you
Senator supported.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee I'm Harry Smith I will
full features we are right.
Senator both of ours here we
strongly.
We urge you to pass thank you.
Okay we'll go to the webcast I
see the courage.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee this is current
rigor of the director of Lujan
at this ministry to Mexico and
we also stand in full support H.
B. one sixty nine and I would in
the interest of panel simply
equity arguments already made by
speakers support and I urge you
to support H. B. one six nine as
well thank you.
Thank you then we'll go to
closing comments HSD any cancer
raised webcast any closing
comments.
CNN Representative Rehm.
Madam chair of yes
Representative is more of state
if.
We look at our state court so
there's you know whatever basis
moving forward.
Both parties the the a in the
course of the parents can go
ahead and speak about of the
trial is coming.
If we look at our federal
system.
They were very close.
They could they do not want to
discussion about the trial they
wanted to go ahead and
Of the strictly what is in court
and then afterwards you could
talk about.
One of the things that I was
worried about our state ethics
commission is that could be
weaponized and I think some one
of those concerns are still
there.
But if one side can go ahead and
speak and the other side Moquino
that's not a fair situation.
And I see this is a fairness
situation more than
or we need to go ahead and
decide that we're going to go to
the federal system and nobody
can speak about it will have the
hearing will have the
determination and then whoever
State.
But anyway that's just kind of a
statement in where I think I.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Zamora Madam and
representatives.
How can there be a fair trial.
If it goes to the public first
and and everybody puts it out
there to the public.
And then it comes to try.
Madam chair Representative
Zamora to really your question
and I would say that
What happened why is possible
now.
Is that once I can speak
publicly in the others cannot.
Which this bill is seeking to
cracked
and.
Do nothing about this does will
change.
When people choose to discuss
this publicly so you know I
don't I think that that's a
larger conversation about how we
approach I thank all complaints
is and in this building and yeah
yes Representative Reese way as
well
All of us who are have run for
office and do you know sort of
that that the nature of thousand
complaints has to be used but we
also can't
I would say we can't make policy
just based on the fear that
something is going to be
weaponized because we're
actually all trying to make this
a very respectful and ethical
place.
And shared and.
And and I I sure.
have many of the and I just
speak to that as well sure
Representative somewhat I
actually I really appreciate
this question because I feel
like it's still hard why we're
doing this right so if you take
a look at the language right now
and the gag order has no limits
right so folks are going through
this process are in a constant
state as you know if my mother
asks why she's saying things can
I tell her right it it you know
somebody's going through this
process can they access.
counselor right so I do want to
say as we know in this building
a lot of these are really
politicized here.
Right and I think we all know
this but one of the things I
want to speak to about that is
our ability to center survivors
and this right we're going
through this process and getting
that
Getting their needs met in terms
of feeling.
I also want to speak to a
representative range question
about you know politically
motivated
accusations and I think a lot of
our job here is on the session
is just to develop a lot of
these things that are sent not
just here but the site in
general.
Now is that false claims are.
Range have two to eight percent
and that's of that folks who are
sexually assaulted and come
forward right and even after
that we know that sixty to
seventy percent cases don't get
reported in the first place so
I'm actually welcoming these
questions are just about you
know the place in which we live
here right as we go through our
sessions the place in which we
live outside of here as well and
so I want to thank you for that
question over the Act because
right now that gag order has no
limits and part of the
legislation is what happens when
people go to the press.
Right.
That's us politicizing this
conversation the real question
is today what happens when
people can access the resources
they need to get through this
process thank you and madam
chair and and thank you for that
testimony.
I actually have a daughter that
went through right.
I know how difficult it is not
just for the victim.
But for the family.
And that's one case.
But then we also see the
political cases.
Where if everybody would not say
anything maybe we can have a
fair trial.
They're deemed guilty.
Before they get to go to trial.
Thirteen guilty by the public.
We see that.
At the national level we see it
at the state level.
Madam chair and.
I believe if the judge of this
yourself as a turning.
And and your date yes
Representative mac mac.
At that point point is it the
legal.
From the.
Law part of this.
Bill to say something about it
K. from a complaint.
Madam chair representative as
the bill stands now it's very
clearly a content based
restriction and people face
restrictions both of which the
Supreme Court has.
Per se unconstitutional
Representative constitution at
the point where you're assessing
what speech is restricted based
on looking at what the speaker
is saying as presumptively
unconstitutional would have to
stress.
And.
I cannot tell you the last
thirty years US precursors.
A version of the speech our
string like this where
constitution.
What is cost.
so as it stands now district.
You.
Employment forward
the way stature.
It seems clear is.
And madam chair.
And and.
Presenter's Representative.
Congratulations
I like the federal better.
Or nobody says anything.
That part of the healing.
Part of the healing and and
support system need to shift our
victims.
I strongly support.
But as far as.
Point some complaint.
Is.
Is a.
Sued and and.
It's going to wind up in trial.
I like the federal law better
ordered.
Everybody has to just wait until
after trial.
And so we can have a fair trial
in the.
Not have such as.
impact on on a trial.
I but putting it out to the
public and and I would like your
response on it to to understand
so like maybe I can better
understand if if I'm
misunderstanding how this is
going to work.
Madam chair representative the
military at your back.
Discussed what happens is that
federal criminal case regarding
disclosures Madam chair
representative systems outside
what I expected to talk about.
but as.
prosecuting federal criminal
cases for years.
As far as I know that at school.
Back this up there is no
prohibition on the eighteenth
talk about the case for the
federal.
The court imposes some sort of
for lack of our guests.
But coming to the table there is
no prohibition on talking about
anything federal case spot
outside what's presented to
director.
It is a.
At least wise and I think it
still is it was the physicians.
Attorney General states are jobs
that the department of justice
never talks.
a case of sub what happens.
And so that is a policy of the
the waters probably in the same
way that the speakers are
permissible to have the
commission and commissioner
stopped talking about.
This government speech.
This.
I think it's the same at there's
probably people online we have
the federal public defender's
office
but expand my impression one
share that they've taken the
same position as general.
This is not speaking about.
But there is no lawful
proficiency.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative and with this
thank you thank you have thank
you Representative little yes
madam chair I need to do pass on
house bill one sixty nine.
A second.
Where do pastor Representative
little a second by vice chair.
To grow Representative
yes.
Representative a block.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes.
Representative three yes.
Representative tomorrow no.
But sure Figaro yes.
Madam Johnson yes.
Six one.
Congratulations Representative.
Your bill.
Two three sixteen zero thirty.
Thank.
We.
Everybody's a comedian.
No improper okay this committee.
Yes.
M..
This is very short bill.
This is a one of the most
important bills madam chairman
for committees that go over.
Simply because it really tells
J. Joint Memorial of.
The capital what it does is this
is the women's suffrage.
And we simply want to put up a
parking capital to ensure women.
Process for us to be able to
vote our farmers and with that I
am going to to use my expert
witness to the left and then she
will rates for this to the right
for some very for you.
Good morning madam chairman
representatives my name is Tina
laws right I am studies
president in our lingo region of
the local Santa Fe chapter of
the daughters of the American
revolution.
We are pleased to bring this
memorial to you this year we
have tried for two years.
Anything the office so we are
trying to get the slack in to
honor the women and a few men
who worked tirelessly suffered
in the state of New Mexico to
pass that New Mexico lags
behind.
Not passes into we refer to
passes it out passed.
In Washington in nineteen
nineteen and it was ratified by
the states in nineteen twenty so
we try to hit that one here one
hundred year anniversary but.
I'm totally so
three D. A. R. is a nonpartisan
service organization we are we
have about a hundred and ninety
thousand members in the United
States we have sixteen chapters
here in New Mexico all across
the state three of the we are a
service organization but we also
recognize historic preservation
which brings us to our FAQ idea
we watch the Santa Fe Trail all
throughout eastern New Mexico we
did the month Madonna of the
trail statue down in Albuquerque
and we are very big on historic
preservation and monuments to
get a beautiful new yes.
up in the Santa Fe national
cemetery and we have a new one
in angel fire at the state
veterans cemetery and we're
going to do a third line
offering yes and this is for.
Set for four years okay so some
of those are state projects this
is a particular chapter project
for Santa Fe but we want to put
New Mexico state organization on
the plaque we already has three
feet up to other plaques sales
ten dollars and we want to keep
that through the funding of
giving the organization of the
state.
Credit.
If anyone has any questions I
will answer them.
Representative did you want your
way to sixty of lakes for this
stance request questions what.
All right thank you
representative will go to public
comment is there anyone in the
room who is here in support of
this memorial thank you madam
chair members of the committee
hello or to use it I stand in
support of this
resolution this memorial to the
I want you all to know that I've
been voting longer than most of
you that a lot.
It is wonderful to see all of
these young ladies here and all
up all of us ladies here
participating in such an
important the.
Student and activity you are to
our country
Certainly do support of this.
Bill thank you very much.
Thank you.
Any other support group.
Any other opposition in rural.
Can go to the zoom.
I would like to speak in
support.
And anyone who would like to
speak in opposition.
C. not either there will go to
the committee Representative re
madam chair I move the do you
have some.
We
could I have a question okay we
have discussion Representative
yeah hold that do pass my
representatives more.
Madam chair and.
Presenters.
I feel as a man we want equal
rights this.
May I answer that.
intelligence.
There was some questions in the
bill it's just real brief
briefly
One of the statements you made
was.
Something about meeting up with
federal.
for the federal lawyers.
It's been done yes when women's
suffrage was finally passed in
nineteen nineteen in DC.
It had to be ratified by a
certain number of states in New
Mexico was kind of late in the
game doing that but they did it
they did okay and so up I wanted
to to there is a very important
in Mexico from Las Vegas.
Who supported women's suffrage
consistently at the federal
level he was a senator Andrés.
Office or something a a job to
from highlands he was elected to
the Senate he followed capturing
Senator pronounce it wrong he's
all control and then
of someone followed him in the
Senate and at the national level
and he did so wonderful
maneuvers to keep women suffrage
on the table so to speak and
make sure it was still going to
committees and doing things and
it was finally voted on I
believe during special session
in a DC.
So we are honoring him but we're
not putting names on this plaque
we want to honor the women of
New Mexico who were supportive
of women's suffrage and that
includes Nina Otero Warren.
Who is our new national U. S.
mint order there are many others
that that we recognize.
And madam chair representative
The faster this is it is that in
the bill or did I read in the
FIR D. A. R. will pay for the
full cost much of the cost there
will be no cost at all which is
why.
There.
And in the.
Representative Madam chair
representative for formal bids
will the plaque be places are
already a designated area for
and how may is that.
And the sites but.
The staff house staff will
determine what will be in the
two usually right next to all
the right it's on the west
hallways what we assume in the
rotunda madam chair and.
And it would be eighteen by
twenty two matches of plaque
build their that DA are placed
in two thousand it will look
very similar so madam chair and
and.
Presenters I I guess we don't
need an amendment to keep them
from put in a like a forty by
forty foot plant.
I've been working with a capital
recognition subcommittee for
three years now so thank you so
much madam chair madam chair and
that's that's all the questions
I think chairman spoke to
Billboard about.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Trujillo and
I appreciate your efforts in the
presentation I'm happy to
support it and I knew there was
something good
authorities in the audience
David.
This morning for those of you
don't know.
This Ortiz she chaired our state
board of education for many many
years and.
Let's start with the.
You did not see that there's for
years madam chair.
All those eight years with
Madam.
Senator
He said I wrote our.
Do we have a second.
Also.
But.
Okay so we have a motion passed.
Do we have any opposition.
Seeing them you go to pass
regulations thank you so much
thank you very much.
Madam chair.
Representative Trujillo.
Senator.
Representative little would like
to explain yes.
I do support.
He is no and thank you for
bringing forward but I think
it's important to continue the
education of all of our people
in the city of the citizens of
the state that would prove that
is not part of this.
As I stated earlier this is
people's.
While I don't I I.
That is at the fact and I
perhaps I am not aware of how we
might address that it
separately.
I think that your knowledge of
New Mexico finally joining
Wanted times as it were then
is important to acknowledge and
but I do want to make sure that
we recognize.
Order and served in World War
one and.
Other.
Our reserves that right to gain
that right not be forgotten as
well so thank you thank.
I promise that I will work with
my colleagues here to make sure
that you're your comments are
not forgotten thank you thank
you thank you thank you dress
that we actually do a are
actually did place a the Navajo
talkers monument of incentive.
Terry many years ago it's a
beautiful line up of the flag
thank you and senator qualities
for addressing is the
representative body mean to
promotion.
It is
somebody's.
Is it all going on like.
We.
Thank you everyone thank you
thanks we are.
Thank you for.
