Representative.
I was.
Mr Chairman representative
Lente.
I'm here.
Good with a quorum.
Very.
Yes okay can you do me a favor I
received a text message from
Representative Matthews that
she's looking for the week or
this meeting if you can email
her that be great.
Thank you okay thank you thank
you thank you so at this point
I'd like to go and have parks
are are members introduce
themselves.
and and we can go ahead and
start with Representative Brown.
Representative Brown if you
would please.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee so I'm.
Catherine brown Representative
the eastern half of Eddy County
it's district fifty five every
culture and water potentially
huge in my district we have
probably more agricultural
activity than most people
realize and we talk about
stress on our roads down there
it's not just from oil and gas a
lot of it's from agriculture so
it's cotton pecans chili also
for the some of the best of self
in the world high protein
content
the Germans love our cotton
redress of the best there is as
well and then just a bunch of
other other crops as well so I
like to have a few bit bragging
rights about what we do in
agriculture Picos river runs
through my town we have a lot of
have the cross Education
district also there and the so
everything that adding water
handles is very important to my
constituents thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Brown
love having you on the committee
let's move then to
Representative Ezzell
Representative Ezzell good
morning.
Good morning Mr speaker members
of the committee.
I'm candy Spence Ezzell.
I've been involved in
agriculture my whole life.
My brothers and my.
The farm that my grandparents
started.
And we're fix if we can hang on
to it it'll be a hundred years
coming up pretty quick.
I've been through.
The trying times that the
farmers in the pagans belly went
through in the early sixties
whenever.
The wells were going to be a
major and we saw the outcome of
that and it was not.
It was not.
I think that at the time these
farmers were very concerned that
the state engineers office was
going to repeal their water
rights we have seen the changes
over the years.
We have seen what.
State engineers office has tried
to do as far as limiting our
farmers ability to have the
water they need to be able to
farm whenever they came out
about twelve years ago is it
because you all are doing such a
good job we're going to take
away half acre but if your
water.
That's whenever I tell the state
engineers office.
That's fine but whenever you do
this you will see them going
back to the old ways of farming
which is throught their air
gauging tanks instead of modern
technology like we have now.
I had some pretty good mentors
as far as our water rights go in
agriculture goes that's my
father was my father.
Joe still.
The representative ABAC dating.
And all those farmers around
there and ranchers around there.
One of five children.
And we know what it's like to
work on a farm I became a
tractor driver whenever I was
about ten years ago Mr chairman.
I guess that's probably safer
than the Spence does that drive
my vehicle Lujan.
I I really have a problem with
people in our state not
realizing where their fate does
come from Mr chairman.
It doesn't come from the grocery
store it comes from the hard
labor that these farmers and
ranchers which now comprises
less than two percent of the
total population of the United
States and to me that's very
scary.
We are faced right now in my
particular area with the
problems that the dairy farmers
are having we have had six
carries closed down in the past
seven months because they could
not afford to keep doing this.
I do have to brag on my dairy
farmers because if you all all
of you all we'll go into the
grocery store see a product
called fair life milk.
That was developed by my.
Jerry farmers down in the
valley.
And it is fantastic I do like to
brag on agriculture Mr chairman.
I am a rancher.
We had to sell at in September
of two thousand and nineteen
because of our drought
conditions.
And that one really really hurt.
Thank goodness last year god
send us your brain where we
where we grew more grant get but
I still can't afford to
replenish my ranch.
We've been hearing all these
people talking about.
Important.
To table here in New Mexico
where we have.
Our agricultural products being
served to our school kids to our
hospitals.
To our penal institutions and
guess what Mr chairman members
of this committee if you're new
to it.
We cannot have our meat
processed in the state of New
Mexico and have that serve their
we literally have to ship our
protein products out of state
for processing before they can
come back into the state to be
served to our school kids Mr
Chairman it's time for change
and if anybody has any further
questions for me I'll be glad to
answer because I've served on
this committee pretty good while
at one time I was chair of this
committee.
And it's for.
It was just people this in the
the speaker mentioned that the
other day how many of you all
are involved in agriculture.
If you we you're involved in
agriculture Mr chairman thank
you very much.
Representative Ezzell thank you
so much for your insight and for
being our ranking member in this
committee we appreciate what you
bring to the table and and value
your comments thank you very
much let's move on then out to
Representative often be ill
Representative Hochman Vigil
good morning if we're just doing
some introductions and you are
next.
Good morning Mr chair thank you
so much I apologize for my late
arrival I'm having some trouble
with zoom links that are that
are I'm getting the committee
cell work with IT on that I'm on
my phone today on Representative
day Hochman Vigil I represent
house district fifteen which is
right now the northeast heights
north valley in one precinct on
the west side of Albuquerque
this is my second session on the
water and agriculture committee
in my day job I'm an aviation
and spaceflight Attorney so are
being on this committee has been
an enlightening experience for
for me I've learned a ton about
I think what may be one of the
most if not the most important
subject areas for the state of
New Mexico I'm in my this is my
fourth time I'm sorry my second
term point session as a
representative and I'm looking
forward to serving on this
committee again thank you so
much Mr chair thank you very
much Representative Hochman
Vigil have a have a great
meeting with us let's then move
then to Representative Matthews
Representative Matthews good
morning.
Good morning and Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
I love serving on this committee
even though I'm a city girl
I
grew up this is hi
Representative district twenty
seven in out in the northeast
types of Albuquerque
and.
I grew up in a in Missouri in a
town that was suited the
regional center for farming for
a lot of farming communities and
a lot of
Gary producers there and I
noticed a representative is that
was talking about Gary things
and one of the
one of the most enlightening
things that I've had happen to
me is a member of this committee
is to get to the publication
called.
from the dairy Committee for the
dairy and producers caught and
has its common called news.
And this is one of my favorite
rates and I've been amazed at
how the different the fact that
there's a difference between dry
dryland cattle dairy cattle and
and I guess wetland
and house so much of the dairy
cattle world is controlled by
the federal government
regulations that they have so
it's been a a real learning
experience being on this
committee
I. E. I was interested in it for
a couple reasons one is I I love
to grow things I'm a master
gardener I was it does it act
the tentacle gardens until I
started doing this now I don't
have time to do that
so I love plants I love watching
things grow and I had a bumper
crop of tomatoes this year as
did everybody else so it wasn't
my skill the Syrians came at the
right time
and
I.
But is yes and I wanted to
mention
Yes the water part of this
committee
I got interested in.
In water law.
A retired lawyer but I got
interested in water law when I
was a deputy Attorney General
and I represented the state of
New Mexico before the US Supreme
Court in a water case involving
the Canadian river
and I do not claim to be an
expert in water law or anything
like that but it got me very
interested in meeting very very
aware of the.
Complexity that surrounds Water
particularly in the west where
there are so many contacts and
see and so few resources.
So I'm very glad to be back and
expecting to learn more more
things not only about dairy
cattle but all kinds of other
other issues that involve
agriculture and water resources
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Matthews love have you on the
committee and congratulations on
the bumper crop of tomatoes
let's move on to Representative
small good morning
Representative vice chairman
small good morning Mr chairman
members thanks so much for
having us here today my name is
Nate and small very proud to
represent house district thirty
six which is in the mid to
northern Dona Ana County and
much of the Misia and Rincon
valley's this is a district that
is steeped in agriculture within
the history of our state and and
prior to state the.
Course our green Chile as well
as much of the cotton production
pecan Development pecan
development as well as other row
crops all are very connected to
that the area that I'm
privileged to represent and just
very proud to be here serving on
this committee and grateful for
your leadership Mr chairman
thank you.
Representative small thank you
appreciate you being on our
committee thank you for your
contributions to this committee
Representative Zamora good
morning Sir.
Good morning Mr chairman that
member morning members of the
committee my name is Martine
somewhat I I represent districts
sixty three I cover the south
half of curry the north have for
Roosevelt all of the Baca little
by little bit a little touch of
San Miguel County I am a farmer
by blood I was actually born and
delivered by a midwife on a farm
and lived on farms and ranches
all my life I had the
opportunity to buy my own farm.
And my own ranch and in the past
year I have sold a mole.
I believe god guides everybody
in different ways
I think this is the path we're
supposed to be on for whatever
reasons that sometimes we don't
understand.
I'm glad to be serving on this
committee look forward to it and
the thank you for allowing me to
introduce myself Mr chair.
Representative mora of the more
appreciate your contribution
this committee and appreciate
your friendship in the in the
house let's move in to our our
new vice chairman for the
committee we have the same
committee members for for this
thirty day session as we did
last year last year and so
without further ado
Representative Mr vice chairman
Ellis and yet they have been.
Yes.
Good morning what is this.
I gotta throw in my Indonesian
Selamat pagi.
That's all in the needs in the
or a that's all good morning I
am Anthony Allison I serve
district four which is all in
the San Juan County.
We have the San Juan river that
runs through the middle of the
county.
Through several communities all
the way to the Arizona border
and then it finally connects
with the Nevada border let me so
we have a lot of farmers in our
area and one of the biggest
farms is that Navajo
agricultural products industry I
forget how many acres they had
but they're only my they're only
farming about seventy five
percent of it and they grow.
All kinds of vegetables and
alfalfa and everything else I'm
not much of a former.
I am in the I'm a journeyman
electrician by trade working in
the coal mines that's where my
experiences of my family used to
farm the tow Hetchy area which
is in McKinley county and back
then we used to hear gate in the
early spring and just irrigate
once before we planted in the
accord  and then just hope for
the rain the rest of the summer
right now my wife and I enjoy
small gardening in our backyard
that's the extent recording
stopped or gardening experience
she does a better job than I do
so that's what I'm trying to
stay away as long as I can when
I can.
The name of very glad to be part
of this committee of thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr vice chairman
appreciate you being on this
committee appreciate you
stepping up to be our vice
chairman
little bit about me before we go
to staff introductions I'm
Representative Derrick Lente day
Representative the sixty fifth
district in the house of
representatives that includes
the counties of Santa San Juan
and Rio Reba I do have seven
pueblos within my in my district
along the the Rio Grande
majority of all of them at a
culture in nature as well as.
I have a five chapters of the
Navajo Nation and eight three
Apache nation as well as the
town of Bernalillo so very much
an agricultural community proud
to serve in agriculture this
will be my fourth year as
chairman of the house
agriculture committee and
excited this year that we have
inherited a stake test as part
of our recording in progress art
of our cattle love to have their
issues represented here as well
as we heard a lot of those last
year in the years prior so I
think this is a very good place
for them to be part of as we
discuss water issues an
agricultural issues that affect
our state and our relatives and
our and our communities that we
that we represent again just
happy to be here also a former
rancher Representative that zoom
I have a have a running joke as
to who is the best farmer in the
house and and we're still going
at it and someday will we'll
figure that out but until then
just proud to be part of this
committee we'll go over some
some ground rules for this
committee right after we hear
from our staff but also to
Representative is else point
regarding how much she loves
agriculture and how much
agriculture affects our daily
basis and and who's involved in
agriculture I want to just give
a shout out to the New Mexico
farm and livestock bureau as
today is and cultural education
day in the house of
representatives so it's a it's a
piece of us that depicted a
memorial that that we were able
to get through and I want to
congratulate them on today being
house agriculture education day
so thank you all again for being
here I wanted to take some time
to introduce our staff that will
help us out through this entire
committee process I don't want
to have to put them on the spot
but I may ask them to say a few
words and I will want to begin
with our committee assistant.
Mary D. Mary dean is is in our
office you can come visit in
that office to be want to and
she's there with a smiling face
all you probably can't see it
there mask on but very good
morning can you hear me good
morning yes I can hear you
representative would you let
yourself my name is merry dean
and I am from Santa Fe New
Mexico born and raised here I
work for the house of
representatives for several
committees for ten years or so
and while.
And it's a privilege and a
pleasure to work with
representative Lente and in this
committee.
Thank you merry thank you for
being there for us and and keep
in us all all together we
appreciate your help and your
support let's then move to
Bridget Breen Act who is our
committee analyst.
Way there yes hi good morning.
Good morning thank you if you
introduce yourself we appreciate
it yeah I'm Bridget pine Act and
I'm a water attorney I graduated
from the university of New
Mexico in two thousand and two.
And I also have an L. L. M. from
the university of Dundee and
Scotland in water.
And our I'm just really looking
forward to helping everybody out
with the bills and definitely if
you have any questions feel free
to reach out and a half this
really happy to be here I'm
working from home.
Sarah are contacting you by
email also a great way to go.
You got it thank you Bridget
thank you for being here for us
and.
At the conclusion of this
meeting I'll ask merry to create
a contactless for for members
and and for our staff so that we
can all have that be able to
contact one another so if you do
need to so let's move that to
Elisabeth Johnson Elizabeth good
morning she's our minority
analyst Mr Johnson are you there
yes good morning Mr chair
members of the committee I'm
Elisabeth Johnson and I and the
general counsel for the house
Republicans but I'm also serving
as an analyst on this committee
actually do you have a a small
background in agriculture as
well as I grew up raising goats
and high school and you'll see
me probably tomorrow on FFA day
wearing my FFA jacket so I'm
actually very excited to get to
know everyone on the committee
and work on some important
issues L. thank you.
Thank you Mr Johnson let glad to
have you with us.
Next in and finally we have Beth
barred will best bar will good
morning she are the issues are
major analyst better either.
I don't see you're on our list
so perhaps she's having some
technical difficulties as well
but Beth will be our major
analyst at Bardwell and so as I
mentioned merry will we'll get
together a contactless so that
we will all be able to have each
other's contact as well as to
our staff members as well
Representative Ezzell I see your
hand up yes ma'am.
Yes yes Sir Mr chairman I do
have a question can you tell me
again what rural merry dean is
here.
Merry is in room three one two
three twelve three twelve and
that extension number.
you know you'd think I'd know
that off the top of my head but
I don't we will get that to you
as soon as we can.
And no problem okay and one more
thing Mr chairman as far as our
committee handouts go how are we
to retrieve them.
merry has them all in the shared
file that that is online and so
she she will get we don't have
any for today but when we do
have that we will have that in a
shared file that's been created
for our committee and so she
will send the link we will have
access to any type of document
because that's obviously going
to be important for when we
begin to hear pieces of
legislation so that no one
doesn't have anything that they
can't that reference to.
Mr chairman I really have a
problem with that I want
something that I am able to hold
in my hands and to read to make
notes on and this year about
crap is nothing but that okay I
I just want that out there for
maybe Legislative Council to pay
attention to because I do want
to be able to look at these
documents I want to be able to
look at the FIR is on it I want
to be able to read the bills
right then is there be been
being presented by the person
that is carrying those bills and
I know I'm not the only one that
feels this way I'm just amount
the one thank you Mr chairman
Representative Ezzell your your
comments are noted and we will
see we can do to accommodate
that nonetheless I think the
practice has been especially
because were but now everything
is going to be in a virtual in
the cloud file and once we do
have access to that that we can
print them on our own but we'll
we'll we'll we'll see how we can
we can create some some some
positive effects to help you out
well Mr chairman the reason I
bring that up as many problems
during this session that I've
had with this computer because I
am in the house these.
Because my speakers what work
out here I have to get special
help table pick up the internet
out here and I'm afraid a lot of
us are not going to be able to
retrieve the files and to be
able to read them and death in
depth to be able to make
quantified and qualified
decisions on these bills that
are coming up and over there I
will stop Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative Ezzell
noted and I will work with very
and staff to see how we can
accommodate you and and and the
members I mean the simple for
all of you if we if we can help
you all out then we will do that
okay Representative Allison is
your hand up Sir
I also had a problem with the
file folder I kept losing the so
I I prefer individual mailings.
Thank you for that you got it
and and and I just received a
text message from merry saying
that.
Maybe maybe emails an option but
we'll figure it out don't worry
we'll we'll we'll get it figured
out what time were stunned to
hear legislation regarding some
of the ground rules in regards
to this this committee I want to
remain committed to one.
Observing the twenty four hour
rule knowing that no piece of
legislation will be stuck by it
regardless of of of party I want
to make sure that I remain
committed that both Democrats
Republicans have better access
to all of us in our committee so
that we will here bills as their
as their referred to us I want
to make sure that that none of
you feel like you are being
slighted or limited on your
comments to any piece of
legislation so we will
thoroughly vet every piece of
legislation so that we all feel
like we have been able to
represent our own communities of
constituents to the fullest I
also want to make sure that when
members of our public zoom in or
or and and and in the past had
joined us physically in a
committee room that they're
given the respect that they
deserve and that means that when
they are here to speak that
they're here to speak and I will
I will not cut off people's
comment period so that so that
we can just try to.
Go by and and and get and get
the bills
fast so I want to make sure that
that I'm still committed to that
so members of the public I I'm
looking now we have an attendee
lists of about twenty nine
strong and love to see those
numbers going up and I know last
year when we had the zoom as an
option that we were there were
times and we could hear in the
background of farm animals
because people were on their
farms Wells zoom again and
listening to the committee
hearings investment dissipation
I think that many in our rural
communities can appreciate
because then they feel part of
of of what's going on in Santa
Fe so to all of those I want to
make sure that we can run a very
fair and transparent Committee
if there is ever any time when
you feel anyone of you that that
that we are not abiding by that
call me out I have zero problem
with anybody asking me a
question me on anything you know
at at at the end of the day I
want to make sure that we all
feel like we have
a good team especially for
matters related to agriculture
safety as in water resources
some of which I think and I
think we can all agree on this
committee are at the very most
important issues as we are
moving into
the future so with that being
said thank you all for your
attendance this morning thank
you all for your introduction
this morning and I will I'm I'm
excited to have our our our
first presenter for the for the
twenty twenty two legislative
session be Amanda I've known for
at this point probably a couple
decades Mr Mike Hammond used to
work when I first met him for
the bureau of reclamation
insurance and gives introduction
as well but then we stole him
away from the bureau reclamation
when I was eight chairman for
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district the
irrigation district and he was
the man that was so well versed
in all of water issues from
irrigation to the native
American to.
Adult culture to everything that
you could think of related to to
to water he was our men and and
I was proud to have worked with
them for several years and I'm
proud to see him now here with
the state and so
you know without further ado I
see Mr Mike Hammond now on the
screen good morning Mike thank
you for joining us I gave you I
gave a little brief injection
how I know you but
you know the floor is yours now
Sir so welcome to our committee
thank you.
Well thank you so much Mr
chairman and and I really did
enjoy our time together with the
grant Conservancy district where
you served as chairman and I
work closely on a number of
issues of great importance to
the middle Rio Grande in the six
Miller Graham pueblos in all
your years in the four county
area so it was a pleasure of
mine Mr with you as well.
I also was pleased to be part of
your introduction.
Says this morning on your
inaugural committee meeting for
the session I'm very impressed
with the brought brought the
nature are experiencing and
representation of our great
state of from around the New
Mexico and and I'm here this
morning to introduce myself to
you
to be working with you as a
representative of the governor's
office
and and the the on all things
water essentially
in in terms of what she's asked
me to do
I.
I grew up in Taos my folks had a
property just off the boundary
of tells Pueblo we're a ditch
came off of of of through the
Cerro there and and ran through
my my my family property and we
used to Terry data an orchard in
the garden and and and some
other other shrubbery and in the
landscaping associated with a
motel that my parents ran when I
when I grew up there and I I I
was also the toilet plunger in
the
and the fire wood splitter and
all the stuff you do in a family
business but I I also work
closely with the the the public
here years just to the north of
our boundary to kind of
negotiate I call it it's Bank
proficiency up to find out why
the ditch cut off and what's
going on and so I I I I got
the early introduction into our
life and and then the the
secular world up the tiles this
is part of my upbringing I I
went to the university of New
Mexico I got a degree in civil
engineering and I've been a
professional engineer since the
nineteen ninety.
Of practicing primarily in New
Mexico I've got almost forty
years of water resource
experience that.
I spent time down and
Representative Allison Browns
area of on the Pecos of during
the rally dam construction time
with your reclamation we also
work on the car form for it for
the fish and Wildlife Service
and the seven members of pumping
farm down there so I have a
little bit of experience and
knowledge about the Bangko
spelling.
and and my my time.
I served with reclamation for
seventeen years and I completed
that that work with them as the
area manager for all of New
Mexico and southern Colorado and
and and parts of West Texas.
Under my purview at that time
before I came to work for the
millers and Conservancy district
that I just retired from in in
December and and the governor
tapping on the shoulder come
forward and and
And work on her behalf on on
these very challenging times and
very opportune times in the
water business and I look
forward to it I I do want to
share my screen at this time I
got a short presentation.
So give that a try.
No more is that something that
I'm allowed to do.
Yes I'm gonna go ahead and and
what you present it.
Thank you so much.
Can find the spot where I can
share my screen.
Doesn't quite Mr Hammond you see
your desktop.
So perhaps you just opened the
presentation.
Okay.
No
merry can can you go back to
that screen where we could see
Mr Hammond's desktop.
Chairman Senator.
This is in a meeting of the
committee assistant supervisor
Mr chairman if you could just
select the document you want to
screen share and then we can
share it.
Selected.
That is now.
We we we can see you moving your
mouse around on your by desktop
chairman I'm so sorry we are not
seen his screening at.
The transition.
This is my screen sharing is
still disabled.
Which screen you're trying to
share.
Thank you for particular strain
but on.
The message that I'm disabled
from insuring.
Try try again okay.
There we go.
Share your screen now Mr and
then.
This.
Thank you.
Yes Sir okay great that's always
the tense moment of the of the
most of the time these days is
to get the screams insure up and
running so I appreciate the
committee's indulgence and and
again
the.
This brief for a.
Introduction into a.
All right the governor asked me
to step up and take this job I
was I was originally planning on
retiring this coming year and
and work on my small farm but I
haven't crossed.
And then you know do some other
things
of you know work on a number of
issues that we face in New
Mexico and there was some
consulting opportunities that I
was talking to folks about that
the governor's very.
You know a very compelling to
give me very come compelling
reasons to come join the state
working for her as our senior
water adviser and what I'll be
doing is really assisting in the
continues to provide our
relationships with our
communities across the state
that's something that is always
necessary to the governor's
office as well as our.
All of our.
Natural resources water agencies
with in the and the and the
government.
Find a point of contact in the
governor's office on water and
water related infrastructure
matters.
The system is coordinating the
state and federal funding
programs I think that's strongly
critical with all the funding
opportunities that we have now
and and most of them are are
here to serve underserved
communities in rural New Mexico
well lots of resources coming
through the federal.
Are both funding as well as the
bipartisan.
Infrastructure bill that will
starting to learn about how to
put those resources to to more I
also serve as a liaison between
communities in the in the state
agencies and assist with any
federal outreach the needs to be
conducted as we go through this
process of competitive.
The grant process and and all of
the different federal programs
and then also also I'm on the
adviser to the governor self on
water policy and budget
recommendations I just coming on
board couple weeks ago and the
first of the year spend a lot of
time working with their directly
on on prepare preparation of the
budget and and working through
those issues and then also work
with the legislature on this on
the state's water agenda that's
with all you you folks in my
contact is there it that's a
Mike dot hamon at state dot in
M. dot US.
The illusion of New Mexico water
policy is really started back.
create the pre statehood and and
Google two three centuries ago
really with the Spanish New
Mexico and a lot of the secular
as.
Utilizing the journal shortages
and community unity of the
guiding principle as the
foundational water resource
management program that existed
pre pre of eighteen forty eight
the with the treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo.
The staff was man of the
appropriation drive the card and
and and nineteen oh seven and
that was the starting point for
the the and ministration in New
Mexico
and nineteen twenty three
Conservancy act was.
Passed by the state for
improvement of the Miller grand
valley and construction of a lot
of them.
and then the interstate compacts
Rio Grande Colorado because
Canadian Cristea and Animas La
Plata were all put in place in
in the thirties forties and and
and and leader of the fifties in
some cases and then Senator
federal projects came into being
the first in health food
Carlsbad irrigation district
dams the other dams in the paper
this San Juan Chama project in
the.
Being in the early seventies and
along with that down in the
sixties and then several other
act the accent you through
including the foot flood control
acts of the
nineteen forty eight and fifty
for the middle Rio Grande
Valley.
And then the state's been
adjudicating Senator basins on
an ongoing basis and that will
continue forward into the future
until a lot of those are
completed there's also Indian
water rights settlements are
part of all the education
process is.
The federal government on behalf
of the tribes to solidify their
water rights and there's four of
those on going right now and the
three of one of the biggest
completed.
and are in various stages of
implementation.
and then act water resource
management that's a a new tool
in the toolbox for the state
engineers office to take a look
at district specific regulations
that can help in various regions
of the state where the the the
traditional process of prior
appropriation really isn't of
best way to to function and and
and make things work and and a
water tight situation as we are
are facing.
Really.
We have some huge challenges now
of rural New Mexico is is is in
every state the and it's it's a
place where people have
adjusted.
We'll have adapted and and
people know how to deal with
throughout the cycles of drought
is nothing new to our our our
folks that have lived with that
for their entire lives food the
the one thing we have experience
of the nineteen eighties as is a
very
Hi the floor of the average
supply.
That we've experienced in the in
the in the eighties and and into
the mid nineties is probably one
of the wettest periods on record
in our things are changing a
little bit and talk more about
that in a minute but but all of
our policies the sons I just I I
just listed in some of the
things that we've been doing.
Really the the the formed in the
twentieth century and and it was
on the backdrop of of good good
water supplies but the long term
record really shows that if you
look back at the paleo hydrology
and you know triggering surveys
it's cetera that really.
The southwest is gone through
lots of serious water shortages
and droughts in the past and and
and it's and that's the backdrop
that we have.
The question now is is the is
the is the.
Climate change driven by the.
Additional CO two and the
environment is that really
something that is.
Impacting us tremendously right
now what does it all mean how
are we going to adapt to a
different of the teacher if it's
in the will be experiencing more
there is V. as a result and like
I said earlier the nineteen
eighties to very high snow
bacteria but even back then I
was cutting my teeth in the in
the water resource business as a
young engineer and and and we
were already starting to see
reductions in Los no elevations
when I grew up in counties to
see snow in the in the valley
floor well into may
you don't see that anymore up
there the the Los no just does
not hang around anymore and and
a lot of times
you'll see rain in the lower
elevations instead of so and
even up in the northern part of
the state.
and the and so those those
particular changes are are
impacting our infrastructure and
the and that was built in in the
twentieth century as a as an
adaptive strategy of back in
those times the the new leap
ahead analysis that is the first
section of the governor's your
water plant was conducted by Dr
nearly a Dunbar hers associates
she she's a
leading scientist at New Mexico
tech in need of some of the
really great team that included
our state climatologist.
And the state hydrologist as
well as scientists are from
around the state including
doctor Phil king from from the
New Mexico state who recently
retired there and this is a is
working on the special projects
but that particular study really
reveals additional aridity in
the future and we're already
experiencing some of that with
the higher average temperatures
in and we're were of concern
about how in the fifth year
outlook that will continue to
affect New Mexico going forward.
Here's here's a slide showing
the the Rio Grande compact
deliveries.
and and and deficits of the
green bars are the credits that
we were fortunate enough to
experience during the higher
water years and the red bars of
the of the deficits that have
been occurring more frequently
and in the last several years
you can see where we're headed
towards of the possibility of of
a compact well Asian once once
the.
That total it approaches or
exceeds two hundred thousand the
confusion the negative that
constitutes a form of violation
under the compact and a
significantly impact of the
Texas The New Mexico litigation
and other of processes that
we're dealing with down and then
the and the lower ground so
that's just one problem with the
state is facing a you all know
about others are going to.
Going on in your in your part of
the of the of the state.
This slide shows the ninety
hello that the National Weather
Service publishes
we're in a of the colony near
pattern right now the time
that's hearing usually
experience warmer than normal
temperatures as well as.
Hello normal of precipitation is
the is the pattern there
we we've seen a lot of different
things and learning about it
sometimes we get some really
good storm that's like we
experienced in December we got
some pretty decent stuff.
We're up around.
A hundred thirty percent of
normal up around the real time
in the upper caller
we've been basin in Colorado.
but nothing has occurred much
since then and in the ninety
outlook shows unfortunately of
higher than normal temperatures
and and below normal
precipitation for the next
several months and maybe beyond
that as as well.
So it's it's it's looking bleak
but we have
possible solutions and
opportunities that I I wanted to
to share with this committee
because you'll be probably
looking at legislation and
various other things going
forward
in the short term during the
session and then there's some
planning work we're we're doing
to to help when we look forward
to to the the next the next year
sixty day session.
Really I think.
The the the short term answer
and and unfortunate thing about
our senior water users many of
them rely on the on the surface
supply and that's the most
valuable supplies that we have
so we gotta figure out ways to
help.
Deal with that fluctuation in
the in the surface water
supplies in a fair and
reasonable way and one of one of
them is a performing dynamic
following.
during the times of shortage and
we're when we're also
experiencing under deliveries to
the compact like on the Rio
Grande and and potentially could
face on the radio on the Pecos
river right now we have a great
surplus down there and we hope
that maintain that but wanted to
address these things of we need
to have some tools in the
toolbox one of them is a is a
voluntary and temporary felling
programs for for surface water
users and and we're looking at
an emergency drought mitigation
fund for this particular year
given the forecast that we have
and and we believe the lack of
snowpack that we will see when
the spring run off begins in
April so we're looking to do
that this in the in the short
term this year we're also
looking at infrastructure needs
we have these great
opportunities with federal
funding under our fund the
bipartisan infrastructure funds
to leverage against the funds
that the state has available to
us to with the uptick in the in
the oil and gas revenues that
center of the that we can
leverage federal funds as far
into the future as we can and
and really address some of the
long term infrastructure needs
that we're hoping to accomplish
then we need to look at
streamlining state funding
mechanisms we do have capacity
issues will talk about in a
minute but but helping our local
underserved communities that
have capacity issues themselves
we go she ate the way of getting
funding out of the system is
really critical at this point in
time we need to work together.
From the governor's office at
the state agencies as well as
with the Legislature to figure
out ways we can help streamline
getting the funding out words
most needed.
and then we we're we're gonna
complete the the governor's
fifty year water plan and within
that we're going to develop a
suite of recommendations.
That'll be vetted through a
water policy and it's structured
task force that the governor's
authorized me to move forward on
that will start in in February
and and will terminate the
complete the process in time for
the release of the of the fifty
year water plant as well as a
separate report that will make
recommendations for the interim
committees to consider as well
as the legislature in the sixty
day session so that's that's
what we're going to focus on
here in the next six months or
so
in the longer term we really got
to have a somehow help our
farmers and our agricultural
producers
the.
Transition with the the new
average water supplies there the
the the prediction is the
average availability is going to
steadily declined so we got to
figure out a way to help our
agricultural producers of
utilize the resources in the
most effective technically
possible and all a lot of folks
are talking about that
Representative Ezzell mentioned
some of the more modern
irrigation techniques and things
that that the folks returning to
just by necessity
to make make their their their
production work but we we need
to do more of that we need to
have systems both with federal
and state funding support to a
create a soft landing if you
will for for agriculture
producers because I I totally
agree that the.
Let's just look at the
possibility of California not
being able to produce
Representative basket
agricultural products that they
have all of these years we we
the folks will be turning to New
Mexico in more in depth with a
so preserving our agricultural
economy and preserving their
abilities to put land keep
planet production maybe even but
other other means it's
production is going to be
extremely important to have that
local sources of high high value
agricultural products available
right here in the state is is is
going to be crucial in the
futures and of of work on that
winter career really and and I I
think it's incredibly important
then also created a a managed
conducted the strategies it
would it would be tied into the
surface water of strategies that
I talked about earlier I think
of a better administrative
procedure to allow folks to
capitalize on a combination of
groundwater and surface water
given the the flexibilities the
added flexibility is between the
two sources of supply is going
to be very critical and I think
need a warm up for sure to turn
green equipment and settlements
is going to be absolutely prove
crucial in the future to allow
for.
Regions across our state in
communities across our state to
share in the in the in the
supply both groundwater and
surface water in a constructive
you strategy in Medicaid
Medicare is already doing that
but I think we're gonna have to
really focus on those as best as
a the next level of managing our
supplies and a more proactive
manner.
We have other sources that we
need to look closer at how do we
deal with stormwater the
predictions are as we're gonna
see more intense and maybe more
frequent monsoon that's and and
being able to first protect
communities from those.
Toward the end flash flood
events is what is the first
first thing but the second thing
is what we do with the water can
we capture can we treated can we
put it back in our systems and
make it available for our our
producers and the communities
use also so we need to look at
that and then take a look at new
supply opportunities such as
produced and recreational water
treatment and other reduce
options that are are going to be
the price here part of of of
water supplies it's kind of that
next incremental supply and and
anytime you you go to that level
it is going to be more expensive
but it is something that we're
gonna need to look at as as an
alternative supply for various
industrial and municipal
purposes initially and then
possibly of other hi hi.
Valued uses an agricultural as
well.
And then also of like I said
earlier our system is set up in
the twenty twenty a century with
a different foundation and
knowledge about the the average
supplies of water as that
average supply drifts that might
I'm talking about services ply
as it drifts
to a different lower level of
average availability we have to
take a look at that the the
authorities that are critically
our federal us.
For control facilities were
authorized for take a look at
those to see if we can utilize
reservoirs that are only
available for flood control and
see if we can't get additional
authorities to make those
available for surface water
capture and and and use
so so those are things that I I
think we need to work with our
federal agencies on we also need
to take a look at the of.
Different ways of meeting
compact and yes they obligations
based upon the new hydrology and
then also can take a look at
what's happening around this
like on the Colorado River and
and other places and and and
learn from some of the things
and people are doing outside of
our state to to wrestle with the
same problems that the whole
southwest is dealing with right
now.
And then of course
we we we need to ensure the
preservation because systems and
and our traditional communities
and that's just part and parcel
of the work that we do as water
resource managers to consider
all of all of the impacts that
are going on.
The other thing I'm working on
and and quite a bit of detail
right now in conjunction with
the other of folks at the
governor hired a.
Former mayor of Marty Chavis and
what well as.
Achievement who's the the
broadband.
resource manager as well as
other funding opportunities in
transportation and and others
that the Mr Chavis is working on
on my my job is to work on water
resource.
Jex with all of the funding
coming in and they're several
projects I won't get into the
the nitty gritty detail here but
we do have lots of opportunities
the department of interior in
the PA and that and the media
and rural water.
we also have opportunities in
the department of agriculture
through an RCS and other rural
rural Water assistance programs
so we that when I was at the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district we applied for
watershed protection fund
control of.
Program which is a hundred
percent federal for doing flood
control and recapture and reuse
of water so that that'll be a
program will to do it will be
implementing and once county so
so we got to take a look at all
of that stuff and and then as I
mentioned earlier we need to
coordinate our state programs
and leverage those dollars as
most efficiently and effectively
as possible with the federal
dollars so that we we we we take
that as far as we possibly can.
there's various projects the
state engineer and construct
mission are working on I'm
working closely with those
agencies our regional water
supply projects that several of
them and the and this
Northwest part of the of the
state with the healer river
settlement funds there's ninety
million plus down there that we
need to put put on the ground to
help those communities with
their water problems.
There's always capital outlay
indirect appropriations that can
be leveraged and and done more
effectively in my opinion I
think capital outlay service
great great purposes and if we
can get we can leverage that
into the water trust board and
various other other funding
opportunities and and the
federal dollars I think we can
make it all go farther if we we
work closely together and have
that well coordinated.
Finally I wanted to to just talk
about government capabilities
and capacities as you know and
heard of not only the water
agencies but a lot of our our
our departments have had a
pretty flat budget for for quite
a few years and and and we're
just now starting to see an
improved situation there
the governor's executive budget
for for this fiscal year for the
water agencies and increased the
request was for seventeen FTEs
to expand our or reestablish the
level of service that those
agencies were we're providing
several years ago.
But now that things are changing
and moving in new directions
it's even more critical that we
have better technical capacity
and knowledge within the
agencies to address the new
normal if you will or the or or
the coming challenges that we
see
and to work in collaboration
with all of our regional
partners throughout the state as
well
but the yeah and and and the a
request from the governor also
included three additional
positions for Indian water
rights settlements unfortunately
LFC recommendation did not match
that was far less than that and
up and we're we're going to kind
of figure out how to.
Hopefully trying to restore some
of the funding if we can somehow
the session if not will work to
improve this the water agencies
could capabilities as we look
forward to the next session.
Then you know obviously the
federal and state funding
programs.
Recognize
and vast need really in in rural
communities for technical
assistance and capacity
development that's a real
critical component to what I am
going to be working on closely
with like I said earlier the
water transport NMFA you all in
your capacity as you know right
on the ground where things are
lacking and we're communities
need help and I want to I want
to I want to learn more about
that from from each of you as
well as other representatives
and senators I've been talking
to the concerned with this
matter and and we also need to
coordinate internally and and
make the most of the resources
we do have right at our
fingertips the we we we think
how we do things work across
agency boundaries a little
better consolidate capacities of
maybe work with the costs and
the counties within to to get
some capacity developed it at
their level so that we can be
more effective in getting
getting this of funding out on
the ground over the next four
five years that we have to work
with this federal the federal
funds.
And then also take a look at the
like you said the cards in
counties but also maybe the the.
The private sector with
consulting firms in the non
profits that are out there on
that anxious to help out and so
with that Mr Mr Chairman
I I just want to thank you for
this opportunity and I am
anxious to engage with the
committee at any level at
particularly at for any
questions you may have of for me
today and there are some
pictures of the beautiful man
order Grande Valley when it when
the reversal and the farmers are
are are grown with the full
supply and I look forward to to
maintaining that opportunity as
we as we move into the future.
You Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Hammond for your
presentation and for joining us
this morning Mr Hammond a quick
question before we go to the
committee for questions
comments.
It is this presentation they
provided us to date can you
email that to our committee
secretary Mary dean so that she
can distributed to our
committee.
Mr chairman I already did share
that with with merry so she
should be able to this
distribute that you all very
good so before we start
to questions and comments from
the committee you will be
receiving this presentation in
your email likelier or somewhere
but I expect to see that the
sometime soon today let's begin
now than with questions or
comments for Mr Mike Hammond
that's COVID too Representative
Brown good morning you have a
floor lamp.
Thank you Mr chairman so I'm Mr
Hammond good morning to you
thank you for the presentation I
look forward to working with you
as I know every member of the
committee does as well
you mentioned that you're
familiar pretty familiar with
the Pecos river and just some of
the needs we have we have there
and we do have a pretty good
water credit I believe with
Texas right now.
For that contact but one of the
concerns that I'm.
Are working on right now is
apparently there's a need for
some new irrigation gates around
fort Sumner and I'd like a
couple of dates in particular.
Could you give us a short
explanation of what's going on
there and then let us know if
there's a way to access some of
the federal funds to help pay
for that I understand it's a
very expensive proposition to
replace those gates.
I I am very familiar with of the
the owner amendment of the gate
problem affected was the concern
back in my time as a reclamation
and we're working with the
parliamentary addition to strict
trying to remedy that solution
back then and and and
unfortunately these things drag
on because of a lack of funding
so that's why I'm so excited
about the opportunity that we
have now to leverage and I have
received a letter from from
Carl's better education district
making the request it's it's for
about twelve million dollars and
I I understand that the United
States recognition will be
picking up I think about thirty
five percent of that amount and
we're gonna have to figure out
the logistics on that
but
idea will work closely with
reclamation and and and it will
be it's in the that's in my list
of things to attend to in
addition to the flood control
release gates that that Avalon
them as well is in the request
and that's been an ongoing
concern of not having the
ability to control the of the
releases that Avalon which is
been a continual problem for
that because better education
district for some time and they
have other issues there too that
will will be taken into account
in terms of water efficiency
improvements and and things of
that nature so I look forward to
working with with them and
others in the in the pick those
value to see what we can do to
leverages federal dollars as far
as we can get him to go.
Mister chair Mister Hamit is
there at a time I know you say
things drag on but is there a
realistic timeline for when we
might see a resolution to have
all the funding needed to do the
work.
That's always the challenge is
to try to take it you know the
the right funding mechanism and
to get it and and the in the
process the in conjunction with
the federal dollars but I I will
work with get back to you on
after I reach out to reclamation
and kind of see what how it's
always a challenge dealing with
the the federal agencies because
sometimes they want to do the
work and so they want the money
up front and and if we can
figure out a way to to leverage
the those dollars together
and and and come come to the.
The legislature probably in the
next session with the proposal
and then it's probably a one
year project once we get the
funding lined up so we hope we
hope we can get that done no
later than the next session in
terms of the funding aspect of
it but maybe we can get
something lined up even earlier
than that.
Okay thank you so very much Mr
you.
Thank you Representative Brown
Representative Ezzell the floor
is yours.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I built that representatives
Brandt Representative Brown
question were right in line with
where I was going on this as
well Mr Hammond because my
computer sucks it really does.
Because I I'm having a real hard
time.
The.
Your work Mr chairman Mr Hammond
did you just did I hear you say
that you are an engineer this.
And where did you receive your
degree University of New Mexico
and I've been a professional
engineer since nineteen ninety.
In nineteen ninety okay and Mr
chairman Mr Hammond.
Were you part of the Interstate
Stream Commission.
Yes ma'am I just recently
resigned because of taking this
new post from the governor's
office.
Okay that's what I thought you
were are you here in place in
Santa Fe right now yes ma'am I'm
I'm in a closet on the fourth
floor.
Well that's better than being
down in the basement I guess Mr
chairman.
Mr Hammond and I'm assuming
because you have been put in
place by the governor are you
going to set up your office over
here across the street from us.
Yes yes ma'am I right now I'm in
a coordinating with the water
agencies as you would expect
they've they've made me a little
of a home here in in the fourth
floor that I would use but I'll
I also have the option of also
stating the Senator cross the
street to we're working with the
agencies as well.
Okay thank you for that because
I think it's very important that
the people that do have the
right to use the water in the
state of New Mexico know where
they can contact you.
Mr Chairman and Mr Harmon can
you tell me right now how many
employees are there currently in
place in the office of the state
engineer.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell I don't know specifically
I think it's in the just over
two hundred at the moment but I
I don't recall the specific
number I do know that there is
an expansion requests for about
thirty eight employees
of by the state engineers office
and and and the governor came
through with about half of that
number.
In her budget request in
addition to asking for a
transition off of the water
trust funds on two of the
general fund in terms of the
updated a bonding requirements
for the agency.
Okay thank you for that response
because I just wanted to verify
those numbers because there's a
big shortage as far as any sort
of litigation coming up because
of the shortage of the attorneys
in the O. S. C..
Mr Chairman and Mr Hammond.
You said well they're the two
were located down at Bradley
whenever we were finishing up
that project down there can you
tell me the time frame there.
Yes yes ma'am Mr chairman
Representative Ezzell I I was in
Carlsbad for three years from
nineteen eighty.
The state eighty six so we
started wrapping up the valley
construction in about eighty
nine.
Yep.
Okay thank you for that okay so
you were not there whenever
there was a problem that
Brantley whenever one of the
wells was leaking and the bureau
of reclamation wasn't doing
anything about that because of
the as state that was in place
but it impacted every rancher
going Adamo fifty miles and they
were actually draining the our.
Not the deep water but the
shallow water there and it it
did affect all those ranchers
down there it was terrible Mr
Chairman Mr Hammond.
I also picked up on something
that is very important to me
you brought up the.
Our budget right now and Mr
chairman and members of this
committee.
The reason we have so much money
in our coffers right now is due
to the oil and gas production in
the cost of oil right now the
but it's bringing per barrel Mr
Chairman and Mr Hammond.
Like I said earlier I am a
farmer I am a rancher.
Into power those tractors it
does take days and whenever
those tractors or those cotton
pickers are those combines are
costing over two hundred
thousand dollars each.
And you know what the returns
are going to be for that red
shirt and that important.
Still have to get cattle pots to
haul if I had the capital to
haul my kids or my diesel pickup
to move my cattle or my horses
the the one that is due to the
oil and gas industry that we do
have all these revenues at our
disposal right now but we have
to be very careful about what is
going to be reoccurring it what
is going to be a one time
expenditure because as everybody
has pointed out that this may
not be the case next year and
that that gives me great worry
are we going to have enough
money left.
The fund everything that we are
doing this year Mr Hammond I
know that you've got your work
cut out for you Mr chairman I
realize that this is not going
to be easy for Mr Hammond and
everybody that is going to be
working through the office of
the state engineer.
The only person that can change
things in our state.
Really with reality check in is
god Mr Hammond you stated
monsoon advance.
We had a monsoon you get down to
my particular area which is to
yes the basin of which I hope
that you are working with
because that is very critical to
support making the supply to the
Texas state line so we can be in
compliance down there as well.
But when we're talking about
monsoon events versus climate
change could you make that
explanation for me please.
Mr Chairman representative is
out yes yes ma'am the as you
said mother nature is in control
and and but but we as humans
need to do everything we can to
try to predict the changing
nature of the that that is being
addressed to and and and I think
taking a look at our stormwater
capture system that we have in
place right now I'm either
bolster it and make better use
of that in terms of its
authorities.
To the.
First control the impacts of the
flood event but also to capture
and re use that water in some
fashion whether it's really
injected into the aquifer point
taken down to C. ID in your neck
of the woods or down in the
rally or or I I know the the the
black canyon area comes in below
rally but the the there there's
several things that need to be
looked at in a in a more
comprehensive way for us to use
the water that that mother
nature is going to be providing
but in a different manner as
time goes forward.
Mr chairman Mr Hammond thank you
for that explanation here
we are relying in my area for
the snow packed it's up in the
rid us so area that does.
Right planning shop the by then
that our former said over there
in the thank you spelling.
We have our problems over there
with.
A. B. ideas been experiencing
along with the issues that we've
had with Texas regarding the
lower Rio Grande and I know that
Representative small is very
aware of these issues as well.
And we do have to be there ever
vigilant as what we're doing
with our water.
And it's not.
It's not easy these days just
trying to make a living in
agriculture.
Whenever I see.
How many golf courses does H.
particular town have is that
really put that water to
beneficial use wealthiest for
recreation.
It's amazing that I can't
remember the numbers right now
on how many gallons the house
bill uses every day but we've
also had the problem cut or not
the problem we've also had
I've been getting quite a few
calls from constituents of mine
and I I think everybody else on
this committee has as well.
As far as our recreational
marijuana being grown and is
that going to be a lot of.
Do they have to have a
commercial license to grow this
yes they do or do they have to
have an agricultural right to
the water to be able to use that
or can they just use their house
Water I mean the list goes on
and on and I think that is
something that we need to also
be very aware of Mr chairman I
appreciate Mr Hammond's
presentation today and his
answers to my question.
We have to protect our food
source Mr chairman Mr Hammond
and to me that's very important
in the way that we're going to
be able to go forward is to
ensure that are eight that are.
Businesses out there private
enterprise are the ones that is
funding our government we do not
have the right to continue to
grow government Mr chairman
thank you very much.
Representative result thank you
for your questions and comments
as they moved to represent a
small Representative small the
floor is yours Sir.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you Mr Hammond
I just briefly Mr chairman Mr
Hammond wanted to publicly thank
you for putting on this
presentation and thank Mr
Hammond for the work that he's
already doing were very much in
the middle of the budgeting
process and there's been a level
of clarity that's been really
important as we head into what
seems like perhaps one of the
most challenging here is that
all New Mexicans will face from
a drought perspective and most
especially all New Mexicans who
are producers are kind of
involved in that side of things
so
My one question Mr chairman Mr
Hammond is.
How do you use do I guess do you
see this era of elevated federal
and state resources helping to.
Ring the state closer to
more collaborative water work
the knowledge in the vast number
of differences in different
jurisdictions but in the past it
seems like we've really been
hung up on on really the
inability at times for different
parts of the state different
irrigation districts certainly
the lower Rio Grande that I
represent
Some feeling very disconnected
from the state.
Do you see an era now where we
may be able to overcome some of
that or or work on it and
different way.
Mr Chairman.
Representative small I really
appreciate that question because
we do you know one of the the
keywords on on on the my
presentation is opportunity I
see an immense opportunity
particularly with the folks that
we have positioned in the
federal agencies right now that
do you have they are New
Mexicans
and and and high places
including the of the system
secretary for water and science
and and the department of
interior this tiny Trujillo as
well as the the the the now it
confirmed head of the corps of
engineers Mr might Connor it is
as a.
I think he went to high school
in Los crucis if I remember
correctly and and attended New
Mexico state so so yes we have
we have a this really unique
opportunity not only with the
funding itself but with of
people in in excellent position
to work with New Mexico I've
heard talk about utilizing New
Mexico as a as a as an example
of the most one of the most are
states in the in the west as an
example of how the the federal
and state and local governments
can collaborate together to to
make the most out of this great
opportunity that we have with
with the funding of but we have
to set ourselves up as as
Representative results that we
have to set ourselves up for a
longer term future so we're
using us as as as a good
foundation to correct some
problems that we have been
unable to correct in the past
because of a lack of funding.
But we have to do it in a
sustainable manner beyond that
of the five year horizon that
but I now see of it open to us
with the with the federal
funding opportunities but do it
in a way that sustainable both
from a water supply and a
funding perspective so that's
going to be a critical component
looking forward and and the
federal agencies want to play a
part in helping us with that
vision and and and I think we'll
get to some of that in the in
the task force that we're
setting up to make some
recommendations to you all in
the for the interim committee
and and and the session next
next year but but but you know
the to me that working with our
our regional partners I've done
all my life that I'm I'm I'm a
collaborator and that's my
nature and and I tend to reach
out to folks and create
relationships which is the key
to any good long term solution
and and I am dedicating myself
and have dedicated myself to
that it taking this new position
and and hopefully influence in
our our our.
R. my fellow agency heads um to
to to do the same so thank you.
Representative small for that
great thank you Mr Hammond and
I'm very excited and grateful
again on where we're we're
headed into thank you very much
that's my only question Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative small
the representatives with
questions or comments for Mr my
canon.
I see Mr Representative Zamora
the floor is yours Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for your presentation
Mr Hammond
as we go into the future and in
in the state of New Mexico I
believe we're going to see water
Conservancy's efforts being made
on there's one being made in
eastern New Mexico right now can
you kind of get into that a
little bit see how I'd like to
know how you feel about water
Conservancy of first efforts.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Representative Zamora I think
the more that we can organize a
runner because a common cause
whether I'm working with the the
Ogallala Landon water
Conservancy district of of Dr
ladonna Clayton she she's had
set up and and and and I think
there's some great opportunities
the the into it should I
mentioned earlier the
collaboration nature of working
in the water world is so
critical and and and I see her
as as one of those folks that
reaches out to and and brings
people together through through
the process of trying to solve
problems learn yoga all of which
as you know as a as a very short
lifespan that we're very
concerned about on the side of
the state and and and we're
we're hoping that we get the new
pipeline the.
Eastern New Mexico pipeline
constructed but even then
we still are going to need to
manage that groundwater because
there will be times when they'll
be water shortages on the
surface supply and will have to
supplement with groundwater that
that's what I was referring to
Mister Zamora is that we're
going to have to have this
really comprehensive well
constructed regional water
planning and and and and
operational strategy with all of
our water users so that we can
we can we can get through these
tough times and then when we
have abundance we know we know
how to best utilize that in
preparation for the drug the the
tiger tiger years so so that's
the strategy that many people
are undertaking right now and
and I think it's it's the answer
at least at least for the
foreseeable future.
Okay and and thank you for that
answer Mr Hammond and and
another issue that I see going
on in eastern New Mexico is is
what the U. water pipeline
project and easements a word
we're concerned State Land.
seems like.
The commissioner of land
commissioner.
gives US prices on on easements
are going through State Land and
there's so much higher than than
the private land easements and
how do you feel that we could
work with the with the land
commissioner maybe resolve some
of these issues as we go into
the future the state I believe
we're going to see more and more
water lines run across state
lines and I think it's gonna
affect everybody sooner or later
just as to these prices on the
easements on lands how do you
feel we could work with the land
commissioner on something like
that.
Mr Chairman representative of
what I I haven't had the
opportunity to really delve into
that issue yet but I I thank you
so much for bringing that to my
attention I I will I will I will
put it on my.
List of to do's to reach out to
the commissioner and and get a
better sense as to why the the
property values the as you know
it's a revenue producing entity
right for the state so we wanted
maybe we need some exempt
exemptions that are put into
place could be a legislative fix
or could be something that could
be worked out between the land
commission and and and the
governor's office but but for
for public.
Jex that serve a purpose of the
so important like water supply
maybe there's maybe there's a
solution there and getting
either executive the needs are
at least a reasonable of you
know transactional fee there for
those easements so I will look
into that Sir.
I'd be glad to just sit down
with you one on one so we could
go over some things on that
I would be very appreciative of
your time to do that.
I look forward to thank you I
think I think I have some input
that would be interesting to you
and you made some comments
earlier on the on the federal
programs as to how maybe we
could relate that with farming
in the state of New Mexico and I
am carrying a memorial this
year.
And it's about us The New Mexico
congressional delegation when
making farm policy for the you
to look at New Mexico as an
individual Ehrig state
I believe it's very important in
the future that we look forward
to the Feds helping us.
In New Mexico with our water
issues and it has so much to do
with farming and and I'd support
farmers a hundred percent I do
believe we ought to create a
soft landing for them.
As we get into the future will
they'll have less and less water
to farm with and the promotion
of a.
Growing born and hi our water
usage crops in the state of New
Mexico maybe can be looked at
we can maybe look at
bring in some.
Grant programs back in the state
to give farmers an opportunity
to transition from from farming
to grazing cattle and and still
keeping their land to keep in a
productive.
Water is going to be a big big
issue as we go into the future
from what we see today.
We ought to be working with the
feds I believe they have as much
power and and and and capability
to help us as a state to address
a lot of our water issues I look
forward to working with you and
and this committee and and
tackling some of these some of
these problems that we have in
the state and and thank you for
your presentation Mr have.
Thank you Representative Zamora
look forward to working with you
Sir.
Thank you Representative Zamora
representative Allison the floor
is yours.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
sharing a lot of good
information with us so Mr
Hammond
my question would be on San Juan
river the goal king
contamination can you give me a
sort of updates or what the
decision or the status on that
is.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative I up I just heard
yesterday and you may you may
have heard the announcement but
there's been some some kind of a
Madam.
of an initial claims and at I
haven't had a chance to review
the details of that settlement
but it seem like it was touted
to be a benefit to the water
users and the Navajo Nation in
the region to help us move
forward with you know with the
some sort of reparations
associated with that with that
disaster
and and I think it's also a
dedicated to a Superfund clean
up to prevent.
Other currents along that line
so that's the latest I've heard
of the Representative also Mr
vice chair
in that regard so
but I can certainly get you some
more details if you like.
Okay thank you for that Mister
Mr chair Mr Hammond I heard some
a bit of that information
yesterday too and I think it's a
long time coming for all the
farmers that have made losses or
have suffered losses loans and
wondered so thank you for the
presentation Mr Hammond thank
you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Mr vice chairman last
call for any questions or
comments Mr handed before I have
a few questions coming for
myself.
Anyone if not you know Mr
Hammond I've known you for like
I mentioned the the couple
decades at this point and when I
think about the the governor
making her decision to invite
you to join her as her senior
water adviser I can't think of
anyone
in in a better position to do
that and I'm glad to have you
join our team glad to see you
working on the fourth floor glad
to see you and what you bring to
the table I think that you bring
out the best in regards to to to
water policy from a perspective
that you work with but almost
all facets of water users in the
state and so I I think you bring
a breadth of knowledge I do have
a couple of questions you may
mentioned regards to the fifty
year water plant and you meant
made mention that it'll be
released I think is that six
months of the do you have an
exact date on the release of
that water plan and and is that
water plan authored by by state
agencies exclusively or or was
there was there contributions
from from other water users a
safety is tribes and and so
forth.
Thank you for the question Mr
chairman and I also appreciate
your your characterization of my
my my capabilities I I thank
you.
And I do a lot of the state and
and and I think you know
contributing to the future of
water supplies is super critical
at this point in time and and I
I'm gonna throw my full weight
knowledge behind that to serve
you guys on this committee as
well as other other.
You know parts of our converged
constituents of the state as
well so but the and and the
fifty year water plant plays a
unique role in the and that
perspective as you know that was
one of the the governors of
Maine of parts of for water
policy when she took office was
to develop a fifty water
Issues and things about you know
kind of making progress on it as
well as a resource constraints
but with that resource
constraint is being resolved and
we're moving forward and and and
and the salt water policy
infrastructure task force that
we're putting together will
include stakeholders from around
the state and and it's going to
be done in parallel with the
finalization of the state water
plan
so that we have vetted
recommendations on policy and
and infrastructure priorities
that will be part and parcel of
of the fifty year water plan and
and and the task force will have
its own report that will be and
the focus is going to be to do
these simultaneously and
released on in July we don't
have a specific date yet Mr
chairman but but certainly we've
we've targeted July as as the
month because that's one of the
interim committees really start
you know getting going and we
want to make sure that you all
have what you need to have good
you know we come and make
presentations regarding.
These recommendations to to to
the committees of an awfully
your folks some some real good
foundation on on where we need
to go with our water policies of
an infrastructure of direction.
Great thank you for that answer
Mr Hammond's one last question
and when when I listen to
discussion today we have
representatives that represent
the east part of our state the
southeast our state our vice
chair from the northwest part of
our state and and Representative
small down down south in the
lower Rio Grande in my question
is specific to the middle Rio
Grande Valley and and and maybe
perhaps affects that'll be had
on those that your gate using
the the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district canals
specifically those in perhaps
Albuquerque and those native
American pueblos within the
district and and that's that's
to your following program and
the you made mention of that
earlier in terms of the short
term long term effects that it
may have been and I know that
you have a budgetary line item
requesting some dollars to to
begin that programs can can you
expand a little bit more on that
Alaoui program and and
you see participating
specifically how many acres and
and really what type of of of
affect it may have on that David
that we have with with the state
of Texas.
Thank you Mr chairman yes
there's a growing problem as as
as you know and and we've we've
been of the I still have a hard
time taking my hat off I just
the just retired this this the
December thirty first so
sometimes I say we when I refer
to the Millard grant the the
metal Representative folks
are of I have worked on
the pilot family program with
some reclamation dollars through
the national fish and wildlife
foundation that was designed
really to to help of the state
and and and and the emergency do
meet some ESA commitments so we
have the district had experience
of dealing with the following
program of last year was around
a thousand acres of under that
specific funding item and this
year they're going to target
somewhere around three thousand
acres for the environmental
component of that the way it
works is strictly voluntary and
is typically targeted that that
that that the the forage crop
grower of the many may be at the
tail end of a nonprofit cycle or
any other kind of approach like
that and and so we
We are we are working on
expanding that to include a lot
more acreage this year and and
and I think if we have a really
low for March one forecast
we will of.
We will be the.
Probably attracting a lot more
farmers and and that you know
and we're like we take we have
lots of farmers in the sixty
acre and below range of vast
majority of our of our farmers
or or in that category and and
but there's a lot of farmers
that that doesn't make it make
of their full living on farming
and so the the way this program
is designed is to this to get
folks that feel like they can
take a year off of maybe let
their land rest maybe do some
cover cropping or some other
kind of.
Rents to the water systems or
something in a year
and and then allow for that
water to be available for the
farmers that need to make a you
know awful crop in a living out
of it this year and also develop
the the a good block of water
hopefully in the twenty to
thirty thousand acre range of
additional deliveries done
elephant Butte in addition to
what we have to deliver anyways
so we target we target that
degree of supply and we start
chipping away at the deficit and
what that will do is it'll allow
for the use of a Lotto them up
on the real trauma in the coming
years right now it's under
reconstruction as you know we've
been working on that for years
and we're finally breaking
ground on that so the dam has to
be at a low level or empty
essentially for a year of for
this year and and and next so
well that's occurring it's it's
a great opportunity to make up
our of our Rio Grande compact
delivery debits and then once we
get that under control them L.
Lotto when it's fully available
again after it's been
reconstructed we can then go
back to that cycle The that we
enjoyed
in the last several years where
we have summer water to release
from a lot of and so that's the
position that the middle valley
needs to get back into with this
following program and it it'll
be short lived it'll be targeted
for two years and there's
several farmers that have
already expressed interest in
participating in it on a
voluntary basis.
Thank you thank you Mr haven't
so for those farmers that need
listing today woohoo would they
contact with offices
administering these this
program.
Would you of the middle Rio
Grande Conservancy district
they're all set up for it now
now it's all of course dependent
on emergency funding coming out
of of this legislature and if
that were to come come to pass
we would hope that DFA would
make the funding available
immediately to the emergency and
they're fully capable of
managing those funds and using
the criteria to get the money
out on the ground as quick as
possible okay thank you Mr
Hammond and one final comment is
someone made mention earlier in
regards to some of the people
that we haven't.
Some of the people that we
haven't really high places
relative to the state of New
Mexico some made mention of of
tiny Trujillo and and others
like that when I think of some
of the people that are in DC
that our New Mexicans you know
like but that all ends of the
world the Mike Connors the the
representative Stansbury that is
very involved in water issues
time Trujillo and and our own
very us to chill torrez mall
which the USDA to make some
really good pitches on our
behalf I think all the people
are there in place that we need
them to be so that we could
perhaps.
Ask them to to help facilitate a
lot of these really important
water issues and water projects
that need to take place to help
us combat this route because
there's certain things that we
have control over and and
there's some things that we we
don't and when I think of things
like in the middle Rio Grande
Valley in the in the Rio Grande
itself in delivering water from
the Meadowbrook at lower Rio
Grande and that the that we that
plug that's right there in the
river Senator Costa you know
being able to use federal funds
because they're the only ones
that can work in the river to
help relieve that logging get
water moving again I mean those
types of things seem huge.
But we need the money to do that
I think again if we can leverage
ourselves as a state and now you
in that position with our
partners there in Washington DC
I think a lot can be done
hopefully this year and under
your your leadership Mr Hammond
so with that being said thank
you so much for your
presentation today we're sharing
your knowledge for being
available to us and knowing that
in the future should any member
or anyone feel the need to
contact Mr Hammond he did
provide us email address and
that he is on the fourth floor
and some broom closet and
welcomes anyone anyone time so
Mr Hammond thank you again we
appreciate you and at this point
we will allow you to X. at the
meeting thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman I look
forward to working with you and
all the committee members the
these are these are opportune
times thank you yes Sir thank
you Mr Hammond for the committee
members still on the call this
concludes today's.
Introduction meeting reminder
that we do have a meeting
scheduled for this coming
Thursday saying starting time at
eight thirty will we will have a
presentation from the state
engineers office Mister John
Romero will join us as well as a
representative from the
Interstate Stream Commission as
well as of the secretary for
agriculture Mr Jeff would you
will join us for that
that meeting as well and then
beginning next week Tuesday will
begin to hear of pieces of
legislation related to
agriculture and water and we
have several that have been
referred to a committee today so
that being said anyone else have
any questions or comments before
we adjourn for the day if not
thank you all so much for
joining us and we will see you
soon take care bye.
