Representative chairman chairman
met vice chair.
Here.
I'm not sure.
Representative should I hear.
You're more yes she's there.
I'm not hearing that okay.
And Representative black she was
there at one point.
Issue there Representative
black.
Okay.
Have a quorum madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you members for coming I
know these nights are long and
that I move the meeting to line
thirty so that.
maybe people get that a little
more time in the morning and to
this is that we're headed into a
series of long nights and long
days so welcome everybody's good
to see everybody again and with
that we have one bill that we're
bringing up that we wrote.
And that Representative Montoya
would you put your bill on the
table.
Yes good morning madam chair
committee members I'm here today
to present a committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy three.
I'm happy to see everyone and.
Thank you for glorious day all
there are about six points to
this adjustment.
Amendment to the bill walk
through them the the number is
four eight two two two four
seven two.
Representative I think I need a
motion here to introduce so
that.
It's our.
Madam chair thank you and second
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair real quick I didn't
get never mind I did get I'm
sorry state for that thank you
all right thank you.
Thank you so much for helping me
align with the procedural stuff
so that the the number is point
two two two four seven two point
two.
The first change takes place on
page two.
I will know that at the end of
my outline I have our bill
drafter.
Mark Edwards on to clarify any
technical points or questions
okay so the first change
happens.
In the definition of durable
equipment on page two line
nineteen.
Under D. says durable equipment
means equipment of a permanent
or non depreciable nature that
is necessary to the use of
critical public infrastructure.
The second change.
It is on page.
I.
Line twenty one under section
G..
Hundred determination of
eligibility purser pursuant to
subsection D. of this section.
The secretary the secretaries
shelves and it goes on the
sensually talk about how we
wanted to include I wanted to
include the tribal.
Government communities in this
bill.
In
state constitution prohibits
funding to non to non state
entities so we adopted to use
the same structure if you will
that's used in the tribal
infrastructure Fund in order to
include.
So I hope that I've covered that
point do I need to read through
all of those changes.
I'm
interested in
You can be helpful Roger.
Twenty one under a determination
of eligibility pursuant to
subsection B. of this section
the secretary shall one for
critical infrastructure that is
owned by a tribal local
authority either certify to the
state board of finance they need
to issue bonds for the rural
infrastructure crisis response
project so we to section seven
dash twenty seven dash ten that
point one NMSA nineteen seventy
eight or awarded grant from the
fund to the tribal
infrastructure board to repair
or replace the damage critical
public infrastructure in
question.
Or two for critical
infrastructure that is owned by
a non tribal local authority
either certify to the state
board of finance the need to
issue bonds for the rural
infrastructure crisis response
project pursuant to section
seven dash twenty seven dash ten
point one NMSA nineteen seventy
eight or awarded grant from the
fund to the local authority.
To repair or replace the damage
critical public infrastructure
in question.
The next lines twelve through.
Nineteen address this.
Next segment under F. on June
fifteenth and December
fifteenth.
Each year the secretary shall
submit to the state board of
finance the certifications
issued for the prior six months
pursuant to subsection the of
the set of the section provided
that the secretary shall not
issue a total of certifications
or awards pursuant to subsection
the of this section worth more
than one million dollars for
rural infrastructure crisis
response product within any
county.
In a calendar year.
What we're trying to do here is
use sponge bonds.
That are sold twice per year so
on June fifteenth and December
fifteenth of each year those
bonds could be sold in applied
under this you.
Change happens on page seven.
Winds ten through fifteen.
State under be.
Money in the fund should be used
to make grants to local
authority or to a tribal
infrastructure board in eligible
project is owner operated by a
tried eligible projects that
have been approved pursuant to
subsection D. of section three
of the rural infrastructure
crisis response at for up to and
then it goes on to the the
regular material.
The next change.
Representative.
Better if you just didn't read
it but just kind of explain to
the changes okay.
The next most prominent are
perhaps the most.
Elephant in the room if you will
is looking it starts on page
nine and it goes from one
section see line thirteen all
the way through to page ten
through line I.
I believe.
And it basically it talks about
the new funding.
Your doctor your mark process or
mechanism using this function
bonding capacity of two point
two five percent.
It's one here for any anyone to
read through if you don't want
me to read every single line
It's important to note that.
New Mexico board of finance and
one of the super powers in the
the law department for our state
Mr David David of cults.
So use in getting on in helping
us to craft this he is a
formidable player I learned so
much from the our discussion we
had in his recommendations to
deploy this device this
mechanism to ensure that this
bill could have a pathway that
is viable.
If you'd like me to read through
any of it I can or we could
do for two any questions right
now because this is really the
centerpiece of the change and
perhaps market boards could
speak out with any a key
questions.
Does anyone have a question on
this section recognize market
which did you want to add
anything to this more.
Know that the key difference
here is from the bill that you
saw last week is just the
mechanism for funding R. the
state board of finance believes
that the language in C. will
allow them to use the short term
bonds that the state purchases
for itself so those bonds are
subject to the normal IRS rules
because we own them R. and
that's the big change here.
Thank you madam chair.
She.
One more section towards the
very and I believe that had a
slight adjustment it's in on
page twelve.
Second to last page online
eleven through thirteen and read
under under two rural
infrastructure crisis response
means an eligible project
pursuant to the rule
infrastructure crisis response.
That was the only other
significant text change.
Thank you Representative Montoya
does that conclude your
presentation that concludes the
committee subset of outline of
significant changes.
I'm.
Are there any
In the
The people in the audience who
wish to comment on this bill.
We're not I see somebody.
Just give us a minute.
Thank you madam chair.
The chairman recognize Priscilla
Trujillo.
Okay the chair all right
Mexicans Alice excuse me.
I think we lost.
That would be the more of C. C.
Marrone.
For some reason we're having
trouble getting R. X. a.
Can you hear me now.
You now is this Mr thank.
Okay great.
So madam chair members of the
committee my name is Matthew
Gonzalez on the more the
villages the more on we stand in
support of this set piece of
legislation I'm a small
municipalities we don't always
have.
A lot of options when when
strikes and so you know we we
just want to thank the
Representative for bringing this
legislation forward it's so it's
so important to have tools for
for small communities like ours
and and we're just grateful that
the representative about this
legislation for thank you.
Thank you.
And now we'll go to the nine
essential
Thank you madam chair
Christopher Madrid here for more
central economic development
again we spoke out at the
previous meeting in support of I
think the emphasis what we
learned from our mispronouncing
C. to seventy years old these
issues are going to keep we see
him every year at their gonna
keep continuing I applaud the.
Representative Montoya in this
committee for considering this
important piece of legislation
thank you for your support.
Thank you Mr chair the chapter
recognized Joni Jodie's sparse.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Joyce
person I'm the deputy executive
director New Mexico counties are
board stands in strong support
of this legislation and we
appreciate Sanchez one player
hot in New York in the chair for
bringing this forward as
mentioned previously rural
communities are sometimes the
least equipped to deal with
these types of emergency
situations and we appreciate
having one more resource for
them to rely on thank you.
Thank you we're looking forward
to working with the New Mexico
association of counties in the
interim thank you I'm now I'd
like to recognize Paul Cassidy.
There I go madam chair good
morning Paul Cassidy I'm a
resident of Morris County and I
want to thank my representative
for bringing this forward this
is very important critical piece
of legislation for rural New
Mexico there's just not enough
money.
That we found to really deal
with for crisis issues that that
we we're seeing more and more
because of aging infrastructure
the state just doesn't have the
tools to do that this will solve
that problem and go a long way
some also comforted by the fact
that Representative Montoya
talked to David Buckel's.
To address some of the.
The findings in the FIR.
Thank you very much for bringing
forward.
I fully support.
Thank you so much Mr Cassidy.
Recognized.
Rickets.
And members of the committee my
name is Taylor reckons speaking
on behalf of the members of New
Mexico cattle growers
association as well as New
Mexico will growers and we
support the efforts set forth in
the house bill one seventy three
we believe rural communities and
their citizens are an integral
part of the prosperity of New
Mexico and deserve to be
elevated implementation of the
role infrastructure crisis
response act and funding during
crisis shows these communities
are worth and spurs on their
longevity in our state thank you
to the sponsors for bringing
forth this legislation thank you
all for your time.
Thank you Mr guns and now.
Car Mr Kirk Hey good morning
madam chair this is more Jeff
Carr I spoke at the last meeting
Highly in favor of house bill
one seventy three and it are.
I just remembered something that
ice I think I probably said over
twenty years ago to the
legislature is that we in the
rural counties are like the
wanted step children.
It all as you want to come up
here to ski or something that
it's a private we need this bill
and you.
And we needed maybe more and
thank you Representative Roger
Montoya for for bringing this
forward
I hope this doesn't get killed I
hope.
It gets a full hearing and and a
full thank you.
Thank you more.
Good Isaac to Kota the sentence.
For the rest.
If you will come back to Isaac
later and move on to Steven I
have.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Steven
I CEO The New Mexico association
of realtors and also as a local
official of on a rural community
we think this is another tool
that rural communities I can
have an as was mentioned earlier
there there's there's several
tools out there but for rural
communities it makes a little
harder so well we would stand in
support of house bill one
seventy three thank you.
Thank you so much.
To think ten dentists.
A good morning madam chair my
name is Dennis Tim Salazar.
Good morning members of the
committee I am more pro tempore
the City of Espanola I would
just like to thank
Representative Roger Montoya for
bringing this word house bill
one seventy three I think it
will greatly help in assessed
smaller cities towns and
villages and there is a huge
need for money as you know many
people know as well so I'm just
really hoping this passes and I
would just like to state that I
am in full support of it thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
We will go to Isaac again see if
we can get him.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee once again
Isaac aside as chairman of the
native American democratic
caucus representing or twenty
three native American tribes
nearly seventy two thousand
native American voters
throughout the state of New
Mexico we strongly we start
standing strong support of this
bill as it begins to really
address the equity crisis that
exists not only in our rural
communities but also our tribal
communities what we're looking
at key infrastructure that has
not been repaired or really
addressed and in a number of
decades so we commend the
sponsor we commend the the co
sponsors of this legislation and
we hope that it continues to
foster good relationships and
good dialogue discussion on what
more we can do to help our rural
communities in our tribal
communities
Compete in this new environment
thank you so much chair.
Thank you and that contraceptive
so we did see this morning.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee and you all a
great little so you all got the
memo.
I just wanted to make some
additional comments response
that as the chair of the New
Mexico association regional
consequences of the council of
governments are very much in
support.
But I also want to say what
impact this bill would have
passed to the most vulnerable
populations and our most rural
and frontier communities I would
take it one step further because
in the French communities that's
where you have to travel to two
hours to get your grocery store
right how to travel two hours to
get medical services and then
Senator and so I think that this
is something that we just.
I'm just really kind of yes my
heart is the fact that as a
person was was
all the water to some of the
most frontier communities it's
not too you see an elderly
person trying to lift the pale
just to be able to do whatever
is are basically within the home
that's what hits you hard
because we have the capacity
right in the bility many others
that don't and most of those you
see in the most frontier and
rural communities so thank you
for the opportunity to speak on
our behalf but this bill really
addressed many of those issues
there are fifteen available
populations thank you.
Thank you and will now recognize
Ramon to settle.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you so much again R.
Representative Montoya for
sponsoring this bill having
lived and worked in rural
communities for over twenty
years this bill is absolutely
critical to public water systems
across the state are recognizing
that safe drinking water is one
of the most critical critical
water resources that we have
it's in it's important to have
the resources that we need to
help these rural communities
address the crisis or emergency
that you run into on a daily
basis so thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you.
C. anymore.
Any more people who would like
to.
and comments so.
With that I'll turn the I'll
turn the.
Many you over to the members of
the committee for questions.
Representative us to run a.
Madam chair when it's
appropriate I move I do not pass
on the bill but I do pass on the
committee substitute thank you.
I think will stand for questions
first if there's any committee
members.
I.
Madam chair.
One of your.
But I just I just want to
commend a Representative Montoya
and.
Other legislators and on to the
bill.
For bringing this forward living
in a rural community and they
have none there's a lot of
issues that we faced with as Mr
settle said water neutral
domestics and you know stuff out
there like that so I just want
to commend him right I think
this is something that's.
Been a long.
We're waiting for for a long
time and I'm glad that he
stepped up to.
Waiting about four and he has my
full support and I just want to
commend him and
thank you very much we'll
communities really do need the
help and I appreciate thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative on.
I don't see any other hands up I
would like to ask a few
questions if I may.
and and I don't know if you can
answer this Roger for an
Representative I am sorry or
if market which can answer this
but I'm just curious when you're
talking about that I think it
was two and a half percent how
much money are we talking.
We.
Madam chair committee members we
are looking for twenty five
thousand dollars annually to be
brought into this fund.
No twenty five thousand put
twenty five million sorry I
thought so I thought so.
You might want to get one twenty
five million dollars yes which
were barely you know really
scratched the surface we're
looking at infrastructure needs
as based on a recent C. O. R.
capital outlay request a wide at
five point six billion dollars.
It's estimated that around
thirty percent our water crisis
related so the need is enormous
this is just a tiny.
Really in the bigger scheme of
things a remedy that I hope will
open up pathway to equity for
rural areas okay answered your
question.
Thank you Representative you did
I I tried to get a similar bill
well it was to add a new rural
water infrastructure fund and at
about the same amount I'm just
gonna tell you it was that it
was a heavy lift lift and that
but I think we have a rural
caucus since much stronger now I
think we can maybe do this is
interesting twenty five million
for those of you who don't know
how they do water infrastructure
now is
Nine percent of the severance
tax Fund goes to
the water transport and and they
give out those requests to the
NMFA okay what a trust fund and
then you have a second a second
of water and you have to other
things called the tribal
infrastructure fund and the LESC
colonias infrastructure on the
also pay out for a half percent
severance tax bonds.
I'm sorry which is about
Twenty five million so this
really replicates kind of what's
happening to the
to the tribal infrastructure
fund and the colonus
infrastructure and so
I certainly think it's equitable
and when you do look at the map
of New Mexico the you know all
the tribal communities are
really covered with the special
fund and then you have there is
a hundred and fifty miles from
the border that are covered
after the last colonias Fund but
the rest of the state rest of
the rural state in there about
six hundred I'll give you the
map project if you're carrying
just six hundred other it
entities water project I'm just
talking about water systems not
even just seconds but just
mutual domestic water systems
that are in the other rural
parts of the state that really
have no place to go for funding
I mean they can go to the water
transport but it's a pretty
heavy lift especially for
volunteers to do this job on the
weekends and things like that
so.
Really stand in support of this
I'm just gonna tell you they
guard that stacks pretty
carefully it's not going to be
this is not going to see
so I just sat but doesn't mean
we shouldn't do it and I will
work on this during the interim
so.
Sure.
Sure if I can just check coming
just shortly.
Thank you so much for
articulating those existing
funds what's different about
this stop gap is that it is
unique it includes
intentionally those communities
which make up the majority that
the colonias and the water trust
board and the trouble
infrastructure do not it's not
to condemn them they are
extraordinary vehicles but they
do not include the other piece
is the timely manner.
Our communities that are
unincorporated and tiny villages
and and counties they need
response turned.
And we deserve to have response
time our urban centers don't
have the same worries they have
infrastructure that's much newer
they have eighteen and some
quite cases Representative
surrounding them they can deploy
capital outlay if they so choose
and they have the the force of
sheer population we are left in
the frontier areas with
virtually nothing and oftentimes
for got so get awfully bandwagon
but.
It is been a distinct honor for
me to bring this policy for
because he truly meets the
people the one thing I've
learned in my short time is that
listening to our leaders the
frontline first responders they
know their communities they know
the need and we must respond
this committee has an
opportunity.
To.
I'm under no false illusion that
this will be hard but good work
takes time diligence in the
force of nature if we need to to
bring this forward I would like
that we passed unanimously out
of this Committee that's my
secret wish it's still based
must administrative or do we.
And I would like to see that we
press this on to to the to the
finance committee we have a
vigorous debate if it made it to
the house floor.
We could kind of pull this the
medically.
To the rooms and place it is a
centerpiece perhaps as a
discussion for the agenda thank
you will stop there.
Madam chair.
Representative.
I second Representative Serrato
was motion.
With that we have a motion and a
second to.
Should have passes sensitive.
as amended and
The secretary please call the
roll.
Here.
Representative black.
People Representative black.
Castellano definitely yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Vice chair set up go.
Yes.
Yes.
Back to the Representative
black.
Okay.
And Representative Fajardo of.
All right.
Motion passes I.
Representative Monterey you
haven't at relations
and I will continue on thank you
everybody.
Thank you and that concludes our
committee meeting for this
morning I everybody have a great
day and I'll see on the for our.
For.
Thank you madam chair.
