Senate.
So.
State.
It's just.
It's.
It's.
C..
So it's
just.
Locals month close.
It's close.
Members please rise for today's
indication.
Provided to us by gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Herndon's.
Father we have come together
today to once again work hard to
make decisions for the people of
New Mexico each and every day we
come and we thank you for being
able to lift our communities up
and to lift up every single
person in our state as we all
work together to make New Mexico
one great place to live and to
work and to be part of a man.
Delay from Bernalillo
Representative Lujan in our new
please.
Right actually to this.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United.
New
Mexico which is.
Individuals with.
The gentleman from hospitals
Representative block with the
pledge The New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
Gently from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and we go
to that order business
introduction of legislation to
no objections so ordered.
House memorial forty two
introduced by Representative
heard a memorial declaring
February tenth twenty twenty
three African American day and
the house of representatives
House memorial forty two
introduced by Representative
heard.
Forty.
The more forty two have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed in place in the
speakers table.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
We go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered good morning members.
Happy Friday.
Members today is African
American day here at the
legislature this is a very
special day for our body to
celebrate New Mexico is
diversity which is something
that we've been doing all
session and I'm I'm very very
much excited and honored to be
part of it with you all here
today.
Just a quick read of show.
We're gonna do House memorial
honoring African American day
we will then go on to some
announcements and some committee
reports although we will be
closely monitoring the other
chamber because we will going to
join session to hear from some
esteemed guest that will be here
to provide some remarks
we are not going to do third
reading today we've already
confirmed with respectively to
ship offices
and we will not be in session on
the floor this weekend I heard
there's a football game on
Sunday.
This.
I would I would not know.
soul that state run of show I
think we're all good.
Thumbs up.
All right let's go to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative hunt and hunt
announcements.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house memorial for
be removed from the speakers
table and be made the next order
of business seeing no objection
it is so ordered this is the
speaker would you get me to that
point.
The record reflect that
elections are for placing House
memorial forty two on final
passage has been taken in it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentle lady
to explain the memorial since
the speaker today we celebrate
African American day in the
legislature and in the state of
New Mexico as a as a part of
that celebration we have house
memorial forty two which
describes and raises and lifts
up the an honors African
Americans this statute and this
day having been impacted by
section twelve days five days
twelve of the New Mexico
statutes is a day of great
celebration there are many there
are many activities that many
contributions that African
Americans have made not only to
the state of New Mexico but to
the United States in general
House memorial forty two
describes those a great
achievement.
Too many we're gonna have our
click read more effect made
worse as Mario forty two
introduced by Representative
Huntington Memorial declaring
February tenth twenty twenty
three African American day in
the house of representatives
were as African American day is
a celebration of the
achievements and contributions
of African Americans to the
history of both New Mexico and
the United States and we're as a
New Mexico recognizes the
importance of honoring African
Americans having an active
section twelve dash I dash
twelve NMSA nineteen seventy
eight which states the second
Friday of February of each year
shall be set apart and be known
as African American day.
And whereas African American day
is a celebration of the many
sacrifices that African
Americans have made to the
democracy everyone injuries
today and we're as African
American nation be observed by
the people of New Mexico in
recognition of those efforts and
we're as African American day is
celebrated in tandem with black
history month and whereas the
celebration of African American
day is also a time for people to
reflect upon the need to
diversify thinking and strategic
planning to ensure that all
voices are heard in decisions
that affect New Mexico and New
Mexicans and were as African
American day provides an
opportunity to honor the too
often neglected accomplishments
of black Americans in every area
of endeavor throughout history
and we're as a black history
month should not be treated as
though it is separate from the
collective American history
whereas the black history month
is merely a compilation of
greatest hits ranging from the
March on Washington to some of
the most memorable court cases
inspired by African Americans
experiences but rather as you do
that is focused on the shared
experiences of all African
Americans commingled into a
recipe that everyone can
appreciate.
And whereas the African American
community in New Mexico has a
compelling a legacy that dates
back to fifteen thirty nine when
asked about a Spanish more from
North Africa travel to New
Mexico seeking gold.
And we're as after the civil war
from three thousand three
hundred to three thousand eight
hundred African American
soldiers probably known as the
buffalo soldiers a term given to
the troops by native Americans
for garrisoned at eleven
different sports throughout the
territory of New Mexico and
we're as today New Mexico has a
vibrant African American
Community the population of
approximately forty four
thousand people of African
descent according to the United
States Census bureau M. as
African Americans continue to
face police violence systemic
racism disproportionate health
outcomes and we're as efforts to
advance racial equality and
civil engagement continue to be
urgent priorities and we're just
the greatest contributions that
African Americans have made to
both the history of New Mexico
in the history of the United
States should be celebrated and
acknowledged while also
recognizing that the fight for
racial justice and equality
continues every day.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico February
tenth twenty twenty three the
designated African American
today in the house of
representatives and board
further resolved the copies of
this morning be transmitted to
the governor executive director
the executive director of the
New Mexico office on African
American affairs the board chair
of the African American museum
and cultural center of New
Mexico and to the president of
the national association of
social action for the
transmitted colored people New
Mexico if.
Lee do you have a guest here in
the chamber that you would like
to introduce yes Mr speaker I
would like to introduce my guest
I am extremely proud of a group
of women who have come here to
join us today they are member of
the the sorority in the state of
in the country bill this Greek
letter sorority in the entire
country and they do incredibly
remarkable work throughout the
community every single day not
only in New Mexico but also
throughout the United States so
it is my pleasure and honor to
introduce them to you today we
have ray and a baby the
president of IOTA's I'll be good
chapter of alpha Kappa alpha
sorority.
We are extremely honored to have
a joint T. Hey is the regional
director of the south central
region of alpha Kappa alpha
sorority.
Is Dimitris Sampson a colleague
of mine from the university of
Texas school of law and the
regional connection coordinator
of the south central regional
chapter of south central region
of Africa about the sorority.
It will make millions the New
Mexico state connections chair.
Alexandria Taylor attempted
connections chair.
Also read a Washington vice
president I owe it is I'll make
a chapter.
The kids Jackson undergrads with
president top five chapter
University of New Mexico.
Maria was the Todd chapter for
cap out for New Mexico applicant
down protected you in them.
Seventy bay to the field
representative for U. S.
representative Melanie A.
Stansbury.
Order of the I see is the vice
president of equity and
inclusion of the University of
New Mexico.
This is not a member of the
sorority we have gone to the
university of Texas I'm inside
the University of New Mexico.
Madam gas Dr Kirstin Buick the
chair of africana studies
department you in them.
Dr Kathy powers the vice
president of African the studies
in them.
Mr speaker we also extremely
honored to have with us today
Catherine Baker Stetson of the
state from office and the
president of the Rio Rancho
chapter of the NAACP.
We have a we have with us
another incredible gas all of I
guess are incredible but this
one I know that you all love the
chairs and you have for many
years former state treasurer
James B. Lewis.
Montoya the state treasurer who
has followed in his footsteps.
We also have with us Brian
Cologne the former state
auditor.
Mr speaker we have three
outstanding judges with us
joining us on the rostrum we
have judge of the Samara
Henderson of the a court of
appeals.
The state and it would occur
from the second judicial
district in Albuquerque.
And we have newly appointed to
dis of metropolitan judge with
us said meta Estrada.
Mr speaker.
I ask unanimous consent to the
delivery of think we might want
to debate your moral first Mr
speaker before we believe that
the Morial I truly apologize but
then even great I guess that we
have here is the former dean of
the universe of New Mexico
School of Law Alfred Mathewson
is here with us today.
Thank you Mr speaker good same
gentle lady.
Sir.
Is there debate on house
memorial forty two.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please deals ideal
gentle lady thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady I am proud to
stand here and welcome and honor
all of your special guests
everyone in the gallery everyone
who's come here today to be
present with us we are
absolutely honored to have you
and thank you for your service
and I will say as I always do.
And many of you who've been here
for awhile have heard me but I
come from a bridge I'm married
into a very.
Historically rich family.
The sudden family that was my
first.
Husband who is now deceased.
the honorable Percy Sutton.
Was the borough president for
New York City for many many
years.
The first African American Chief
Justice of the state in New York
all oversee certain.
And of course my father in law.
I absolutely adored and traveled
with him and all of his the end
of laci P. as many as I could
adventures and meetings and
conventions the Reverend AC
Sutton from Texas he was the
Texas branch director president
of the N. double ACP he was from
San Antonio Texas.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
revered by many throughout the
United States for his dedication
and commitment to his Sir work
which was to help
The there county juvenile system
he was a strong advocate so I
come from my my oldest son is
home their legacy and the
grandsons Mr speaker and.
Gentle lady home I spoke about
yesterday are there grandsons
and great grandsons and I know
that my former husband who is
deceased is looking over all of
us and thanking us for being
able to stand here today and
honor all of you so I it the
legacy of.
Our history I also am part of
the league of United Latin
American citizens.
Established in nineteen twenty
nine
the oldest Hispanic Latino
organization so we stand always
arm in arm hand in hand with our
brothers and sisters of the N.
double ACP as being the two
oldest civil rights
organizations established in
these United States of America
I've served as the national LESC
parliamentarian the national
LESC treasurer I've served on
the national board for many
years and I'm honored to cross
paths always with our brothers
and sisters of the N. double ACP
in our fight for civil rights
because that fight continues and
so.
Gentlelady Mr speaker thank you
so much for honoring us today
with this memorial I stand in
full support in the memory of
Percy Sutton all of a sudden AC
set and and my husband ex
husband Clift and check our site
thank you very much actually
there's further debate the
gentleman from earlier percent
of the cruise.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield I yield to the gentleman
thank you first Mr speaker I
want to congratulate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo on her
momentous passage of the bit of
her bill the of in storage bill
here in the house yesterday
congratulations gentlelady.
But I also want to take a moment
to welcome all of the theme
guests are here today the guests
of the gentle lady but also
friends of mine personally and
so Mister speaker.
And to all of our guests welcome
in the house in your house today
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen there's further debate
the delayed from earlier was in
Thompson thank you Mr speaker
does the gentle lady LA I yield
to the gentle lady and first I
have to apologize for pulling
her away this morning but we
need to turn committee so I am
very proud to have married into
the Powdrell family they're the
most wonderful people I got an
extra I don't know two hundred
fifty cousins when I married in
their so.
The public king was prolific
shall we say so I want to
welcome you all and and thank
you for doing this and
especially gentle lady for for
all that you've done in this
chamber for all of us so thank
you.
Is there for the debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett thank you
Mr speaker I just want to thank
everybody for being here and for
all the educational work do you
do with our young people I think
every woman and man here today
for African American date has a
specially worked on the theme of
our young people especially our
middle school students are
African American youth but all
of our youth so just thank you
for your service that transcends
race identity and everything
thank you thank you lady there
is further debate the gentleman
from Santa Representative
Martinez Mr speaker.
Kind gentle lady from Bernalillo
I rise and full support of your
memorial today I rise to honor
a an incredible man on the
Dyess.
Judge Stan Whitaker.
As some no when I was with the
department of Veterans Services
under his tutelage has support
his direction we established the
first veterans specialty court
in New Mexico and today I rise
to thank you.
your honor for all your hard
work on the field is a great
privilege to have been a part of
that and and I know that
hundreds of veterans lives were
touched by your hard work so
today Sir I stand in honor you.
The gentleman.
Are for the debate.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
New Mexico Representative Lujan
thank you Mr thank you Mr
speaker will the gentle lady
yield
is ideal to the gentle lady Mr
guys want to with all my heart
say thank you to Representative
Townsend Pamela Herndon and.
Being able to serve here in this
body with you is just been an
amazing
Shared experience but you don't
maybe not remember memory I'd
like to share with our great
Representative outside on the
steps of the capitol when she
spoke on women's rights state
and and.
Had this incredible voice which
we are able to hear every.
Of many days here in our body
but what it represents and and
the fierceness and the pride and
the everything you bring to this
body I just want to say how
honored I am to serve with you
and this body and how honored I
am to have a listen to this
memorial be happy here as part
of this memorials for moving
into this this joint session to
celebrate today's date and and a
black history month today so
this month excuse me Sir I just
wanna say stand in full support
of of this memorial and
everything that you bring and
bring everybody here and want to
honor judge more.
Anderson she she also had an
experience with me here before
she became a judge before I
became a representative in state
we've come a long way there's
more to there's more to do this
more there's more for us to do
here and an honor that you're
here and also
knowing and working with
are former treasurer of James
Lewis thank you Sir for being
here for all your service to New
Mexico and it's an honorable day
to share with everyone thank you
Mr speaker and thank you
Representative and to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo thank you
thank you.
Thank you for the debate I do
have some guests in the gallery
that are here to celebrate
African American day and please
rise we recognize we've got
students from Amazon UL's high
school at the school heritage
academy send the I school and
otherwise school Albuquerque
high school by school the north
high school full can of Vista
high school it would on the high
school as well as college and
career academy and highland high
school welcome to the house.
As for the debate.
On house memorial forty two
general from someone thank you
Mr speaker Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield I
yield to the gentleman Mr
speaker I'm filled PTSD from
yesterday maybe both the.
Conjoined join the discussion
nonetheless so Mister speaker I
do want to actually take a
moment next to the body
recognizes the long
contributions of of one of our
own former provided former
representative Jane Powdrell
Culbert she needs no
introduction I know this chamber
knows her well and and
incredible work that she did
throughout the years Mr speaker
she served in this body for
twenty years she was on a number
of committees did incredible
work for the body and I just
want to make sure that we
recognize her as well she's made
tremendous contributions to our
state into our community and and
I think it's appropriate that
that we recognize her thank you
the gentleman replies for former
representative.
Seeing no further debate.
The gentle lady to close.
The speaker I now move that
house memorial for do now pass
to gentle lady.
This is been a long day.
Of that house memorial forty to
do now pass I now ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
record so that the role has been
called and all members present
voted in the affirmative state
motion show all members of the
house present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
Final passage of house memorial
forty two the vote is now open.
One of seven in the affirmative
zero negative house memorial
forty time has duly passed this
house.
Whether other announcements
deleted from Bernalillo
Representative on in northern
New.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
like to introduce some guests I
have on the floor with me today
to celebrate this wonderful day
in this amazing memorial I would
like to introduce a Kaelin moon
president of PM yes and AS UNM
students Senator.
The money Knox A. as UNM
student senator and student
success leader.
No need secular NM BSA youth
council college representative
and vice president of the black
student union.
Dr Stephanie a diver executive
director of student health and
counseling.
And Randy stone director of
African American student
services at UNM.
Welcome to the house of
representatives.
For the solution.
Other announcements the
gentleman from.
The gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert thank you
Mr speaker I can do this
announcement well the
representative from Sami Gayle
is out of the room.
But remember this week and we
need the green chili not
readily.
Because there's a game on Sunday
and the colors are green.
So in in in in anticipation of a
eagle victory I'd like to
announce green chili is in order
for today tomorrow and Sunday
particularly Sunday afternoon
thank you Mr speaker thanks for
capital outlay for you
gentlemen.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Mr speaker I
think the general from Chavis
has something on his nose you
need to get off after that
comment he knows he knows who
the speakers in favor of this
weekend so
Mr speaker the generated from
Bernalillo previously introduced
former state treasurer James B.
Lewis in our current structural
our inventory Mr speaker there
is also a certificate that I
think would be appropriate to be
read and testing clerk to read.
This is difficult.
House of representatives of the
state of New Mexico fifty six
legislature for session twenty
twenty three recognizes former
state treasurer James B. blue in
recognition of black history
month whereas former state
treasurer James B. Lewis was
born in Roswell and has spent
his life time and devotion and
allegiance to his local local
community New Mexico and United
States of America will serve
serving under mayors governors
and presidents and as an elected
official.
And where as a Gallup high
school graduate treasurer Lewis
attended bishop college in
Dallas Texas where he earned a
bachelor of science degree in
education the University of New
Mexico in Albuquerque where he
earned his masters of arts
degree in public administration
and the national college of
business forty earned associate
of science degree in business
administration eighteen ninety
and a bachelor of science degree
in business administration in
nineteen eighty one I met
nineteen eighty and a bachelor
of science degree in business
and administration nineteen
eighty one and whereas in twenty
seventeen treasurer Lewis
received an honorary doctorate
degree from the university of
New Mexico for his work as a
distinguished public servant who
contributed significantly to the
cultural and scientific
development of the southwest for
the spiritual or material
welfare of its people and for us
treasurer Lewis served in the
United States Army as a military
officer police officer from
nineteen seventy to nineteen
seventy two and whereas
treasurer blue service
Bernalillo county treasurer
chief administrative officer and
chief of operations for the City
of Albuquerque and the chief of
staff for governor Bruce king
and whereas treasurer treasurer
Lewis also served as chief clerk
and chief executive officer
officer of the New Mexico state
corporation commission.
And as director of the oil gas
and mineral Division of the New
Mexico commissioner of public
lands.
And we're as in December
nineteen eighty five governor
Tony and I appointed James B.
Lewis as state treasurer after
the incumbent state treasurer
resigned and whereas after
completing the term treasurer
Lewis ran for a full term in
nineteen eighty six becoming the
first African American elected
to statewide office in New
Mexico's history.
And we're us treasure blue for
the state's twenty fourth and
twenty nine state treasurer
serving from nineteen eighty
five to nineteen ninety and two
terms from two thousand six to
two thousand fourteen and
whereas in nineteen ninety nine
treasurer Lewis became the
director and Assistant Secretary
for the office of economic
impact and diversity in the
United States department of
energy and we're as in October
two thousand seven treasurer
Lewis was elected president of
the western state treasures
assertion Association and
we're us in twenty fourteen
treasurer Lewis was elected
president of the national
association of auditors
comptroller's and state
treasures and whereas treasurer
Lewis was inducted into the New
Mexico African American hall of
fame and the national
association for the advancement
of colored people Albuquerque
chapter hall of fame if you
received the legion of honor
award from the Kiwanis club of
Albuquerque in two thousand
five.
And we're as treasurer Lewis was
named one of New Mexico's one
hundred influential power
brokers in two thousand eight
and received the Jesse M. Unruh
award in twenty and twenty
twenty two the highest honor
awarded by the national
association of St state
treasures and.
Whereas in twenty twenty one
treasurer Lewis was inducted
into the national association of
state auditors controllers and
treasurers hall of fame in San
Diego California honoring those
who have made major and during
impacts on state government
financial management and mental
more realize the vision
accomplishments and lasting
impacts of leaders among its
membership and broader community
and whereas treasurer Lewis has
stated that he was most proud of
being an African American
trailblazer but also being in
New Mexicans who was able to
visit with and be accepted by
everyone in the state and for us
treasurer Lewis has described
himself as living.
as living to give give speeches
but being an introvert is entire
life and we're as friends and
colleagues describe treasurer
blue is a man of dignity
intelligence vision was strong
core values now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the recognition be
extended to former state
treasurer James B. blue in
recognition recognition of.
Three black history month of a
significant public service and
contributions to New Mexico
signed and sealed at the capitol
in the City of Santa Fe.
Mr Lewis I think I speak for
this entire chamber and likely
this entire legislature when I
see that you've left a
tremendous impact on public
service you have blazed a path
for so many of us for so many
years
and I cannot ever remember even
under the the the hottest of
pressures you ever not being the
gentleman a gentle soul a caring
soul and somebody who embraces
all despite are many differences
sometimes on policy or otherwise
Sir I think a lot of us aspire
to be the type of public service
thank you are thank you for
being here and honoring us with
your presence.
Thank you John from someone else
with this.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
House bill six introduced by
Representative Rubio and
Representative Andrea Romero.
And act relating to housing
clarifying the requirement for a
written statement of deductions
in certain circumstances
increasing certain civil
penalties increasing the time
permitted to remedy non payment
of rent for a rental agreement
increasing periods of time
required for non payment notices
requiring the issuance of the
judgment of restitution prior to
a writ of restitution clarifying
that issuance and execution of a
writ of restitution or stated
during an appeal prohibiting an
owner for refusing to renew for
seeking to terminate a rental
agreement during a declared
emergency or disaster declaring
an emergency house bill six
introduced by Representative
Rubio Representative Andrea
Romero house bill six have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
Three seventy five introduced by
Representative Garrett and act
relating to charter schools
requiring the chartering
authority to legislative
oversight and expenditure plan
for the money retain from
charter schools state
equalization guarantee
distribution requiring reports
SO three seventy five introduced
by Representative care if house
with three seventy five hundred
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill three seventy six
introduced by representatives to
Penske and Thompson and act
relating to insurance amending
the authority of the board of
directors of the New Mexico
medical insurance pool revising
and the manner in which rates
are calculated as but three
seventy six introduced by
representatives said Penske and
Thompson House Bill three
seventy six of been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
public affairs committee that
the house.
Health and Human Services
Committee.
House Bill three seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Hernandez and act relating to
marketing creating the marketing
excellence bureau in the
marketing division of the
tourism department specifying
duties amending section of the
economic development corporation
act making appropriation House
Bill three seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Hernandez House Bill three seven
seven have been read twice by
title is are printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three seventy eight
introduced by Representative
Trujillo Thompson Roybal
Caballero to a cruise and
Johnson and act relating to
motor vehicles prohibiting and a
time to miss from transporting a
good or passenger I'm just a
human operator is physically
present and has the ability to
monitor the vehicle's
performance intervene operate
the vehicle and turn off the
engine House Bill three seventy
eight introduced by
representatives Trujillo
Thompson Roybal Caballero to the
Cruz and Johnson.
House Bill three seventy eight
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee thence the house.
Commerce excuse me house
consumer and public affairs
committee.
House Bill three seventy nine
introduced by Representative
Castellano Dixon and Armstrong
and act relating to refrigerants
providing that municipalities
and counties shall not prohibit
the use of certain refrigerants
for the installation and listing
of equipment that contains
certain refrigerants House Bill
three seventy nine introduced by
Representative Castellano Dixon
and Armstrong.
House Bill three seventy nine
amended twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer public
affairs committee that the house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill three eighty
introduced by Representative
Trujillo semansky cone to go and
get it goes Sen act relating to
parole specifying compensation
allowed for actual service by
members of the parole board
House Bill three eighty
introduced by representatives
Trujillo said Penske Falcone a
girl and guy a ghosts House Bill
three minutes twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government election in
Indian Affairs Committee and
that the house Judiciary
Committee
House Bill three eighty one
introduced by Representative
Trujillo K. A. goes Roybal
Caballero Representative G.
Andrés Romero and representative
Lente and act relating to
Hispanic Education creating the
Hispanic Education fund amending
the Hispanic Education Act to
allow members of the Hispanic
educate Education Advisory
Council to receive per diem and
mileage for their services
working appropriation three
eighty one introduced by
Representative Trujillo thank
you goes for broke up it all
Representative G. Andrés Romero
and representative Lente House
Bill three eighty one have been
read twice by title is ordered
to refer to house Education
Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three eighty two
introduced by Representative
Townsend and Armstrong and act
making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration to match funding
for the construction of
monuments recognizing and
honoring County sheriff's house
bill three eighty two introduced
by Representative Townsend and
Armstrong house bill three
eighty two have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three eighty three
introduced by Representative
Figueroa and act making an
appropriation to the public
education department to enhance
a six week summer and out of
school time programming
requiring a report House Bill
three eighty three introduced by
Representative Figueroa House
Bill three eighty three have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
Three eighty four introduced by
Representative Figueroa and
Senator Ivey Soto and act
relating to licensure providing
for expedited licensure of
veterinarians and all license
levels of social workers House
Bill three eighty four
introduced by Representative
Figueroa and Senator Ivey Soto.
House Bill three eighty four.
A minute twice by title sort of
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee that's house
government election in Indian
Affairs Committee Bill three
eighty five introduced by
Representative Chavez and act
relating to public health making
and non solicitation provisions
in certain health care
practitioner agreements
unenforceable House Bill three
eighty five introduced by
Representative Chavis house with
three and I have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee events
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three eighty six
introduced by representatives of
mine toria ball Millia
Representative Allen Martinez
and representatives block
antennas us an act relating to
education restricting the use of
the Latin acts and similar terms
and postsecondary educational
instant institutions public
schools and instruction and
instructional materials used
within the classroom when used
as an all encompassing term in
reference to people of Hispanic
descent Hospital three eighty
six introduced by Representative
Montoya about million
Representative Allen Martinez
and Representative Spock and
tonight US house bill three
eighty six seven been read twice
by title is are printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee then the house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee.
House Bill three eighty seven
introduced by Representative
Skerritt Perregaux and Dixon and
act making appropriation to the
department of finance and
administration to reduce the
backlog of outstanding felony
warrants House Bill three eighty
seven introduced by
Representative scary radio and
Dixon.
House Bill three eighty seven
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House memorial forty one
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and Representative
added on the memorial requesting
that the board of county
commissioners of Rio Arriba
county transfer the escalator
probing and the one about to
step out of the land grants were
said to at land grant more said
to be part of its common lands
and used as a public meeting
place and for other services to
the community House memorial
forty one introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia and
Representative at at a.
House memorial forty one have
been read twice by title is a
printer referred to to the house
rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee.
Senate bill seventy one as
amended introduced by Senator
Brandt.
And act relating to anatomical
gives prohibiting discrimination
against anatomical gift
recipients based solely on
physical or mental disability
prohibiting insurance coverage
discrimination against persons
with disabilities receiving
organ eye or tissue transplants
and associates and associated
care declaring an emergency
Senate bill seventy one as
amended introduced by Senator
Brandt Senate bill seventy one
having equipment was by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee then the
house Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty one as amended an act
relating to guardianships
providing rulemaking authority
to the children youth and
families department amending and
changing removed and family
services act amending the
kinship guardianship act
providing for voluntary
placement of children providing
for financial subsidies amending
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA in nineteen seventy
eight Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty one as amended.
Yes.
Senate judiciary committees of
supercenter bill thirty one as
amended having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house health
and Human Services Committee
this house Judiciary Committee
this.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one.
And act relating to broader and
acting the regional water system
resiliency Act authorizing the
creation of regional utility
authorities providing the powers
and duties of authorities
providing the powers and duties
of boards of directors
authorizing the issuance of
bonds providing for the transfer
of assets and liabilities and
broader range Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one Senate Judiciary
Committee subs to present a bill
one having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
agriculture us against and water
resources committee.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one as amended act
relating to prescribed burning
prohibiting the use of
prescribed burning during the
spring Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one as amended
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one as amended have been
read twice by title is are
printed and referred is ordered
not printed excuse me not
printed otherwise we printed
twice is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee this
the House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee.
Senate bill twenty nine
introduced by Senator o'neal for
the courts corrections and
justice committee and act
relating to criminal justice
reform creating medical injury
after.
Symptoms amending and repealing
sections of the NMSA in nineteen
seventy eight Senate bill twenty
nine introduced by Senator
o'neal Senate bill twenty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee then
the house Judiciary Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
We go to that order of business
committee report seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
To read.
Mr speaker your rules
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee to ms
been referred house bill two
zero six has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation of do pass as
amended and it's referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Ortez chair Mr speaker move
adoption adoption of federal
committee report on house bill
two zero six all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose Nate the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your role development
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to is been referred
house bill three zero seven has
had it under consideration point
it was recommendations to pass
and instead referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Christina
or yes chair Mr speaker move
adoption board adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill three oh seven all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me.
Is habit Committee reported
opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to
impose been referred house bill
two ten has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that I do pass
and answer for to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
a Silicon chair.
Mr speaker a about the report
reduction of federal committee
report on house bill two ten all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Couples they just haven't
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker agriculture as sick
as in water resources committee
to is been referred house bill
two ninety eight has had it
under consideration reports and
with recommendations to pass as
amended and it's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Susan K.
and at a chair Mr speaker move
adoption reduction of federal
comment report on house bill two
ninety eight of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was made that the eyes have it
could report opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
house bill one seventy nine has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it to pass and this
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committee
report on house bill one seventy
nine of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Propose day yes have a committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill one ninety two has
had it under consideration
reports say was recommendation
that it to pass an answer for
the taxation and revenue
committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committee
report on house bill one ninety
two of those in favor signify
the state line.
Couples may be as having been
reported up to Mr speaker
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee too is been
referred house bill one ninety
three has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation to do pass and
then since referred to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption reduction of
federal committee report on
house bill one eighty three of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose the I. Senate committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to miss been referred
house bill two twenty three has
had it under consideration point
I was recommendations to pass
an answer for to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair.
Speaker move adoption production
a favorable report on house bill
two twenty three all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose the eyes have it
committee reported up to.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to is been referred
house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute for house
bill one six zero has had it
under consideration forcing with
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted Dan
Hochman Vigil chair for speaker
move adoption reduction of
federal committed Ford on house
rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty.
Well full all those in favor
signify the state line.
Propose maybe the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that border
business announcements and
miscellaneous business the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative hundred.
Mr speaker I am proud to
announce that we have to
distinguish gentleman in the in
the chamber today we have the
president of the national
association of the advancement
of colored people Mr Joseph
cotton he has come all the way
from Hobbs New Mexico.
Mr speaker we also have with us
Mr Dr Harold bacon Dr Ben Bailey
was the president of the
Albuquerque branch of the NAACP.
Thank you Mr speaker right thank
you gentlelady.
Now some is simply going on a
thank you Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will be follow fifteen
minutes following the conclusion
of our upcoming joint floor
session room three oh seven
we'll be hearing some
subcommittee reports as well as
a revenue update thank you Mr
speaker members take note.
Gentle lady from going on a
Representative Rubio thank you
Mr speaker house consumer and
public affairs committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning in room
three oh nine will begin at nine
AM and we will go on until.
A long time.
Members signal delayed from
earlier because of Thomson thank
you Mr speaker just a reminder
that health and Human Services
will health and Human Services
will meet Monday morning in room
three fifteen we had been
meeting and three oh seven but
we're going back to three
fifteen for the next two
meetings thank you Mr speaker
members take note of the gentle
lady from Rio Arriba Sandoval
Santa Fe Intel's representative
Cadena thank you Mr speaker just
a reminder to everybody that the
house agriculture sec is and now
water resources for me Tuesday
morning at eight thirty in room
three fifteen member signal
generated from Achilles and one
thank you Mr speaker colleagues
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow Saturday at one PM
in room three zero nine we have
four bills we won't have lunch
but we'll have snacks or run
thank you gentle lady the lady
from the Indiana Representative
Gallegos thank you Mr speaker
your house commerce and economic
development will be meeting
fifteen minutes after of session
joint session today thank you in
rural seven three seventeen
thank you Julie member signal
couple of announcements members
the joint rules of the Senate
legislature require that all
requests to draft bills must be
received by council service on
Monday February thirteenth by
five PM.
The deadline for introducing
bills is Thursday February
sixteenth members please take
note another reminder junior
funding junior bill funding is
due today by five PM to house
appropriations and finance
committee staff he should have
an instructional email from
Michael again with details on
how to submit your request
members please take note if you
need any help or support reach
out to me or members of the
leadership offices the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Mr speaker.
The chair recognizes
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that the
speaker appointed committee to
invite the president pro tem
minister and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet
joint session with the house in
this chamber for the purpose of
being addressed by speakers in
honor of African American day
there's objection the chair will
appoint representatives no no no
Representative going online and
Representative somewhat true but
the president pro tempore of the
honorable members of the Senate
to meet in joint session with
the house for the purpose of
being addressed by our
distinguished guests.
Mr speaker the chair recognizes
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that the
house stand in recess subject to
the call of the chair and that
the rules be suspended to allow
the City of gas in the chamber
during the joint session if
there's objection the house will
stand in recess subject to call
of the chair.
