Here.
And madam chair.
Here.
Great good morning everyone and
so we're missing a couple
members but we do have a quorum
and we will begin at this time
I'm going to.
Handed over to our vice chair to
chair the meeting.
Good morning everyone.
Do we have on the agenda.
House Bill fifteen.
Are you ready madam chair.
I need a minute.
Okay madam chair and members of
the committee and audience we
are ready for House Bill fifteen
and representative madam chair
Lewis
you may begin your presentation.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members House Bill
fifteen is something that is
endorsed by the Indian Affairs
Committee during the interim it
what the tribe's currently have
right now our cooperative
agreements with the New Mexico
department of taxation and
revenue and currently the
definition of a qualifying Tax
in New Mexico law limits tribal
governments from collecting or
excuse me currently.
Limits tribal governments to
collecting excuse me the same
tax amount or last four G. R. T.
as the surrounding a county or
local government so in some
areas it tribes taxes are
actually higher so what we're
doing now is to have the law
changed so that tribes can
impose that higher rate and it
could be more than the D. R. T.
imposed by the surrounding local
governments and with that madam
chair I stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair how we
will go to the audience.
We will share comments
supporting bill fifteen.
Seventy one attendees and I
don't see any hands up or
comments so I see one.
Madam chair I can help with that
so we have Public recommend that
is currently unmuted.
A good morning madam chair and
members of the committee this is
our route Randall be sent to the
governor for the public back on
how is everyone this morning.
well thank you how are you or
doing good thank you just real
briefly I would like to
introduce members of my
administration for this year
twenty twenty two I have with me
Our first governor Lloyd
Phillippi seen here I have also
second lieutenant governor
Douglas Patricia also with us is
our tribal interpreter Aaron
sure realty and with those also
is our tribal secretary of
Francis Johnson.
I am
are here in our office server
with my brothers some of them
are very new to tribal
administration sometimes for
these.
It is an honor to serve with
them these are their first time
are the only one that is a
repeat with me we have seen
tribal administration the years
passes the first lieutenant
governor Lloyd Phillippi.
But going forward madam chair I
would like to of.
Voice our opinion here for the
Pueblo of Aqaba strong support
for this H. B. fifteen.
First let me say I appreciate
Representative Lewis bringing
this legislation forward for
your consideration and passage
thank you Representative I want
to.
Madam chair and other members of
our tribal governments in New
Mexico have had a good working
relationship with our New Mexico
taxation and revenue department.
Generally the present joint
powers agreement concerning the
collection and reporting of
gross receipts is an example of
an agreement that benefits both
Indian tribes and the state.
However there is a problem with
the only with the law governing
these agreements and this bill
is intended to correct that
problem.
Under act most tax agreement for
gross receipts taxes that The
New Mexico tax and revenue make
collect on behalf of the tribes
are caps by the right tax rate
of the county or local
municipality within the tribe's
boundaries.
For Arkema that civil County.
Where there's a tax of six point
eight percent however alchemists
gross receipts tax rate is eight
percent the neighboring local
government grant has a slightly
higher rate of eight point one
two five percent.
The track the tribal tax and
state will collect on behalf of
the need to try it is based on
the definition of qualifying tax
in the law and is not it's not
something that can be addressed
that ministry to flee.
If enacted HB fifteen with a man
and the definition of qualifying
tax for the purposes of the
joint powers agreement this
would allow for the state to
collect a tribal tax at the same
or greater right as the tax rate
for the county or municipality
within the tribe's boundaries.
Well I Comeaux could not less
could not taxless the Boller
County it could tax at a higher
rate and still have a tax
collected pursuant to the joint
powers agreement.
I do not have the same array of
taxing arrangements that are
available to the state or
political subdivisions for
example we cannot collect
property tax.
The pandemic has certainly
created a severe economic
hardships for optimal the pueblo
has not been able to take full
advantage of the tools available
to pay for tribal programs and
services.
Our casino is creating has been
closed for ten months and is now
open but is limited attendance
due to the ongoing pandemic.
It's just one of those tribal
businesses that's currently not
producing significant revenue as
a result we've been unable to
generate income or collect our
food gross receipts tax at the
time with the Pueblo must
provide increased services to
our communities.
This would increase the revenue
that both alcohol and the state
cope collect pursuant to the
joint powers agreement.
Madam chair members of the
committee I ask for your
unanimous support for H. B.
fifteen and we wish you.
Good good support from the
pueblo back among going forward
in our third day session of this
legislation we help and support
you know other bills that are
going to benefit of both the
state of New Mexico and the
pueblos we look forward to
working with each and everyone
of you thank you for your time.
Thank you next I see we have
Pamela my hoodie.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Hootie I'm a registered lobbyist
for the put.
We lost here Pamela.
Is that better.
Yeah we lost you your bills we
have to start over.
Morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Hootie I'm a registered lobbyist
for the pueblos of this letter
okay Wingate.
Santa Clara St Phillippi and so
the pueblo.
I we stand in support of
gross receipts taxes that might
help other members of our tribal
communities but I want you to
know that
This has not been really
communicated directly to me but
I just wanted to let you know
that
anything that helps tribal
communities is where we stand
thank you very much.
Here.
Next I see on the list we have
some treat peyote.
Good morning on a roll chair and
members of the committee my name
some PPO G. I. and telescope
will open in the corner to
Navajo I'm also the vice chair
of the native American caucus of
New Mexico the native American
democratic caucus of New Mexico
and we stand in strong support
across the fifteen thank you so
much for your work.
Thank you.
I don't see any more of a hands
up for comments.
What committee members.
Madam chair no discussion all
moved to pass.
Okay I see Representative night
Burt and Representative Ortez
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
I do have a few questions
regarding house bill fifteen.
Of.
Madam chair and madam chair.
Why was the original statute
placing a limit on.
taxable transactions.
One
oh Indian problems tribes and
nations plans.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and I birds
I'll let my expert introduced
that and Rogers is on with this
and you can address that.
Good morning madam chair and
other members of the committee.
This cooperative agreement why
this was done is not exactly
clear.
It was done I want to go.
The.
Design more it was done in the
city in a time when people were
not always in agreement on
things on about taxation.
There was also some beer that
all my goodness the tribes
would.
Raise their rates ridiculously
and all of these these are.
I can ours that we run into all
the time.
And it was basically a reach
through.
What is it what will to wide
litigation.
And that's incredibly important
point of this the cooperative
agreements that we have with the
state.
at this point it does that it
makes no sense to continue to
have this limit in the bill.
I'm in reality tribes just like
every other
group of governments makes
decisions based on what what
would be most beneficial to the
tribe and that always takes into
consideration.
Racking business and economic
development to attract there's
no question about that.
So.
Those fears are totally
unfounded
but that is what was the driving
impetus for this R. this last
year language so at this point
in time it really is a problem
for the tribes and well with it
must languages change that will
dissuade tribes from joining in
these cooperative agreements
with state which one provincial
taxation to find a way nobody
gets to a state taxation we
always have the problem where
somebody will say I don't want I
don't want to be taxed by the
tribe and then they'll turn
around and say I don't want to
be taxed by the state this
avoids both of those problems.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Mr Garcia
I'll get back to a couple of
your points
You made the statement that it's
like every other group of
governments and.
My recollection albeit the
pretty finite on tax issues is a
the state.
Recognizes.
The need to.
Control the amount of tax levy
particularly gross receipts tax
levied in the state of New
Mexico and and so your your your
levies or it restricts.
Counties municipalities other
governmental entities with this
legislation that's before us
tribal entities
To a certain range and so
the way I always viewed taxes
and and it's generally of goes
back to the old adage that the
ability to tax of the ability to
destroy and so it seems to me
that the state has a vested
interest in ensuring that.
They use group of governments as
you raised to of.
Does have some sort of.
Maximum or with on the amount of
tax that a local government our
could impose
And I think that's in my opinion
good public policy.
what we're now faced with this
dichotomy between of.
He was nations and tribes on the
one hand and their ability to
tax independent of state
government.
And.
The interest of the state in
that very issue and and so it
seems to me.
Correct me if I'm wrong but it
seems to me that if the state is
the end of day collecting the
tax.
That.
That tax collected by the state.
Should be subject to those
otherwise statewide limitations
would that not make sense madam
chair madam chair.
So I'm thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Nibert
to I guess a few points kind of
going back to some of the points
that you were talking about you
know this is a for those tribes
that have cooperative agreements
if tribes were to do this on
their own without a cooperative
agreement they can do that
however that would be you know a
great burden on the tribe within
their taxed revenue department
if they have one to you know
figure out who.
they need to assess the tax on
the collect the tax on keep
track of all of that here with
there's a cooperative agreement
between the tribe and the state
you know there's a there's a
real partnership and also
benefits the state because once
they tried increases as tax than
the state also there's a portion
of that it says seventy five
twenty five splat but you know
these are sovereign governments
that we're talking about and I I
think that pursuant to the
agreement is in statute this is
the only portion we
Change in terms of you know the
tribal governments being able to
collect more than those local
governments.
You know that and I I see it as
a win win situation
For those.
Businesses that do that and
collect G. R. T. on tribal lands
you know I I don't think that
folks traveling through those
reservations what otherwise know
the difference.
The amount of tax debate.
Do you know the amount of tax
that you pay on purchases.
But generally do and and by the
I was in November over Christmas
and I about fell out of my chair
when I when I worked at a
restaurant bill of and notice
that they have not the usual
state gross receipts tax perfect
from brokers that may have state
gross receipts tax that have the
community gross receipts tax and
then because I was sitting at a
table in a special district
there was a another tax added on
and and it was well over ten
percent.
About the kind of
maybe swallow a little bit but
but
and that's kind of my point the
if the.
Tribal into the wishes to impose
a greater tax then it's
incumbent upon that tribal
entity to collect that tax
And.
If they if they choose to do so
I I don't have any
philosophical issue with that.
But I respect their ability to
to to tax them to do it can
collect that tax but what we're
asking
taxation revenue department to
do is to.
Be the conduit for the
collection of those taxes and.
To collect.
From the.
Businesses are I presume from
the the residents technically
and others at the the live on
the tribal lands to to collect
that gross receipts tax on the
transaction the parable
So to me if if we're going to be
consistent of in the state has a
vested interest in making sure
that
Group of governments.
Have taxing authority up to a
certain amount.
Then if the state's collecting
that tax remove it ought to be
consistent across the board if
the tribal entity wishes to
taxed at a higher rate they can
do so and making making
collective American set up a
mechanism for for for that to
occur but.
What you're asking is that we
Krikor about an exception to our
general limitations which we as
a legislative branch of
government have a vested
interest in and
Insuring.
Some consistency Armonk tax
rates across the restating what
we give.
Governmental entities latitude
imposes tax that tax and so you
go to remove those so the taxes
higher than if you
Where I would or if you live in
in Albuquerque the tax rates
different in Santa Fe I suppose
but but they're all limited
by the total amount of gross
receipts tax available for local
governments to participate in
and so if we make it a greater
artists are or make it the.
Transaction at a rate not less
than the total gross receipts
tax member want to make sure
that that the.
The tax form
tribal lands cannot be less than
Mr I guess surrounding area
which.
In a way.
Also the test against
sovereignty because the the
tribe could say we want to allow
less tax on our lands hare them
the adjoining county of because
we want to encourage more.
Commercial retail activity or
whatever on on our land so so
were were prohibiting were
prohibiting from from them going
that way of and yet we we take
off the cap in the other
direction so you know I.
I personally would would
Support you know for tribal
wants to have the state collect
the
Tax.
To be able to
go up to the maximum message
while elsewhere the drive once
the collective known tactic can
do what it wants to should be
less could be greater what it
whatever it wishes
but within the state's not
involved so anyway those are
just some conceptual concepts
with respect to go through this
legislation
the.
grapple well with it's it's
frankly not going to affect.
What other parts of the state
but you know if if it's tax
policy and I think we need to be
consistent with our tax policy
of I think one thing that the
New Mexico does a poor job of is
being consistent in its tax
policy so I'll just leave it at
that thank you madam chair thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Nibert
icy and Rogers would you like to
make a comment before I called
and representative Ely.
Yes thank you madam chair I
would point out that these
cooperative agreements are
voluntary between a tribe and
the state.
That in order to qualify.
Six of the Accern's qualifying
gross receipts sales person
we're tax levied by a tribe
shall be limited to a tax that
one is substantially similar to
the gross receipts tax imposed
by the gross receipts and
compensating tax act this allows
the secretary of tax revenue to
refuse to enter into an
agreement where the taxes are
the tribal tax does not meet
that requirement.
So the concerns the tribes will
suddenly increase their tax to
twenty five percent or even
fifteen percent or even how the
amount that the president
Municipalities across collects
I think you have to look at it
that there are limits on that
ability in the act that do not
require to set them to say that
the tribal tax has to be less.
It has to be substantially
similar.
The gross receipts tax imposed
by the gross receipts
compensating tax act.
In order for it to be a
qualifying tax or a cooperative
agreement.
Or thank you Representative Eli.
Sure madam chair I just have a
couple questions.
Right now the state collects
this tax on behalf of the tribal
interests correct the tribal
governments etcetera right.
Madam chair and representative
that's correct if the tribe has
a cooperative agreement with the
New Mexico taxation and revenue
department and madam chair madam
chair I what I just heard was
that that has to be a
cooperative agreement meaning
both sides have to agree to it
correct Madam chair
representative that's absolutely
correct so all this does is the
ministerial Act of the state
government collecting the tax
that would continue but what
would be removed is the ability
of the of the tribe or pueblo
whatever the tribal interest yes
to say need in our community we
would like to we like to have
the option to charge more in
terms of taxes and the state
will agree to collect it we can
enter into a cooperative
agreement I mean I'm I'm I'm
misunderstanding that.
Madam chair representative no
that's absolutely correct and
and really also you know the
because the tribe implements its
taxation through it's usually
through its legislative body you
know then it makes that tax
effective
In those areas so that you know
pursuant to the agreement then
that's collect and I want to say
also that I think that there's
an administrative costs that's
associated with the the
agreement so that also comes
into play as well is that
correct and.
That is correct the state has
the ability and does collected
three percent administrative B.
and dition on all of the tribal
taxes collected to I did read
the cost of the administration
of the of the cooperative
agreement.
Madam chair madam chair yes the
one thing I was confused about
as if the tribal entity wants to
charge less than the surrounding
communities to restructure
sheets Tax unable to do that as
well.
And madam chair and
representative I'll let and
answer that.
I'm I'm fortunately not through
the court what they would not be
able to under the cooperative
agreement.
To make that change would
require an entire revision of
this
The statute concerning the
cooperative agreements and
where.
Whereas.
I would like to do that at some
point in time that was not
available to us at the time
what it does mean I and I do
hope for example there's one
tribe that does not collected
gross receipts tax.
And they are
Working with the state taxation
and revenue department to
address that situation which is
totally different from what even
collecting one percent.
But this was also to make sure
we kept a level playing field in
the taxation area between tribes
and local communities there's
also a concern usually that the
tribe not create a tax statement
and so.
To be able to fix this in a
short amount of time it was to
say okay we will agree not to.
Tax less than other people but
we will agreed to keep it
substantially similar to the
gross receipts tax imposed by
the state statutes.
You madam chair chair so I I I
think I now get the pictures so
what's happening is is that the
concern initially the statute
was set tribal interests in a
community would charge last
businesses within our B. that
are in the county outside of the
sovereign boundaries would be at
a disadvantage that frankly is
an entirely separate debate
by yes the tribal interest want
to charge more obviously those
non tribal areas around our
counties and municipalities are
not at a disadvantage the
building in advantage of the
tribal entities would be in
control of their destiny if they
wanted to charge more I said
that right.
Madam chair representative you
did say that right thank you
that's it thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair madam chair I'm
sorry for the appearing late of
some way I didn't get the link
sporting but
I have one question what if is
there anything in current law or
in this legislation allows of
the tribal entity to determine a
certain tax for members and then
another tax rate for non
members.
madam chair and representative
no it's going to be the same
rate for everyone I think that
would just be an administrative
nightmare to do.
I I do agree but I'm it just
came to mind if you could have
different tax rates and I didn't
know if current laws for that
that would stop that or if it
this allows for such.
Madam chair and representative
thank you I think and can
probably talk a little bit more
to that too but within the
cooperative agreement it's just
the same right for everyone.
That is correct you can not have
a tax that is the changes based
on membership.
Is is not you would have an.
With
due process and concerns which
is a violation of the Indian
Civil Rights Act.
So you could not do that at this
time I I and I don't think
tribes would even want to.
So actually the tax has to be a
reasonable tax that is
applicable to everyone so that's
not an issue here.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative night
per for any just a second or
third time.
can't there twelve.
I was just thinking about maybe
a the fix because to me.
I ought to be able to charge
less gross receipts tax rolls
around an area if it chooses and
so I was wondering if any
thought was given to putting a.
Operand cap that exceeds the
state women's but would still
give the tribal and that the
some way way to increase that
tax and I think I heard the word
a reasonable amount so we can
say at a rate not greater than
X. percent over the maximum of
gross receipts tax authorized by
statute or something what was
any thought given to that madam
chair madam chair.
Madam chair representative I'll
let an answer that there's a
group of
Tax administrators that are
which tribal governments that
have a group so I'm she probably
has some information about that
do you and.
Madam chair.
Here I would say that we
attempted to do that last year
and it was struck.
I the impact taxation revenues
comments are struck that
amendment to the bill and you
can see that I believe in the.
Hi our report the we attempted
to limited to municipal the
highest rate charged by
municipalities in the state as a
path and that was struck.
They said it could not work and
it was taken out by the
legislative finance committee
analyst so we attempted to do
that.
To limited to the maximum amount
that could be charged five
municipalities under the state
but that creates another problem
for the tribes in right now the
state is contemplating lowering
its gross receipts tax because
it does have other at other ways
to collect revenue that is not
available to try.
So okay it's it's a it creates a
problem when the state is up may
as a tax policy decide we don't
want to collect proceeds tax
reminders Stangel we limit our
gross receipts tax it creates
additional problems for the
tribe's when you do that makes
the cooperative agreements very
unattractive and now they're
significant state budget to
cooperative agreements.
One you avoid litigation which
is always better for everyone.
To you have availability to
really catch people who are
trying to evade tax by plane up
the state versus the try and
that's a big that's a big
problem.
So you can look at it and say.
Well we're limited to that would
you want to keep these
cooperative agreements pretty
much attracted to the tribe's.
There are state budget to.
Madam chair and madam chair
Mister Rogers
I don't quite understand the
our.
The system that was level last
year because it seems to me that
it's just a map of automatic
issue and and mathematics.
Really should should not be a.
No intention I mean do doing the
math and figured out what the
maximum rate is is just a
calculation so I'd are you
really and I'm lost as to why
they would criticize it but I
mean if that's not what you want
my concern would be to give the
tribe's more flexibility and it
seems to me there's an easy way
to do that by saying you can
have a greater rate up to now
experts sent over the maximum
rate charge in the state or
something along those lines and
that would give you the language
that would allow you to have a
lesser rate as well but this
language.
Give you some ability to raise
it but it doesn't give you the
ability to be less than the the
go land down the street in the
county or or in the municipality
next door and the tribe may have
a vested interest in in lowering
the rate to to to attract
business and and and the
You know if if they're looking
for flexibility I will I think I
would look at some language M..
You know for taxed
Representative pushes back on
that I'd be happy to say
something because to me it's
just a mathematic problem and I
can run plenty of mathematics
computations over taxed
Representative.
So anyway that that would be my
comment on this stuff moving
forward is maybe looking at the.
Changing the language slightly
to put and I a greater.
Cap that exceeds our current
state right but but that we give
you the flexibility on the other
and it still gives you the
ability to raise taxes above the
the state right I think you've
already testified that.
They ought to have some
reasonable ability to do that
and so so put a reasonable of
percentage increases.
And I'd be happy with it thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you madam chair thank you miss
Rogers.
Thank you Representative I don't
see any more hands raised from
our committee so now we have a
motion by Representative Eli for
two passed and I believe a
second by Representative Ortez
is that correct.
Yes.
And it is move to pass house
bill fifteen travel gross
receipts right sponsored by
Representative Lewis madam chair
and the motion at court to take
the role for about.
You Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes
Representative Nibert.
and I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Ortez yes
Representative green yes
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair Johnson yes.
Madam chair Lewis yes.
Well it looks like the motion
passes where just six in favor
and to propose to and
Representative Lewis madam chair
you have to pass on house bill
fifteen and we can go to thank
you committee members we can go
to representative Nibert to
explain his that.
Thank you madam chair
I would certainly support this
the bill I think it's important
for the tribes that have some
flexibility
I think that I would be true if
the operator and and lower and
and so I would encourage you
madam chair to maybe look at
some language and and push back
on TRD of and because it's it's
just a mathematical formula and
and that would give you
flexibility at the operation and
lower and and I think that's
something that is in the best
interest of of each individual
Indian nation tribe or pueblo or
to to have that flexibility of
this legislation does not do
that thank you.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair and thank you
committee members.
I'm we will go now to
Representative Lente.
Good morning madam chair good
morning committee members.
Right.
Good morning thank you for for
scheduling this bill this
morning this is the house bill
eighty nine is a continuation to
a bill that this committee heard
back in two thousand and twenty
that passed unanimously and
today I bring it up unchanged
except for cell numbers being a
little bit higher based on the
cost inflation but none the less
house bill eighty nine if there
is a portion of what is called
the tribal remedy framework
which is a response to the
twenty eighteen decision in the
consolidate case of Yazzie
Martinez versus the state of New
Mexico where the state of New
Mexico was found to not be
meeting their constitutional
obligation to provide a
sufficient education for a
number of groups of students
native Americans in this case
being one of those groups of
students so what I've done is
over the past several years is
to provide a number of
educational built a package if
you will the trouble in the
framework as it's known to try
to accommodate it and help the
public education department the
administration to ensure that
they can respond to that
landmark piece of of of at this
point a decision in an effective
way and so what I bring to you
again it's house bill eighty
nine which is the tribal
education infrastructure
investment bills and what it
does is it provides capital
investments for tribal libraries
educational.
Resource centers and early
childhood education facilities
in tribal communities it totals
about ninety million dollars and
will provide those
in infrastructure capabilities
to talk to twenty two tribal
nations within the state of New
Mexico.
The compelling need to become
both the state and a national
example under the investment for
marginalized communities and
with no access and some of the
basic necessities in those
communities really were
exacerbated during this comment
pandemic and really a best
majority of our children do in
fact go to schools that are not
located within our own
communities or even within
several of.
Miles tens of miles within our
own communities and so for many
of them they get on a bus travel
an hour to school in our back to
school and when they leave the
school for the day they leave
their opportunity to continue to
learn they're at the school
whatever it might be and so this
is this is not uncommon for many
of the children in any of one of
our of our communities I know
that for several of you that
live in rural parts of New
Mexico you can also appreciate
that the stresses brings to your
communities as well.
There are facilities that exist
within tribal communities with
minimal dollars for operating
these types of facilities.
That we can loosely called
libraries but often times by the
time the kids get home those are
closed they don't have the
capacity whether it's through
internet whether it's through
through manpower staffing to
ensure that they can we help
those children continue to learn
like their peers do within their
own school districts districts.
What the pandemic has expired as
exposed is truly the dire need
for tribal communities to offer
these types of capabilities to
their students and so what I'm
asking for now is the
continuation to push that we can
find.
Tribal libraries.
For art for our twenty two.
Tribes bubbles in nations that
have state certified tribal
libraries with in their
communities already and so of
fortunately enough is that.
Different than past years in
twenty twenty two this is the
first year that we actually have
money in the budget to make some
type of significant progress
towards finding a way to help
these conditions and so for the
past several years everyone
appreciates the idea of being
able to provide this type of
capability or capacity within
our own communities however when
it gets to the appropriation
side.
There's never any money except
for this year during this past
special session that we just got
out of the twenty twenty one
there was twenty ten million
dollars appropriated of both for
tribal libraries right now we
have another ten million dollars
it is in the LFC recommendation
for tribal libraries and I bring
to you again for consideration
madam chair and committee
members the tribal libraries
bill titled house bill eighty
nine at this point I will stand
for any questions madam chair
and committee members I also
have just two expert witnesses
if there are any questions that
I am unable to answer myself
former governor Regis Pecos who
co chairs the tribal education
alliance and is also the co
director of the leadership
institute as well as Elizabeth's
we know from Cochiti pueblo she
owns and operates seen us a
design architects who also
assisted in curating the
information that is within this
proposal the madam chair thank
you for the time and good
morning to everyone.
Great thank you Representative
will move over both regions and
B. M. D. B. two panelists once
we get some comments from the
public so right now I have
Valerie built in with city
public schools you are and made
it.
Hi good morning my name is
Valerie but also on and I work
as the children's program
coordinator at the pueblo of
Zuni library and I support this
bill because I see and I know
that libraries are safe space
for children and also save space
for any community member
libraries are equitable we
provide services to everybody we
don't turn anybody away and we
are.
Essential the hearts of the
community because we find
materials we provide computer
services for job searches just
everything the whole spectrum
and for myself I've been
establishing stem programming
for kids and that's what rural
areas pueblo libraries we are
you know responsible for.
Keep getting high quality
programming and I support this
bill because we need bigger
spaces and we just want to be of
service all the time to the
community thank you hello.
Thank you next we have the
patina Santa you are now and
made it.
Good morning madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Bettina Santa I'm the
director of the test public
education department and I just
want to express our overwhelming
support for the legislation
we don't have a tribal library
at yes but will and therefore
you know we make do with with
what we have but just like
Valerie who spoke before me
mentioned that it's the heart of
our community you know we're
we're missing that for our
students and it's important to
note that you know we do have
the
the I. E. school but the
services are only available for
their students and so we
encounter a lot of different you
know it's only the students can
attend and if you go to town
school you can't come and stuff
like that and we really want to
have a place where we can serve
all of our students regardless
where they go to school so this
investment in our in our
community will really help make
that happen and we're a small
problem
we don't have very many
resources our main income is to
tourism and of course over the
pandemic we have been closed
so we're not able to you know
put a lot of resources towards
this but
The other thing is of course
many couples don't have high
speed internet connectivity and
to have a place where we can
find this in a larger capacity
you know for more students it
would be amazing for the
students of task but will so on
behalf of yes but will I
respectfully ask the committee
to support HB eighty nine thank
you for your time madam chairman
and members of the committee.
Thank you next we have a Lana
Grande.
You are now and meet.
And you hear me we can all good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Elena
Gratton and on was formerly the
live breeder coordinator at the
Albuquerque and then Santa Fe
Indian school after that I
served with the state of New
Mexico is the tribal libraries
program coordinator and in that
capacity of working with
libraries school libraries and
tribal libraries in the native
communities for over forty five
years here in New Mexico in the
meetings that we attended in the
workshops that we attended the
tribal libraries have really
grown to to tremendous resources
within their community but the
limitation has always been
facilities so often they would
have programs in the summer but
they could only accommodate a
certain number of students
because of the limited space in
their libraries so renovation
addition and new construction
have been identified over all
these years as one of the great
needs the state has provided
through geo bond funding to the
public libraries in New Mexico
some very significant resources
but the G. O. bond money can
only be spent on equipment and
collection development it can't
be spent on this big need that
the tribal libraries have and so
there the strong programs and
with this additional support
they can really grow and blossom
and become
important in their communities
in a new way thank you I said I
would respectfully request that
the committee support this bill.
Thank you next we have Austin
Weeki.
We OCBC excuse me and you are
now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Austin
we have TM the political
director for animated both and
we stand in strong support of HB
eighty nine
tribal areas do become huge
centers for the community and
have been incredibly valuable
through the pandemic for access
to resources knowledge a place
where people can safely gather
and pick up additional resources
you know it is to give out
things like PPE which is like
something that that libraries
are not typically designated to
do these community centers and
that becoming so a place where
people can gather for for more
than the intended use but they
get
just you to bang for their Buck
at
our end up becoming
Bill is for the community and
and places that can be used for
for gathering and for learning
and education new technology and
the general resource for the
entire community so we stand in
strong support of HB eighty nine
and one aspect committee to
support as well.
Thank you next we have the
governor mark Mitchell from the
public to see okay you are now
and it.
You we can welcome thank you
good morning my name is mark
Vigil former governor for the
public to Shuki and currently I
am the
elected chairman for the all
public governors and we stand in
support of this bill for all
intents purposes as previous
speakers have spoken about it
and we.
Forward to a do pass from this
committee thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Melissa Candelaria
welcome you are now and made it.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Melissa Candelaria with the
New Mexico Center online poverty
we thank the sponsor for
bringing this legislation and we
stand in strong support of this
bill because it invests in
tribal libraries and education
facility for children and
families can access educational
services resources and tools
within their home communities in
the Yazzie Martinez case the
judge recognize that access to
technology and related
infrastructure are essential to
a constitutionally sufficient
education the court also found
that to during summer and after
school programs and access to
culturally relevant learning
opportunities are important for
native students academic success
due to lack of funding schools
can't always afford to provide
such critical programs to
support and when they are
available students without
personal transportation can't
access them tribal libraries
assess public schools and their
students students to a range of
educational programming and help
bridge access gaps that exist
for native students in public
schools and for these reasons
madam chair committee we urge
you to support and passed house
bill eighty nine thank you.
Thank you next we have Jeremy
Yankee you are now and it.
You madam chair members the
committee my name is German
thank you in the director you to
learn for soccer Pueblo of
representing governor check Rhea
and as many of my colleagues
have already stated library
staff and as a major health for
all of our educational needs
from early childhood K. to
twelfth a college and adult
learning and also the work force
development but essentially
they're essential hope for
language development as well so
with that Senator stands in full
support of possibility I thank
you madam chair thank you.
Bill Jordan you are now and
muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children we stand in strong
support for H. B. eighty nine
and really want to thank
Representative Lente date for
being a champion on this issue.
Certainly the pandemic has
highlighted how important these
facilities are for the children
and we just urge your support of
the legislation thank you.
Thank you next we have Richelle
mon twenty edgy you are now and
made it.
Good morning Mr a thank you for
giving me this opportunity to
speak on house bill eighty nine
thank you representative Lente
for and bringing this bill I
would like to
Also say that we are in support
and we humbly and respectfully
ask for your support on house
house bill eighty nine the
Torreon star late chapter
community is from the Navajo
Nation we are near Cuba New
Mexico we are on the very
outskirts of the Navajo Nation
and our library began as a
mobile library and then it went
to a space and side of our
chapter meeting Paul and now we
have it as a portable building
and we would appreciate your
support in this as everyone else
has mentioned we are the heart
of our community at this time
during this pandemic we have
been able to establish a strong
internet access for our college
high school and elementary
students that have to be going
to school remotely and we have
in the past been able to bring
our elders and our children
together and we would just like
to continue to have our library
grow in our community.
Thank you next we have the hello
Act money good morning governor
you are now and made it.
The first lieutenant governor
for the pueblo that come on.
Thank you for allowing me to
show to pueblos position on HBO
eighty nine.
We support the bill and the
efforts of Representative Derek
Landy to seek the necessary
funding for the Pueblo of that
and what the plan design and
construct a new library.
We support the bill because it
addresses a critical need that
exists in every cut tribal
communities across the state the
need for tribal libraries and
what they can find.
Right now the tribal library at
at Comeaux is that old tired
looking building in need a major
repair.
We need a new bill in.
That provides our students with
the kind of services and the
possibilities that libraries in
every town and city across the
state offers its young people
and its communities.
We lack high speed internet
connectivity.
In almost all of our homes that
come.
The only place our students can
access the internet is the
library.
In order for them to do their
homework after hours that
requires research our students
must sit in a parked car.
In the library parking area.
That's no way for children to
learn.
As a former school board member
forcible County I know the
importance of leverage
elaborate can do many things off
for a place to study a place to
get to her a place for language
instruction a place for distance
learning.
But more than anything H. bill
eighty nine can find the fund
and I believe it's four one five
million and the infrastructure
to support students across
students access to education.
I asked the committee to support
this one time investment in
learning.
I strongly urge the committee to
pass HB eighty nine.
Hello I am Madam chair in
chairman and members of the
committee.
So as thank you next we have a
song tree PRG.
You are now and made it.
Hi good morning members on a
roll chairman members of the
committee my name is on to pay a
need I'm yes hello well look co
that and I'm the vice chair of
the native American caucus of
New Mexico and also the
chairwoman of the Aztec Indian
Education Committee and.
Wanted to stand in strong
support of house bill eighty
nine and.
Give kind of a quick I'm.
When that
Happened during the COVID
because of the existing
Kind of library that we haven't
tells Pueblo during the COVID
I was able to zoom in to.
R. T. will language classes
which would not have been
available.
had the tried not have stepped
up and decided to offer these.
language classes.
Online I'm.
Some of you may know that the
table languages and for language
and not in books
until recently and so we're as
you heard from Bettina Santa Fe
tribal Education director the.
Program has grown exponentially
to serve not only students K.
through twelve but.
Higher education students like
myself we're able to zoom in and
learned
R. T. will language are precious
few language and so
I'm sorry I'm distracted my
phone's ringing
so I urge the committee to vote
in favor of the two passed house
bill eighty nine and thank
Representative Lente and his
team for all of the work that
you do
Have a good day.
Thank you next we have Patricia
Jimenez let them you are now and
muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning.
Good morning go ahead.
Patricia you'll have to and then
on your end.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair members of the committee
good morning my name is Patricia
Jimenez wait them I am the
project manager for transform
education New Mexico for all of
the reasons so so strongly
stated by our community members
transformation cation and its
affiliates stand in strong
support of house bill eighty
nine we wish to thank
representative Lente for
continuing.
Ewing to carry this important
piece of legislation we thank
you for the opportunity and we
look forward to a do pass thank
you madam chair.
Thank you next we have Pamela
hoodie you are now and muted.
Good morning.
Committee.
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the pueblos
Santa Clara essentially be
located when Gary and Santa of
the.
I'm here muted on your end.
Did you miss the whole thing we
did I'm so sorry madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Pamela Hootie I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
Bible says it's lead actor okay
Wingate Santa Clara family P.
Anthony we think this sponsor
who has been a true champion of
these types of bills and we
stand in strong support one of
them's that one hundred percent
make sure you tell the thank you
so much and we look forward to a
new path.
Thank you next we have Brittney
Garcia you are now and muted.
Good morning my name is Brittany
Garcia I am with the problems in
tribal archives.
Go ahead and begin again we
didn't catch a lot of that okay
I'm very sorry good morning
everybody I'm reading Garcia
with the pueblos any tribal
archives.
Thank you we want to extend a
great big thank you to
representative Lente for.
supporting this bill we stand in
strong support of house bill
eighty nine the tribal libraries
has been a lifeline to our
tribal communities during the
COVID they are hubs of learning
and retention of culture and
their innovative in the delivery
of services that they provide to
our communities.
House bill eighty nine will give
us the funds that are vital to
having our libraries growing
continue to support the
community and we stand in strong
support of house bill eighty
nine.
Madam chair and members of the
committee we look forward to the
passage thank you.
Thank you next we have Serra
complete you are now and muted.
I thank you yes my name is Sir
twenty and thank you madam chair
and members of this committee
for allowing me to speak I am
the library director of the
institute of American Indian
arts Santa Fe I'm also the
executive committee member of
the New Mexico consortium of
academic libraries and eastern
committee member of the elite
transforms in New Mexico.
And I'm in strong support of
this bill for all the reasons
stated libraries are essential
to communities community grow
education.
Sir.
You'll have to me on your end
okay.
I now yeah I think it's our
system because this is
consistently happening sorry
about.
So I start over.
Please.
Thank you madam chair and the
members of the committee my name
is there would be and I'm being
library director of the
institute of American Indian
arts I am also the executive
committee member of New Mexicans
are some of academic libraries
in a steering committee member
of the elite tribe right
libraries transform of New
Mexico and I am strong support
of this bill for all the reasons
already stated libraries are
essential to communities tribal
communities educational support
broadband technology needs.
Thank you very much.
Great thank you next we have the
Albuquerque library advisory
board you are now and it.
Hi my name is Julian and I will.
I'm library advisory board
member in Albuquerque I don't
have children I'm Asian American
I'm not native American but I
remember my screen and local
library as my happy place as a
child was clean it was basically
it was bright and full of books
and helpful librarians I grew up
reading and do my ability to
navigate this world by reading
again higher education and a
satisfying information
technology career.
Maybe you can remember being a
child now you also have the
space and books to read we have
money now to spend a New Mexico
children our future fellow
workers and taxpayers thank you
representative Lente T. for
support for sponsoring this bill
the Albuquerque Bernalillo
county library by your board
strongly supports house bill
eighty nine I strongly support
house bill eighty nine thank
you.
Thank you.
that is all of the hands raised
is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition.
Okay seeing then we will go to
the committee.
Committee members.
Representative Nibert.
Why do I always have to be first
of.
The madam chair and and
Representative I just have a
couple questions for first
question is
Has there been any effort to
secure funding.
Through the federal government
it seems that there but a lot of
talk about infrastructure
projects and I've seen on the
news about how
there may be funds available for
infrastructure projects on on
tribal lands in in particular
and I'm wondering if any effort
was made to see if there's a an
Avenue to secure federal funding
of these projects on the Indian
tribes pueblos and nations.
Thank you very much Mr
Representative Nibert to madam
chair chair woman of
Representative Nibert missing
you on the basketball court see
this year but regarding your
question I do believe and it's
all of individual based on each
publication or try but in my
assessment each is very
aggressive in regards to trying
to garner federal funds for
support in any one of their
infrastructure projects whether
it be in this case tribal
library but for the most part
because of the nature of our
communities being some of the
oldest communities within the
southwest if not this nation and
the world.
Many of them utilize those
infrastructure funds federal
infrastructure funds to try to
bring their infrastructure up to
date and most of those are with
water or sewer or housing or
whatever it might be so in
regards to to to this matter in
particular it really is in
response to the Yazzie Martinez
versus the state of New Mexico
lost to where again it truly is
a a states
Responsibility to be able to
provide these these access
points so the sufficient
education constitutionally
provided in our own state
constitution and so in doing so
you know I it is the push
through these types of
initiatives to ensure that the
state can then also be proud of
what they're offering to all of
its students not just the ones
that may be
quote unquote lucky enough to
live in more urbanized centers
where they have that access to a
public library.
Madam chair representative
You're brought up Yazidi
Martinez
that.
Action was directed toward the
public education department and
as I see it there may be only
one.
There may be only one of.
Item here that
would deal directly with
something under the auspices of
the Public Education Department
in that section six on page four
so but I may be missing
something that.
I don't well I'd I'd I don't
know that.
The expenditures and the
creation of these other issues
is going to help alleviate any
concerns that were addressed and
in the lawsuit that was
specifically.
targeted toward the Public
education department
yeah I guess I appreciate your
your expertise so on that
whether my thinking is is maybe
not correct in that regard.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for for that
question you bring up a an
amazing point and if this goes
all to the point within the
lawsuit of extended student
services and the recommendation
that of the state be able to
provide those to all of its
students a native Americans in
this case.
Without exception and so as I
mentioned in the introduction is
many of our students and and
like the madam chair and and
Representative Nibert you can
appreciate that this being in a
rural part of the state as well
as once our students on the
school bus maybe perhaps in some
cases in our to the school and
they're there for eight hours a
day for instance and then they
leave the school for for for the
for the day for the weekend or
even for the summer they go back
to their Pueblo their nation
their tribe or and maybe in your
neck of the woods back to the
ranch and then they leave that
opportunity you can the
opportunity to continue to learn
they're at the school because
they go back to a home and not
to their own fault and and not
to the fall to their parents or
their communities but they go
back to their to do their homes
that don't have wifi that don't
have a public library that don't
have a.
Sir
of the sensitivities that will
allow them to continue to learn
in many cases like their peers
do in more urbanized areas that
AP like I said we'll go look
enough to live in and around
their school there are public
library that have that access
and so what we what what was
exposed with the pandemic
especially up and and you'll see
pictures of this all across of
social media our students in
many of our own tribal
communities whether it was the
summer time and they had to
attend summer school they they
had to meet outside of their
tribal governmental building or
they had to go at ask their
their grandparents their parents
for a ride to the nearest
McDonald's or whatever they have
free wifi to continue to learn
how to write a report and it was
not uncommon even now during
this school year for our
reliance on jet packs that are
truly not hundred percent
reliable I just tried to garner
an ability to continue to learn
to access schooling and the way
they should be able to and so
what what well well we may not
see that.
The state might not have a
responsibility to provide these
within tribal nations.
With with with all with all due
respect they have a
responsibility to ensure that
our children regardless of where
they are located geographically
or their or their race or their
socioeconomic standards have an
access to in this case extended
student services which would in
this case be a tribal library or
and educational center within
their own community thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative for the question.
So so Madam chair representative
as I understood your your
testimony
This investment if you will
would.
Be credited toward.
The state's obligation that was
identified under Yazzie Martinez
even though it's outside of the.
Budget of of the purview of the
Public Education Department
divide that I understand that
correctly.
Madam chair representative I I
think you're you're correct when
when when you talk about it
being credited towards the the
work the state is doing to
remedy the findings and Yazzie
Martinez.
Madam chair representative your
nose some of the school
districts I represent but the
kids are all of us for a couple
hours so one way and and so I'm
very familiar with the with
rural school districts in the
challenges they face including
the sitting in a parking lot
designated for wifi service when
the schools closed down
Yes yes to an entirely
different area of the band
Justice this bill that's before
us but
You identified in your opening
comments of the things that are
set forth herein are are common
throughout rural New Mexico and
and I I certainly agree with
with that statement and.
And so I'm trying to figure out.
You know.
This is a pretty good a lot of
money and it's devoted
specifically for
tribal nations pueblos and and
tribes and yet we still have
basically.
Quite a bit of other areas of
the state that have identical
needs and and so my question
would be Madam chair
representative.
How do we tackle those needs as
well our.
I'm and.
Do we as a state maybe just.
This off for these populations
out of time or or do do we need
to work more through PED for
instance and maybe some other
agencies to accomplish the
broadband accomplish the
educational services accomplish
the new libraries that that are
needed.
throughout what I consider world
New Mexico particularly those
school districts where you
identify get there on the bus
for an awfully long time.
Madam chair.
I'm gonna go okay met madam
chair representative Nibert you
know you bring up some some
really great points and really
it's what I bring to you and
house bill eighty nine is once
again a continuation of a
response by the published tribes
and nations that helped to
develop.
The tribal remedy framework as a
response then again two of the
plaintiffs within your.
See more.
In this to which date of
Americans Hispanic children
disabled children we're we're
we're some of the plaintiff
groups within that lawsuit and
so this is it this package if
you will on house bill eighty
nine is our is the tribe's best
attempts to try to help the
state remedy what's really going
on and how we can find success
is educational successes for our
children within our own
communities and so I I hate for
it to be a piecemeal approach
because I think that's what
you're getting to representative
Nibert but none the less it
really is been a a monumental
task to have to try to speak up
on behalf of those communities
and those students just for them
to be able to have access that I
think many of us take for
granted with with opening up
your computer having a wifi
connection or having a place to
go that safe or warm or cool in
the summer time that we can
continue to stay a read a book
and so in these cases I do
believe and I have every faith
and hope that our public
education department under the
the the leadership of Secretary
stand house is working on these
in a very effective manner but
as it relates to house bill
eighty nine this is that these
are the pieces of legislation
that I brought for help create
and affect positive change for
students within our communities
thank you madam chair
Representative.
Madam chair representative
looking at sections two three
and four of the
Well those are all on page four
there's three of.
Entities that look why.
Does money ought to be.
Appropriated through the higher
education budget and
In our.
It just seems to me that with
respect to two three and four
that ought to be part of a the
overall higher education budget
and not a separate
appropriation act for a specific
the university
any comment with respect to
those three
sections.
Madam chair representative thank
you point those out so in
particular on on on section
number four the career readiness
center at the pueblo of Zuni
that's obviously within the
community that would take place
and provide them that access
within their own communities
we're numbers three and four
four the though those are
different simply because they
provide access at eight eight
tribal college institution that
will provide.
Insurance that for the same
reasons they would be in
availability to allow their
students in this case native
American students or whoever
chooses to go to those
universities or schools that
access to continue to learn in
this case in early childhood
center because it many cases of.
With there's not the luxury of a
providing a day care services or
any other services to ensure
that we can find our our our
adults access to continuing to
go to a higher education
learning availabilities in many
cases in this case we want to be
able to find that so that well
there.
Parents may be in school
students can continue to learn
as well.
I'm not as familiar with the
higher education department as I
am the public education
department but does the higher
education department.
And I'm gonna use a wrong word
but the
penalize the institution for
receiving monies outside of its
normal our budgeting process why
PED does where we were in a
school receives money from our.
Another source maybe even
through capital outlay PED them
reduces their otherwise general
stipe and to accommodate that
the that money that they
received as a higher education
department do that.
Madam chair representative you
know I I I would be remiss if I
was able to comment on behalf of
the higher education department
so I could not tell you yes or
no.
M. and then looking at the madam
chair and representative section
six but Babbitt a very of
charter schools I read the
language M. my question with
respect to that the one million
five hundred thousand dollars if
it if it's seen by PED would PED
then reduce the our allocation
because I receive money through
this bill
what would it be a reduction
that they would normally apply
to that school for the money
they're receiving from this
appropriation bill.
Madam chair representative
that's a great question and just
having a meeting with secretary
Steinhaus from PED yesterday and
has that there was no indication
that there would be any in
relation if in fact these monies
for infrastructure would be
appropriated.
M. Madam chair representative of
I I ask those questions because
of.
Yeah in some of my early efforts
to get resources to some other
schools the district that I
represent
it became very apparent that bye
bye good faith efforts were all
for not because you give them a
thousand dollars here PED takes
a thousand dollars from from
over there so so within that
zero gain when those thousand
dollars could have been put
towards something else in the
community where the would have
benefited not only the students
but the entire community so
I'm pretty sensitive to those
issues and I'd certainly
encourage you to
make sure that neither higher
education department or the
public education department
would see these monies and then
offset those monies from our.
The budget for those schools
many of them
Madam chair and representative
But I appreciate you
highlighting these issues
I believe I'm going to support
your legislation but I sincerely
hope that we as a state.
Look at these issues not only
from the context of
Supporting the tribal our.
Introduce a may tribal lands but
that recognize that these issues
are persist in many parts of our
state
and I would say particularly in
those school districts where
they are very isolated and that
the
The children are having to
help us for our our two hours of
one way to get to school and
they don't have the connectivity
that the the representative
talked about they don't have the
opportunities to
Go to places and that it's not
just a tribal issue is a issue
for all of rural New Mexico
madam chair thank you for all
allowing me some time to to
answers or have some questions
on this bill.
Thank you representative Nibert
to Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and.
Representative Lente my question
goes to the FY all our and if
you look at the last page you'll
see that the expenditure per
student let's take one unit is
nine hundred one dollars
and then we go to
Santana and it's almost twenty
three thousand dollars per
student now I agree when you
look over there Santa Fe N. as
and got a new building
construction
but seeing the disparity all the
way across the the.
The different job entities I'm
worried about a fairness issue
arising out of it and I don't
know how to address that or if
you've got something to address
on it.
Madam chair representative ream
thank you for the question
you know I I I would ask one of
my my expert witnesses perhaps
in this case Elizabeth's we
know.
To provide a little bit of it
instead regards to how these
numbers came about and she can
answer that question then
perhaps I can request Mr Regis
Pecos to help me with that
question but in all fairness to
everybody that is identified
within this bill and with it
within the allocations of
dollars within this bill it's
it's it's not my place to pick
winners or losers and and in all
fairness in this case we've all
been.
I'm accustomed to have been
educational losers for a long
while because of the inability
to have access to educational
infrastructure so in this case I
would ask if Elizabeth Sweeney
is is.
If you can help to answer that
question then.
Yes I can help.
Morning madam chair committee
members representative Lente
what's the help my name is
Elizabeth we not and I am from
the public Kodi I'm a registered
architect in New Mexico and
Arizona and my company is called
Selena design and architecture
my team has been working with
tribal librarian since two
thousand nineteen are we
initially met with the
librarians and tribal
administrators via round table
discussions and have continue to
gather information on program
and infrastructure needs over
the past few years so some of
the information we gathered was
used to generate construction
estimates for those tribes who
did not already have access to
design services so some of those
discrepancies within that budget
numbers come from tribes that
already have access to design
services for existing facilities
that don't require upgrades some
of the criteria we used for the
size of the community the number
of children in K. through twelve
the number of adult users other
general demographics we also did
existing facility assessments.
And we did those to determine
the size whether it was a new
facility in addition or a
renovation to existing
facilities we also used building
codes in occupancy loads to
determine the site deliveries so
from this information we
established construction cost
estimates and again it's based
on new construction expansion or
renovation these needs were
different for each pueblo or
tried.
And those construction cost
estimates that originally were
garnered and generated have been
adjusted for inflation and
recent comment impacts to
construction in the form of
materials and labor shortages
and cost increases as you can
see we also provided eight
standard design estimate at the
rate of four percent to align
with those construction
estimates for each tribe so I'm
I agree the the numbers of very
for each Pueblo and with respect
to Santa Ana pueblo their
existing library is in a portion
of their tribal administration
building that is not designed as
a library it's I'm gonna say
leftover space that has been
allocated to the library and in
their case they are
restricted for expansion or in
addition because of where the
current library is located so
Santa Ana we are proposing a new
library in a different location
and then you I want to state
building that you saw.
It's not the library that's the
recreation center so hopefully I
addressed your question
Representative ram.
Yes I'm madam chair and and
Mr.
In the Representative Lente it
what I'm hearing and it is
concerning is that you know if
you will next year we'll have
another bill similar with with
this and tell all of
The tribal entities have a new
building and and up to that
they're not and I'm not saying
that the the kids don't need to
the library and they don't need
internet and all that says
please don't take it that way
the other thing that I have
madam chair and representative
Lente can you talk about how
much capital outlay money is
designated for the tribal
entities
Currently.
And then also because of the
Aussie lawsuit is there another
quantity of money that you
receive per year for the tribal
entities.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for the question.
I wish there was another part of
money that we received for the
tribal entities because to be
quite honest with you is that
you know this is the dilemma
that I as as as a representative
that representative I I mean I
did I did the county yesterday
seventeen individual governments
within my district so I have
seven Pueblo as I have I Navajo
Nation chapters I have eight
three Apache nation have a
counter Bernalillo that the
village of St a SEATO the
spillage of I would also that
the list goes on and on and so
when
When I'm at the school for.
Stick around number if we get a
million dollars for capital
outlay I'm gonna be by that up
and try to make the most of a
sense of of how to help with
their monumental requests in
some cases to try to affect some
of the most basic of essential
needs that that some of these
communities need whether its
water or waste water electricity
so
that that is the short answer
would be no that there's not a
an individual pod additional to
anything that we all get what we
all get is what I get and what I
get is what I tried to make the
most prudent affects within our
own within communities within my
district.
Madam chair and representative
Lente I thought that there was
also a supplemental
capital outlay that was
designated for the tribal
entities is that not correct.
You madam chair and
representative perhaps you're
talking about like the tribal
infrastructure fund that is
administered by the Indian
Affairs Department.
Madam chair and representative
Lente it could be yeah you know
that that Madam chair
representative that that process
and that program is something
that is been set up in statute
and still yet is is very much
under funded and and it's
amounts of maybe
in some cases per year I.
I the to the ten million dollars
that is allocated per year that
is up for grabs from all of the
tribal nations in the state to
try to again affect some type of
change within their
infrastructure on their own
respective tribal lands.
Chair thank you that's all my
questions.
Thank you Representative the
next we have Representative
Ortez.
Thank you madam chair I move
into passive H. B. eighty nine.
Thank you we have a due pass by
Representative Ortez and a
second by Representative Chasey
is there further discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
two passed motion.
I'm art Representative Ortez I
see your hand still up but I
think that's because you know.
as so seeing then that
Representative you have a do
pass on house bill eighty nine
showing all members present
voting in the affirmative thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you members have a great day.
Thanks same to you next we have
house bill twenty two.
And I do believe that we have
the transcript available going
on too so I don't want to enroll
in a Representative the
representatives and senator when
we go to house bill twenty two
but for members of the committee
and those listening in from the
public there is the live
transcript closed captioning but
and that a down there where you
see the race pandemic and so
you'll just have to push that
when you heard a different
language and the closed
captioning well parents actually
are really neat functions so we
appreciate that it's are
available today and
Representative Roybal coming out
will you be starting off madam
chair if you will good morning
hi my madam chair and and vice
chairman members the committee
and the public if you would I
would like to give a brief
overview of how we're going to
proceed for your great aunt and
then you tell me of we're on not
in mine okay so good morning
everyone again
I as will introduce the bill and
then
Senator Sedillo Lopez my
colleague are will follow and
then we'll follow with
Representative table what who
will then lead to the the
introduction of the witnesses
and the further discussion as we
go along so if that's okay with
you all I'll begin thank you
madam chair and again good
morning everyone
I'm here to it along with my
colleagues and community to
introduce house bill twenty two
which is known as the language
access bill and it's relating to
governmental accessibility
requiring all state departments
to provide meaningful access the
state programs for individuals
limited proficiency in English
making an appropriation I'm here
today on also in honor of the
person that I dedicate my work
who on this bill and together
with the representative will go
on Senator Sedillo Lopez and all
those that will be speaking
today in memory of Dr Delhi I'm
kind of cool founded the Asian
families and I pledged to her
once I got elected but I will
work closely with her and I have
with and and and Representative
before and all of the members of
the Asian community and others
to follow through on what she
envisioned as part of the work
of the Asian families so with
that in mind on the dedicate
today's
bill discussion and
ask
for a good discussion and
positive results so I will now
move on and introduce my
colleague senator Antoinette
Sedillo Lopez.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Roybal
Caballero I I will actually just
say very little except to to
mention that I got involved with
this effort when I was the
director of a lawsuit committed
that you the executive director
and I did so at the invitation
of now Representative cable car
she she let the Asian family
services at that time and she
contacted us and asked us about
the need and we had many clients
who had trouble with access to
look to services even though
there are federal laws requiring
that individuals with limited
act access proficiency have
access to services and it is a
requirement
in in in federal law that the
states must do this and have
language access plans because
already and so one of the things
well I have a table discussed
this Representative we'll go
we'll discuss this but it was
really disturbing to to to find
out that they don't I wanted to
mention that this bill has been
endorsed by Legislative Health
and Human Services interim
committee and last year you got
to do passed from staff but I
never got a hearing in finance
so it has been around and it is
it is a very important bills I
think it will help us avoid
lawsuits for failure to provide
these services so I really want
to give a lot of credit and I
two Representative Boca she
knows that she started this
effort I would say five six six
years ago and it's time it is
really time that the state step
up and do what it needs to do I
also wanted to mention every
time I have a state agency
before me I asked them for a
copy of their language access
plan every time they say yes of
course Senator will give you one
and I have not received a single
one.
with that I'll introduce my
newest colleague and she is also
in my district my Senate
district Representative cable
got.
Thank you everyone good morning
madam chairman and vice chairman
members of the committee and
good morning to all the
community members who are
believed in the wrong well as
being just get this is where it
is today I think without the
voices of people who are
directly impacted by the which
access every single day of their
lives and this wouldn't have.
The moments and the impact that
it will have today and hopefully
if they get pushed for I will
see that at a statewide level as
my colleagues have mentioned age
between the two really works on
four levels so it's requiring
state agencies to assess their
need to provide interpretation
and translation for New Mexicans
who primarily speak languages
other than English it requires
agencies to develop a plan to
provide meaningful access to
state programs for New Mexicans
who speak languages other than
English including the projected
cost of providing language
services that's a really
important one because what we
used to hear Asian families when
I was there and I think but
community organizations still
continue to here as we would
love to do this but we don't
have a budget for it and that
where for many of us is not
meeting the standards of
meaningful access for the which
service as it also requires
agencies to report on the
implementation of the language
access plan that gives us an
idea of what's happening across
the state and allows us to have
accountability measures and then
finally it appropriates fifty
thousand to the apartment and
finance and administration yes
responding with access and
development for state agencies
that the bill is really helping
to coordinate among state
agencies there are eight he
plans and developing something
that really works for the entire
state and where agencies can
share their losses as well.
As Senator Sedillo Lopez alluded
to have there's been so much
work on this across the years to
difference and Morial's that
have passed unanimous the
unfortunately nothing had moved
at the state do those memorials
there was one where we had to
set up a task force it never
happened and when we had to find
finally sent in at we did in our
us we get a public records
requests several departments and
none of them had a language
access plan that they submitted
it's over the New Mexico
department of workforce
solutions which did have a and
because they were required to
pursue settlement with the
office of civil rights and
because of the failure to meet
with which requirements in
twenty thirteen I want to also
mention that the community spent
so much of her time in preparing
a health impact assessment
report through global final
slide which is a community
initiative through this process
there were a hundred thirty
participants from eleven
countries from the ages of three
up to seniors it was a truly
multi generational average and
they went and did studies and
and share their stories of how
language access affects the
health of immigrants and
refugees specifically and how it
relates to stress.
Step question anxiety and fear
what came out of that report
which is also and easily
accessible online is that
language nexus is a social
determinants of health so when
we talk about in language access
plans it's about increasing the
health of all of our communities
across the state.
Really great story and that's
extremely personal and it's
something that continues to have
pushed me to do this kind of
work and to support community
who is this.
And when my mom came and and my
parents came to the state where
refugees they ended up on
documents and my mom we
continually see tell me when she
was when I was a young can these
are some of my first memories
consultation with band band
nation is really stupid because
you know how to navigate the
different systems in the United
States and we know that that's
absolutely not true she's one of
the smartest the by now and
she's incredibly blessed I she's
grant and two languages and also
in English now and she was
always and continues to have
this perception that people
understand her because of her
heavy accent but she's been so
successful in her life and we
know that if we don't support
folks in the community who are
blessed to speak multiple
languages even if English is not
the dominant one we as a state
are failing systemic needs that
to really embrace New Mexico as
a multicultural state which is
something that we continue to
say and we need to really live
up to that I wanted to and with
the excitement of seeing this
move through in different ways I
know with city council and
etcetera and the City of
Albuquerque a recently passed an
ordinance that requires
something very similar to what
we're proposing for the state
she actually use are are
proposed bill to lay the
foundation to get us the City of
Albuquerque sh so I and that
bank continues its ongoing
you'll see that you're on the
fence right here today to talk
about and how it's impacted them
so personally and throughout the
community and across our state
and I really just want to you
and ask for your support on this
and that madam chair members of
the committee at and so happy to
now passage right witnesses that
you attacked States the
executive director of Asian
families financially that for
speaker and also bring the state
you know comes as an attorney
and New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty so with that I'll send
it over to.
Thank you good morning madam
chair representatives and
members of the committee my name
is Sakshi what to say and I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Asian families our
mission is to provide culturally
sensitive programs and services
creating a pan Asian community
that advocates for and supports
itself and back in two thousand
six the Asian family center was
founded in recognition that
linguistically accessible direct
services for the aging
population of New Mexico did not
exist and that the population
have been historically
underserved within the state and
now sixteen years later we
continue to be the only social
service agency in the state
providing in language services
tailored to the Asian population
and ideally work continues to
address the systemic disparity
by supporting families in
accessing and navigating social
and governmental resources while
simultaneously combat in the
barriers are community space
within the systems and one of
the main barriers that we see
New Mexicans confront is
language access within state
agencies so I'd like to share a
story with you about a New
Mexicans child was a victim of
domestic violence after being
removed from a violent and
dangerous situation this young
boy was relocated to live with
his grandfather a low income
elderly man who didn't speak any
English with CYFD came for home
visitations they didn't find
interpretation which left the
grandfather without adequate
access to the resources
necessary to raise this child or
the ability to make informed
decisions on behalf of his
family.
We they have to turn to the
Asian families for help.
Virtually the story is not
isolated to many New Mexicans
health and safety are pre
defined by these inequitable
barriers we see this every day
as our staff are frequent
frequently called upon to assist
low income families to apply for
public benefits last year
approximately ninety one percent
of our clients needed basic
needs support such as applying
for snap Medicaid tenants
seventy five percent of which
required interpretation because
the applications are not
available in languages other
than English and Spanish this is
direct evidence that many New
Mexicans are falling through the
gaps when interfacing with the
state when community members
come to us they often disclose
that they have already exhausted
all other options to access the
help they're seeking so just
trying to phone lines which only
have language options in English
and Spanish or have turned to
their children who cannot and
should not carry this burden.
We know that this is affected
New Mexicans for far too long
shortly after the City of
Albuquerque's language access
ordinance was signed into law in
December twenty twenty one
retired nurse from a clinic in
the international district reach
out to me to share that you
fought and advocated for
institutional in which access
over thirty years ago she tears
in our eyes as she recounted her
team regularly having to call
local Vietnamese restaurants to
interpret critical information
to their patients.
This fight for language justice
in New Mexico is decades old
community advocates health care
providers nonprofit leaders
elected officials families and
communities across New Mexico
have pushed for a solution to
language access to language
disparities for generations well
we are grateful for the efforts
that have been made by the state
legislature over the past decade
most state department still lack
long overdue equitable language
access this is why we need
something better many
communities languages other than
English are far too often
forgotten in the landscape of
New Mexico the state frequently
celebrates diversity while
simultaneously for getting to
the value and support the
diverse language needs language
a whole culture and history and
as a form of power resilience
and self determination for
families across New Mexico
everyone including those who
speak languages other than
English deserves to have access
to the resources intended to
support them passing this bill
will ensure more New Mexicans
their rights to public resources
alleviate small grassroots
organizations like ours of the
burden of being a catch all to
fill every gap in accessible
services and given important
decision making power and agency
back to Mexicans last year the
language of this bill passed its
only committee before running
out of time was indoors by LHS
over the summer and now has the
support of over sixty two other
local organizations our
communities are asking for echo
language access to state
agencies and we urge you to hear
them thank you and I standard
questions.
Yes hello madam chair members of
the committee my name is that
any separate you know bomb plant
in the tourney of the New Mexico
Center online poverty we are
nonprofit organization whose
mission is to advance economic
and social justice through
education advocacy and
litigation partner with
community members advocates and
tribal leaders to identify
systemic issues and through
advocacy and education work to
promote economic justice
education and the health and
well being of Mexicans.
Every New Mexicans should be
able to access the services
regardless of the language they
speak in order to access the
services they must receive
information and application
materials in their own language.
Well interpretation and
translation are sometimes
available in Spanish is not
consistently provided in
languages that are highly
Representative or state and are
often overlooked such as
Vietnamese Chinese in demand
this bill of course includes
American Sign Language it make a
sandwich interpretation as
federal law requires that
interpretation you provided for
all languages and American Sign
Language is also protected under
federal disability us.
This bill.
The New Mexico executive
reorganization act to require
the state agencies that have
secretaries provide language
access by submitting plans to
the department of finance
administration.
And it does four things it
requires agencies to assess
their population population of
the server and determine the
need for language services it
also requires agencies to
providing full access.
And this includes developing a
plan to be able to determine
what meaningful access means and
then they must report on the
implementation of the plan the
bill also has appropriation to
DFA so that they can if they can
help coordinate and support
agencies in the development of
the plan and also to develop
language use analytics thinking
then be shared with the agencies
that can help with the planning.
The requirement to provide
language access already included
in federal law in the seas that
receive federal funding are
already supposed to be providing
interpretation and translation.
These language access services
are already required agencies
should incur minimal costs and
being able to provide the
services.
With this bill really does is it
makes.
This planning and development of
language access plans more
efficient.
So thank you we'll to coordinate
state agencies will be able to
share existing resources such as
our existing.
Language contracts and they'll
be able to reduce costs because
we know that some agencies are
providing language services
already but it's not consistent
across the board and they could
really take advantage of the
language contracts that are
already available.
With federal law there is a four
factor test agencies are
required to use to determine
what meaningful language access
means.
And.
In order to determine what they
need to do to find the language
access they need to develop this
plan and that's what this
appropriation to DFA helps them
do helps coordinate this
planning coordinator planning
efforts.
You know hard it is to have to.
Interpret for your family
members as a kid I wanted to
refer my parents all the time
and I had to personally
interpret.
when it came to really
complicated matters and I really
didn't understand as a child I
had to talk to hospitals and
companies in my appearance
ability to access the services
definitely suffered from my lack
of understanding and eight year
old of capillary this is a big
burden to put on children and
it's a burden that they
shouldn't have to bear with this
is the stage with
responsibility.
Thank you so much for questions.
I just want to before we
go to questions Madam chair just
remind everyone that our believe
is that every New Mexicans
should be able to access our
state services regardless of the
language that they speak in
particular are in addition also
regardless of their hearing
impairment or disability which
is incredibly important I spent
a great deal of my time on
mediating cases our with our
various state agencies are more
income issues and other issues
of applicants simply because
they did not have access to
their into their language access
to the forms and applications.
And so with that I want to thank
our expert witnesses and my
colleagues
our our presentation today is
complete madam chair and we will
stand for questions.
Great thank you we will go to
the public so I.
I don't think there will be any
opposition so we'll take support
right now
first on the list we have Robert
not you are unmuted.
You know I'm a reporter watching
I'm not commenting I'm sorry we
need to remove you from the
panelists.
Okay.
So we have John hoeing.
You are now and it.
Hi the thank you to the members
of the New Mexico state
legislatures today I'm here to
share my story on house bill
twenty two there are many who
share my experience that it
often feels like no one
understands the stress of being
a first.
generation I'm Asian American
child navigating US bureaucracy
I'm like me a lot of other first
generation young children of
color whose parents have lean
them hence have lean on them for
support have been left confused
dealing with the burdens of
massive inequity on their
shoulders I often feel like I
was a child that beginning of
big adult world where my parents
needed me to translate complex
English concepts but the link
but the English language skills
that were imparted to me due to
my time in public education had
left me wholly unprepared to act
as an full on interpreter the
importance of English often to a
lot of our communities is not
just about accurate
communication but also my
parents I as we do chief
equitable outcomes for social
mobility institutional resources
and voting as a child the
realization that I had to
overcome this to be an
impediment just felt so daunting
every time parents also knew
that all to out that the system
cater to English speakers it was
very pervasive and all kinds of
conditions and circumstances and
to also just to reach parity
with other non first generation
families the English that many
young first generation Asian
Americans and I translates which
there's just add up a lot of
distress and mental toll that it
takes on just because no one
really a quick test to
understand the confusing complex
adult world using but look they
can distinguish six because we
had at that time.
Representative reading this
issue must involve a process
that recognizes our living
experiences and thankfully
provided culturally try to
change the identify of the
problems the way andinequities
heavy on the shoulders of a lot
of young first and not just
Asian Americans but a lot of
other firsthand Americans that
have also dealt with the same
issue just starting describing
engaged in exploring the world.
That is why H. the New Mexico
state legislature to support
house bill twenty two as all New
Mexicans should have access to
state services coordinating and
planning language services the
cons common sense that to help
address health and economic
inequities in our state services
thank you so much.
Thank you next we have Mason
Graham you are now and muted.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee
this is Mason Graham from the
New Mexico black voters
collaborative organization works
towards communities and racial
equity in regards to good
governance and budget structure
therefore we are in support of
this house bill twenty two for
language access personally I
grew up with friends of many
different cultural backgrounds
of Vietnamese Laotian Chinese
Japanese sent just like you
heard many of them were first
generation American citizen so I
want to recognize the importance
of language access in our state
I also saw many of my friends
act as interpreters for their
family members and typical
social sex so I can only imagine
restraint as we put our
community members many of them
children when seeking help at
the state level so we recognize
that the tri cultural narrative
of our state has been
detrimental for the progress of
New Mexico and if we want to be
considered a true multi cultural
state and community that we must
have our state services is here
to the federal guidelines
language accessibility and
support our vibrant community
members so we don't continue to
disenfranchise and deprive
individuals of their right to be
services our offices are located
in the international district
nineteen.
Some of the highest density of
multicultural community members
immigrants and ethnic groups as
well as some of the highest
social vulnerability levels in
the state so access to essential
services that will improve
community health should not be
disrupted by the lack of
interpretation.
For individuals that have a
native language that is not the
page so I want to acknowledge
the work Representative Blanca
New Mexico Asian families for
working diligently on this bill
and hopefully receive a pass
thank you so much.
Thank you next we have our
morale is you are now and made
it.
Hello thank you can you hear me
we can hear you okay yes good
morning
Madam chair and committee
members first I want to thank
you all for your public service
I appreciate it very much state
you're out there making
difficult decisions my name is
rose somewhat I listen I'm I'm
retired by the well by cultural
and social worker with over
thirty five years of experience
working in that the very of
social services to individuals
and families experiencing
various physical mental and
social economic challenges.
Most we don't think of us is
that in the past job support
their families maybe nexus in
our productive members of
society unfortunately many of
them are currently unable to
fully benefit from available
state resources new to the NMED
to understand and speaking
English despite being required
by law New Mexico state agencies
now campus staff the equipment
in the funding to to provide
language services support needed
by families experience since
like challenges many you through
the COVID nineteen pandemic The
New Mexico eighty four percent
residences speak other language
than English thousands of people
primarily speak Spanish twenty
nine percent of them but there's
many others of the to speak on
Navajo hundred hang I'm curious
to in the Vietnamese Chinese and
other languages this this this
the state agencies to provide
services and languishes at New
Mexico New Mexican understands
that language services gives the
late or prevented both people
New Mexicans from applying for
benefits such as unemployment
insurance food assistance
Medicaid expected secretary.
Regretfully the COVID nineteen
pandemic is deepening the
economy can help these parties
negatively affect the many New
Mexico communities they just
have social services workers
like myself though that.
Necessary at the all New
Mexicans the syrup equal access
to state services regardless of
the language they speak
everybody should have access to
interpretation and translation
when their language is not
English the location the twenty
twelve to we'll find the funding
to address the inequalities
currently embedded in the
delivery of state services to
New Mexicans your vote today can
drastically improve the chances
of many wonderful families to
survive importation be tried in
the future.
For all the reasons I mention
you to date and respectfully
where changes to close the bit
supporting HB twenty two thank
you.
Thank you and before we move on
to the next speaker we actually
have a lot of folks that do want
to speak during public comment
and we definitely want to hear
from you but if I get asked that
you just not be repetitive and
so we can have an opportunity to
hear everyone and then be able
to go on the bill as well we
have until eleven thirty four
this committee meeting and then
we'll have to get to the floor
so our next speaker is descente
gravado.
You are now I needed.
You know they don't have to and
then you just saw that thank you
very much yes Good Morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is we sent to give a
little and I'm here to expressed
support for house bill twenty
two I'm with the City of
Albuquerque's office of equity
and inclusion and what I want to
comment on was just to highlight
that the pandemic has shown us
how a public health crisis
exposes existing barriers to
inability to access public
services.
So.
Has been delegated to an
appropriate level of
consideration across public
sectors and throughout the state
as mentioned before when around
thirty five percent of the state
of New Mexico residents identify
just speaking English as a
second language we have to ask
ourselves how can we best engage
all residents to participate in
civic arenas throughout the
state the City of Albuquerque
has approved an executive order
as well as a city council
resolution which is our twenty
one to thirty one and we have
begun the implementation of that
legislation city wide our
support for language access at
the state level is based on a
strong belief that everyone wins
when language access is not a
barrier to be included as a
member of society and I would
like to note that as we have
been moving forward in providing
technical assistance to
departments we have developed a
number of tools tool kits along
with other tools that we've been
using to help departments
training all kinds of other
initiatives and just want to
mention that our our tools and
expertise that the city is also
available to
anybody at the state level that
might want to utilize that or
even just talk about her
experience with implementation
and with that I'd like to urge
your support for house bill
twenty two thank you.
Thank you next we have the map
mariachi.
You are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can you hear me
all right.
Yes we can thank you so much my
name is mark and I'm the
director of advancement at and
left a community radio not so
strongly supports house bill
twenty two and thank the bill's
sponsors as the only culturally
and linguistically specific
domestic violence service
provider for central New
Mexico's not next emigrant
community unless they recognizes
how imperative it is for
community members who do not
speak English or who have
limited English proficiency to
have meaningful access to state
programs and resources by way of
example our legal teams client
portfolio is ninety six percent
Ellie P. individuals and in one
recent case and lost a client
children removed by the state
and due to a lack of available
state interpreters she did not
know where her children were for
two days and received no
communication from the state of
their whereabouts this type of
communication goals re
traumatize domestic violence
survivors and make them less
inclined to come forward as many
of our clients have conveyed
their fears of not understanding
state process these and not
having access to interpreters as
we've heard the pandemic has
widened these goals and brought
systemic inequities related to
language access and a sharp
relief especially for
communities of color and
immigrant communities as such
and lost a respectfully requests
the committee members embrace
equitable language access to
state resources and honors the
rich linguistic and cultural
diversity of our communities by
supporting H. B. twenty two
thank you so much.
Thank you next we have a Loyce
Meyer you are now I'm it it.
Thank you.
Good morning chair person and
committee members I am here to
speak in strong support of HB
twenty two my name is Lois Meyer
I'm an applied linguist
bilingual educator and a recent
retired professor from the
college of education at UNM I
move to add my voice to these
testimonies and to tell you
about a specific effort to
address these issues for several
years I have collaborated with
the global education office and
the college of education at UNM
in a project intended to nurture
the incredible bilingual and bi
literate language skills of our
graduate students both domestic
and international at U. N. M.
new Mexico's a research one
institution our effort has been
to initiate a world language
translation Center on UNM's
campus that would employ
graduate students to serve as
world language translators for
local communities and agencies
as well as the tourist in film
industry and other New Mexico
and Tran and I international
agencies I taught at topics
course called introduction to
translation studies which
attracted graduate students from
diverse you NM departments and
programs students who spoke an
amazing variety of critical
world languages Arabic Farsi
Korean Japanese Chinese Russian
hi do DNA American Sign
Vietnamese and yes Spanish both
its Latin American and New
Mexicans variants in spring
twenty twenty one we finally
were able to initiate a pilot
semester of our translation
center to try to bring this
concept to life we began our
work with for skilled graduate
student translators.
Native or very fluent speakers
of Arabic Korean French and
Spanish the pilot experience was
extremely six that successful
yet UNM for budgetary concerns
about initiating a fledgling
Center and honestly I suspect
because of limited vision has
not supported our continuing
functioning.
Well we were up and running we
translated COVID related
documents and videos into Arabic
Korean and Mandarin Chinese for
The New Mexican Asian families
we translated the medical survey
for rural New Mexico into
Spanish appropriate for New
Mexico we spinal Latino
communities and received rave
reviews from research professor
Dr M. javanica Kilburn principal
investigator for the New Mexico
used risk and resiliency survey
project of UNM School of
medicine's preventive research
center Dr children has written
are now non functioning
translation center into a multi
million dollar grant proposals.
Since our center closed New
Mexico's fresh our acts program
reached out to us stating that
quote translation services are
vital to nonprofit organizations
in New Mexico and quote Dr
search Martinez associate dean
for experience learning at UNM
School of Law hopes we will be
able at some point again to
translate documents to help law
students quote provide free
legal service in support of
social justice in New Mexico.
We have received voices from
UNM's office of compliance
ethics and equal opportunity and
also from the president of the
New Mexico association of
museums that urge UNM to take
seriously the need for world
language translation services to
meet the needs of local state
national and international
speech communities by helping to
establish Miss World translation
center in closing I strongly
urge passage of bill twenty two
for language access for all New
Mexicans which is their need and
they're right we have in our U.
N. M. graduate student
population world by after I'm
gonna have to interrupt you I'm
I'm sorry we have to go on to
the next speaker but we thank
you thank you.
David lan you are now I needed.
The committee room right now
we'll be back.
And I am speaking to you madam
chair and members of the
committee on behalf of Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains in support of this
bill because we know how
important is interpretation
services are to.
People seeking health care thank
you madam chair and I am on my
last student interns computer I
look forward to working with you
all the session thank you thank
you.
Virginia pedas or take a.
You're now in muted.
Good morning one of the S.
number this thank you for this
and I'm here on behalf of that
New Mexico coalition for sexual
some programs
I guess they know it's fine way
too long if anything I've
learned in my twenty years
experience advocating for
victims and survivors in
communities that sexual assault
and domestic violence is that
people don't have very at
programs and organizations of
the ones that need so I'm here
to argue and let the voice of
that of the victims and
survivors and communities that I
have the privilege to work with
to please have and yes involved
for the approval of house bill
thank you.
Thank you near record.
You are now in need.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Neil
record of the policy council and
regional manager of the ACLU of
New Mexico and I'm based out of
Los crucis I'm here on behalf of
the ACLU of New Mexicos
organization and statewide
membership in support of HB
twenty two language access is
critical for full participation
in our society and I urge this
committee to support this
important bill thank you.
Thank you Erica Bancos you are
now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erica available policy
director at or may and we stand
in bureau of health bill twenty
two and view it as a racial
justice issue the pandemic is
disproportionately affecting
black indigenous indigenous and
people of color and this has
been exacerbated by the language
barrier that many of them
members face when attempting to
receive state services language
barriers have always caused
disparities in opportunities for
these communities however they
have been especially hard for
during the pandemic we urge
community members to vote in
favor of health bill twenty two
to the committee members to vote
in favour thank you.
Thank you Peggy Medina.
GoPro you are now and it.
Thank you chairman thank you for
committee
thank you for listening to
members of the community all of
us who don't necessarily have a
roll.
In organizations but who have to
deal with all of us to with
state agencies.
Dealt with the state agencies
had to for form or talk to the
agency knows how difficult it is
even if English is your first
language we can all imagine how
difficult it is for people
Corman is not your first
language.
As a retired librarian reference
librarian can state library I
know the importance of data.
Portents on state policy but I
know how important it is for
state agencies to work together
to save money by having a common
way of meeting problems.
This bill to get passed it's
time for New Mexico to.
One with federal regulations
with the people of Mexico help
they need please vote in favor
of this bill thank you.
Thank you Christopher with the
table language.
Christopher I lost to I think
you lower your hand so I'm gonna
move on if you do want to speak
please raise your hand again
okay there you are okay you are
now unmuted.
Good morning madam chair and
committee Christopher Rabb meat
is together for brothers come
from Albuquerque on T. well than
and I wanted to first thank
Representative been key for
having to for B. participate in
twenty seventeen to twenty
nineteen in the health impact
assessment with global Bible
five one of the biggest agencies
besides workforce solutions with
DMV and making sure that people
who didn't speak English could
obtain information first and
then the test in their language
to be able to have a driver's
license or state ID in New
Mexico so this is one example I
also want to think I need for
bringing up the simple CYFD we
know a third of the youth
leaders we work with boys and
young men of color in the
international district in
Westgate live in homes where
English is not that language
spoken at home and we've had
incidents if I need like you
described with CYFD so we know
that there's so many other
agencies that I could also
highlight but this is such an
important part of making sure
that everyone in New Mexico with
access to the resources they
deserve and the need thank you
so much for it to pass on this
bill.
Thank you Bill Jordan you are
now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with the Mexico voices
for children I want to
especially thank my new
representative okay Bonga thank
you for sponsoring this
legislation really not so
thrilled to see you there
representing us we stand in
strong support of house bill
twenty two and I really want to
thank all members of the
committee of the legislature for
helping New Mexico build a
stronger safety net that doing
so much more these last couple
years to really help our people
but it doesn't do any good if
people don't know how to access
the services and programs
because of language barriers
let's let's complete the work of
racial justice and pass this
legislation thank you.
Thank you we have and Holocaust
dollars next.
You are now and it.
You'll have to and you on your
end.
Okay let's move on to and
Rodgers.
You are now unmuted.
Hello everyone I am here in my
capacity as the attorney for the
pueblo Aqaba I was asked to
please voice the problems
support for this legislation so
that native speakers have.
Well opportunity to the services
of the state thank you.
Thank you Cecilia portal you are
now and maybe.
Cecilia you'll have to and then
on your end.
Sorry.
Can you hear me now we can
welcome.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee of I am the founder
and director of the small
nonprofit in Albuquerque called
Valley Community interpreters
and I am myself as a child that
was a refugee as an adult and a
grand so I know first hand what
it means to adapt to a new
society and culture and
language.
Molly community interpreters
we're committed to improving and
increasing language access in
New Mexico and we are building a
workforce of interpreters who
can actually meet the needs the
language needs of our
communities.
two years ago we started a
language service agency are
working very closely with the
City of Albuquerque office of
equity and inclusion to build up
language services in Albuquerque
an important aspect of this is
really
to change the laws but also to
change minds and hearts and
we're doing this in the City of
Albuquerque and behavior so if
we don't do systemic change of
then a the behavior continues
and of workers in state
government will not call an
interpreter
our language eight service
agency offers a telephonic
interpretation over a hundred
and fifty languages but if the
staff doesn't know how to access
it or doesn't understand the
importance of providing language
services then it's just that the
services were not there so a big
effort we're doing with the City
of Albuquerque just training and
educating staff members on the
importance without language
people live in terrible
isolation and it affects every
aspect of their lives so I'm
here to support and beg you to
please a past this bill that our
communities desperately need
thank you.
Thank you Erica DC.
You are now and it.
I madam chair and members of the
committee this is Erica Davis
Cup of the New Mexico lacks into
organizing committee this is
such a beautiful screen that I'm
looking at I am so in it is so
good to see all of you back at
work in such a crazy time still
holding it down for us New
Mexicans and on behalf of the in
the B. C. O. C. we just want to
say thank you so much
representing this bill as this
is reproductive justice issue
this is about equity for
families and all of us know that
a lot of
We everyone in this is not the
first language for many New
Mexicans and that the equity
that's necessary as we all
strive to drive for the lies
that we desire it is pivotal
that we have
literature resource at needs
anything that that's required
for us to thrive in the language
that we understand I'm so we're
so grateful on behalf of the in
the B. C. O. C. for you are
bringing this forward and we are
so grateful for the continual
great and good working good
trouble that you all have been
getting into a behalf of New
Mexicans and we ask that you all
make it to pass on this bill
sending you all so much left at
this time thank you so so much.
Thank you next we have bill
Wagner.
Thank you our unmuted.
Madam chair members of the
committee on bill Wagner I am a
clinical social worker in the
founder and executive director
of Centro Sevilla Senator this
is a non profit outpatient
behavioral health counseling and
social services agency committed
to building health equity in New
Mexico we have offices in
Albuquerque's south valley court
not a parking in the
international district.
We provide outpatient clinical
counseling case management and
advocacy with a focus on New
Mexicans whose first language is
not English many of whom are
immigrants and refugees with
limited access proficiency the
services.
The vast majority of our staff
is bilingual English Spanish and
most are first or second
generation immigrants themselves
and are very familiar with the
stories that we've heard of of
difficulties within their own
families.
we are also contracted by D. O.
H. to provide refugee mental
health clinical screening
assessment and referral for
treatment for all central New
Mexico and access to
professional interpretation is
essential to do our work as we
are much more effective working
when we can speak with people in
their emotional language
and I think that's that's an
overlooked part that even if
somebody may be bilingual with a
lot of clinical services it's
really important to use their
emotional language and
interpretation is often required
to do that.
Funded us intracellular ten
years ago to address the
resounding health disparity in
gap in our health care safety
net that resulted in negative
health outcomes for my patients.
This is been shared we just need
to to really recognize the
dangers of of putting children
and family members as
interpreters for their families
especially when it comes to some
of the hardships especially that
many refugees and immigrants
have faced in their journey to
the United States.
I just a really and and happy
that this kind of legislation is
is being promoted and
coordinating and planning
language services a common sense
step to address health and
economic and inequities in our
state services urged committee
members to vote in favor of the
language access bill H. B.
twenty two thank you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public that would
like to speak in support.
Okay I stole a couple options
disappear so
Specifically.
You are now I needed and I
apologize if I mispronounce your
name.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Shiv he can additional I'm
from some of the cooking I'm
here to support HB twenty two
language taxes the lack of
language has continued to create
so many barriers to my
community.
Especially during the pandemic
if you got laid off during the
pandemic she did not know
anything about that unemployment
insurance and that she'd hear
from the community members.
This you can Glyfada
unemployment insurance benefits
had helped her to open an
account we work for solution and
try to apply for her mom that
either didn't understand that
website stopped application a
community member help her to
call the New Mexico workforce
solutions.
To reset her account after days
of trying to call New Mexico
worked workforce solution of.
Provides interpretation but it
takes too long to get an
interpreter or date and call the
wrong interpretation so most of
the time clients like to use
their children for
interpretation.
And for sending out the
application finally the content
was not was not able to pay
their expenses with this
struggle so I ask you to support
this then and thank you for your
work.
Thank you next we have the New
Mexico human trafficking
conference.
You are unmuted.
Hi good morning thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm here to support
the bill house bill twenty two
and I urge senators to support
this bill as well a coordinating
and planning language services
is a common sense that to
address health and economic
inequities in our state services
working with victims of human
trafficking and labor
trafficking the lack of
paperwork that is on the state
level is a barrier to getting
them that life sustaining
resources and Medicaid not
budget all the stuff that they
are entitled to has been such a
burden on our community and
those that we are trying to
help.
We ask that you please support
this bill and I thank you for
allowing me to speak today.
Thank you I'm having some
technical difficulties on my and
our last speaker is Valerie.
You are now and it.
Hello my name is Valery Sanchez
and I'm executive director for
because of what the last.
I would like to encourage and we
very much support the V. twenty
two it's very important to us to
services for sexual violence
survivors and we specialize in
the Spanish speaking community
it is very important to us for
all the reasons that everyone is
already state and on encourage
you all to support you twenty
two thank you.
Great thank you.
And next we have Hannah and this
will be our last speaker.
You are now unmuted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
handling who come from Asian
PED's I slander Albuquerque New
Mexico I strongly support of
these bills and I would like to
see my friends twenty yes I have
a list I PP Law and the idea
fans she's a has to be used
business announcements beauty
salon and she apply for PPP long
time and the idea and fans
publication will was rejected
because some information Scorpio
to incorrectly due to her limit
in this proficiency she has to
wait a long time to contact
people to help to fix the PPP
applications by the time she
correct yes all information the
PPP loans what expire and the
second time she apply for E. I
D. L. to she didn't check a box
in hating the amount up to ten
thousand dollars because she
thought that she didn't apply
for a whole mouth again hoping
cation for NASA yeah I DO and
school also rejected recently
our shop not my will arise and
she couldn't on the last due to
emissions.
To ensure due to
in this barrier so Iraq which
access the downfall critical
component off and the effort to
improve communications and
access to all of the services
now see why we need something
better again I respectfully to
ask you to say yes to the SB
twenty two thank you for your
time.
Right thank you and I guess I
didn't officially asked for
anyone that would like to speak
in opposition if you would like
to speak in opposition please
raise your hand.
Mohammed are you speaking in
opposition.
Hi everyone.
This isn't how Mexico last.
Program coordinator with United
voice for newcomers Rights.
University of New Mexico.
thanks for giving me this
opportunity shutting my comment.
I want just to share my comment.
This is a good time to shove
this is located chairman.
It's okay you just clarify if
you're supporting or opposing
and then if you would just be
brief please.
Okay.
It's community to support I
understand for house bill twenty
eight twenty.
Well I think call your Mexicans
should have access to the
state's efforts coordinating on
planning language stuff is also
common sense steps to address
health and economic thank Y.
tease and our state service.
Thank you so much for good
listening.
Thank you I am going to the
committee members Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair quick very
quickly I I'm wondering.
It's it's require the.
This would require you to the
state agencies departments to
develop a policy is there a
reason that these policies would
vary from.
Orders steps would vary from
agency to agency or could they
collaborate on
a policy that would work for
each.
For.
I'm I'm happy to answer that
right one of the things that's
great about this bill is they
could collaborate and share
resources
there is some agencies do a
better job than others and so
once we understood what each
agency is doing they could
collaborate there are very needs
within the agencies meaningful
access for unemployment benefits
might be one thing and then
meaningful access to medicine
and you know medical care in the
in and those kinds of the issues
might be another thing so there
might be a little bit of
variation in what they what they
applied meaningful access is
regulated by federal law and
regulations and so they would
look at the number of people of
limited in the proportion of
limited English proficient
officials that there that are
eligible to be served are likely
to be served the frequency in
with which they see limited
English English language
individuals.
the nature importance of their
health program or their activity
or their service and then the
resources to the entity in the
costs so all of those are
factors there is a safe haven
positions that if they if they
serve if there's a of language
that speaks spoken by five
percent of the population or a
thousand people whichever is
less then if they that if they
follow that guidance that's the
safe haven for that particular
agency so it's really of.
What your question is a really
important one we can save money
by the state and there's there
is
It's important that each agency
do what's appropriate for the
population these are.
Thank you very much that's
that's the only question I have
been a major.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair I was
looking at the FIR and I had a
couple questions that came out
of the.
We're one of the things I did is
I Google.
What is the number of languages
that
are spoken in the United States
and that number is three hundred
and fifty.
And I Google the year the World
Wide languages and that sixty
five hundred.
with that.
In consideration I think maybe
you ought to consider somewhat
narrow winning.
The you know the areas that
we're going to cover we.
I I just think that it's it's.
Your bill done defining that are
closely enough.
you know English learners and I
think we need to narrow it down.
But anyway I'll see if you have
a comment on that.
Representative Rehm if I may
thank you for the question and
madam chair I would say that the
the entire discussion today has
been opening up access and has
been denied by the necessity for
example the populations that are
coming forward to
select illicit support for
services you are very the HSD
will do the necessity for the
language that needs to be in
place there are languages that
are known already in our state
of New Mexico and so B. R. those
languages and disabilities as
they apply
will are are what we're saying
we need to be
Introduced and various agency
administrative processes so that
we can ensure that those
languages that that we're
meeting the needs across the
board in the state of New Mexico
and I think that's the key
on that so you know what what we
have populations that introduce
twenty more languages.
Our into our state because of
our growth in population.
And our agency and
administration should be aligned
those services are providing
access to those languages as
well and I know that that that
you can raise a question that
you asked for comment on that on
my comments anyone else would
like at my college thank you
madam chair.
Okay thank you madam chair I I
just think that
that the when we look at three
hundred fifty one eight
different languages spoken in
the US
I'm sure there's not enough
money in this bill to go ahead
and address that issue but when
we go to another one and it is
R. on page two of the FIR and
it's talking about the increased
pay for those who are why do we.
And that technical issue on page
two to three talks about the
disparity and they're going to
have to make some new rules yeah
and I don't know how you want to
you know if you have a comment
on that or how we're going to
address.
Madam chair representative on
I'd like to see in there any.
Are one of our what experts
would like to step in and
response.
Members of the committee.
Yes so as to the question of how
many languages this would have
to be for within federal law
they're already requirements
sensitive populations nationals
for translation which are
written documents and of course
we're not asking for transitions
for every language you know that
depends on the population in
this person to retention which
is oral I'm under federal law is
required to be provided for any
language upon request but these
translation services already
exist phone interpretation
services already exist so it's
just a matter of them being made
available and state agencies
already have contracts with
phone interpreting so we just
want to make sure that all state
agencies are able to use that
state contract.
And then.
As far as the question about
The rate so we won't be able to
assess the costs of implementing
a plan until a plan is made and
that's what this bill is about
it's about coordinating efforts
so that we can
So that agencies can make a plan
to then assess the need and the
cost so we really can't
speculate as to how much it will
cost at this.
Thank you and madam chair.
Representative the other issue
on page two and three are
significant issues under
significant issues is the
definition of terms and I don't
know if you wanna dress that but
I think that there needs to be
some more work on this bill I'm
I'm not opposed to the concept
would be made let me say that
but I think we need to define
those terms I in particular when
we start talking about three
hundred fifty different
languages that the state maybe
it needing to address and I'm
wondering if you know we have
groups are community
organizations that help there
are there are
members go ahead and communicate
and if maybe we should be
looking at how we encourage
those groups but.
I'm not sure if there's a
response or not but those are my
comments.
I would like to them.
I would like to say that get the
bill is is very clear in terms
of well the law is very clear in
terms of federal regulations and
what is required in New Mexico
there aren't as many languages
as you described globally and as
I mentioned there is a safe part
part of your provision if they
need to translate the languages
spoken by five percent of the
population or that provide
language access to five percent
of the population or one
thousand people whichever is
less
and those current languages I
believe in New Mexico are
Spanish Vietnamese Chinese and
Navajo.
I believe I maybe an extra if I
missed all if I missed any so
I thank you it would not be good
to have a bill that is in
conflict or potential conflict
with federal law this bill is
designed to help the state
comply with federal law.
Thank you madam chair that's all
my questions.
Thank you Representative
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair reports start I just
have one question of you are we
going to continue this are we
going to the floor.
Representative Nibert and I'd
like to finish house bill twenty
two and then we'll roll over.
House built sixty two and eighty
six and hello Monday.
Do you know how much time we
have until speakers going to
dabble of Sam.
I don't I don't know that will
start on time but I think we can
you know take this time to move
forward and then if they call us
to the chamber we can certainly
go but I think it'll take a
while to get situated in the
chamber anyway.
Robert well All yes my questions
thank you.
Madam chair and representative
We.
I'm not.
I'm not quite
sure the interplay between.
Federal law and now this
proposed state law.
But it seems to me that if we're
already subject to.
Federal law we have to comply
with the.
Regardless of what we do here
would that be an accurate
statement.
And our representative.
It is an accurate statement
however I heard back to what are
Senator just got through
addressing on when she respond
when Representative are Senator
Sedillo Lopez responded to
Representative green but she
would like to come back on I
appreciate it Senator Sedillo
Lopez.
Will be the answer is is yes and
this bill is designed to help
the state comply with federal
law.
Well.
Madam chair and senator that's
not quite what you said you said
that this will this will bring
us into compliance with federal
law but we already have to be in
compliance with federal law so
if we don't have anything it
won't matter because we have to
comply with federal law in the
first instance they were not.
We do have to comply with
federal law but we are not in
compliance with federal law and
this bill is designed to help us
get into compliance with federal
law.
Okay so so madam chair and
senator how does fifty thousand
dollars.
Bring us into compliance with
federal law if we are currently
out of compliance.
It is a step in the direction of
compliance it is designed to
help the agencies make the
language access plans that need
to be made and it's designed to
help agencies collaborate and
share resources and work toward
Toward compliance the City of
Albuquerque has passed
legislation and has with as we
heard the testimony
they're willing to help this
will really put this issue on
the radar screen for the state
and get us into compliance with
federal law.
Yes compliance fifty you are
probably right I don't know what
a fifty thousand dollars will do
it each agencies some agencies
are fully in compliance maybe
some are not and but it'll be
it's a definite step in the
direction compliance with
federal law.
Well madam chair and senator do
we know which agencies are not
in compliance and if they aren't
in compliance would not a better
mechanism be through their
departmental budgets
specifically.
I would assume that the agency's
request sufficient money to to
carry out the functions of their
agencies
I know that many agencies have
had cutbacks over the over the
last
Over some periods and have not
yet we've built to the areas
that they they need but this
will help them identify what
needs to be requested in the
federal in their state budgets
as they develop their plans and
see what resources are already
available some departments may
need an increased some
departments may not.
And madam chair I made
Representative I'm putting my
planner hat on community planner
had on and All plans take
resources and so we're this this
bill is asking that departmental
budgets begin the plant or
continue the planning processes
in order to align with the
requirements of the bill and so
it's the as the senator said
it's a step in that direction it
may not be the entire amount but
what it does is that supplements
and complements the planning
processes that have to now
include with the passage of the
bill of planning for language
access thank you madam chair.
Well again Madam chair
representative hi I just.
If there's a federal law that
is.
There are that requires the
steps to be.
And.
Some of our agencies are.
In compliance it seems to me
that this is not the correct
method of of addressing those
issues
that ought to be done through
the budgeting process and and of
the executive oughta be
demanding that those agencies
come into compliance this bill
that's a shame to to do that it
seems to.
At least I read it as something
that may go beyond just a
compliance issue that that may
be that may exist with the
federal government but it is it
is that the real intent of this
is to go beyond maybe what the
federal government requires or
is it just to bring us and to
comply.
Madam chair.
A witness may.
Now.
Madam chair members of the
committee so this bill does not
intend to go beyond federal
requirements it's supposed to be
but it's doing is
Helping the state come into
compliance with federal law like
has been stated it's more about
the executive branch and
this is an issue across all the
agencies and it's been raised
with the agencies many times so
this is another effort to be
able to us and for them to
provide the services and the
Many other
So other states have already
implemented plans like this
Minnesota New York.
And also our city ordinance that
just passed eight what it does
is it has the city develop a
model plan that then all of the
city agencies can tailored to
their specific needs but ask DFA
stated in their FY are of are
similar almost identical bill
last year.
The building plans itself would
be a very minimal cost and
that's why we did this that's
what it is is appropriations for
it because it's to help with the
planning process but again DFA
stated that very very minimal
and one of the approaches could
be developing a model planned
that agencies commissions.
Madam chair and representative
of.
I'm not sure of that.
New Mexico if this is a federal
requirement I'm not sure that
New Mexico is going to be the
one that developed that model
plan I suspect that there are
model plans that already exists
somewhere.
Ross this nation because there
are other communities that have
significant language
issues within their communities
and I just got back from Los
Angeles and you see our
tremendous variations in
languages from neighborhood to
neighborhood there so there has
to be those things that already
exist welcome you but elsewhere
so that to me we're not doing
anything you're you're if this
is just.
Are trying to put us in
compliance we're with federal
law and.
In my opinion.
The goal we're going about it in
the wrong way because the
executive already has the power
to to do this stuff we the fact
of the matter is it's probably
more a budgeting issue than
anything else and the agencies
just need to to have
Whatever resources available to
them to go into compliance they
don't maybe they are just to
wave a magic wand and say go get
in compliance with with the
federal government they don't
need that what they need is
probably some financial
resources to put them into
compliance if they're not
already in compliance and so.
You know I just I see this is is
just the
You know frosting and that doing
thank you they're faxing the the
basis for federal governments
already done the listing
We don't need this all we need
is our agencies to to
Come into compliance with
federal law that's what I'm I'm
hearing
Let me understand Madam chair
representative this so.
Safe harbor provision
The word five percent or one
thousand people
if you have less than.
Five percent no I assume that
the population of New Mexico and
not the population of a city or
a county or something else but
the population of New Mexico
four thousand people are less
that need a particular language
R. O..
Systems.
The state doesn't have to engage
in that room providing Mavericks
assistant service is out is that
what I'm understanding
correctly.
Yes.
And so in our case it would
always be the thousand people
and impact in the United States
that would always be a thousand
people because we don't have any
state that has less than ten
thousand or twenty thousand
people do we it is let me
correct myself I think that you
you said by the entire state the
I was tired as well as a okay
then I apologize I misunderstood
no it is by place and location
so within maybe the City of
Albuquerque within community it
depends on what I know who the
agency is serving in the region.
What the agencies of the state
of New Mexico serve the state of
New Mexico so that that figure
would be two million six hundred
thousand give or try right.
No no and I just want to remind
folks to go through the chair
face.
Thank thank you thank you madam
chair so hard on zoom you see it
you're not even on my screen
madam chair I apologize
and madam chair the
representative no that is not
correct that is not the correct
right the interpretation of the
CFR it is by who the agency's
service.
And the region in which they are
being served so it's an
individualized determination.
So perhaps HSD in Santa Fe and
an agency the agency that is
working in Santa Fe might be
different from the agency that
is working in Hobbs in terms of
who they of the population
served and the needs within that
agency.
Well that doesn't give the
agencies much certainty does it
madam chair and senator what are
madam chair.
To further clarifying hopefully
Only for the representative may
I call on our expert witness
very neat part of the building
up on properly quickly to
respond.
Members of the committee yes
quickly the safe harbor rules
specific to translation which
are written so and it is
specific to the agency the again
with this plan could assess
their population and determine
what translation is to be done
but again for every language
they must by law receive
interpretation and then
translation
I'm reading translation of final
documents be based on these
population so that's why we're
saying that it's not many many
languages it's just the
languages that need that five
percent or one thousand people
whichever is less special.
So the HSD.
Is dealing then Harding County
New Mexico with all seven
hundred fifty people.
What we use.
Thirty eight as our racial SB
thirty eight people and Harding
County that speak that language
in order to.
Have to provide those
translation services.
Madam chair my mic eight
Yes.
FY two the representative that
this bill is a planning down to
make the assessment of what will
be necessary and I think that
that.
Into the hello specifics and
details is not with the bill
about is about we need to assess
what that will be we need to
plan that the what made the plan
chair and representative and
make these assessments so that
we can be guaranteed and assured
that whatever access needs to be
made is done in a strategic and
well planned and well assessed
manner so that we guarantee that
we are providing the services in
the languages that are needed
based on the assessment and plan
that this bill is proposing
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair
I was asking questions are based
upon a statement made by the
senator I then got handed off to
the expert now the.
Back to the representative so I
don't know how a quite get to
the safe harbor idea but
If you.
If you're in Harding County when
you take five percent time seven
hundred fifty about maybe not be
the exact number but it'll be
close you're about thirty eight
people what.
The crux of the question is is
that the number or is it.
The number of people that the
HSD is serving with an account
three.
So let's say we're in Harding
County.
Thirty eight people would be the
five percent or is it if they're
only dealing with
five people.
And two people have that
language issue does the agency
then how to supply these
translations and other language
services because there's over
five percent of the people
they're serving in that county
that speak that language.
Thank thank you madam chair I
and I'm happy to stick with this
if you start out with the CFR
which refers to the number and
proportion of limited English
proficiency divisional eligible
to be served or likely to be
encountered in the eligible
service population the frequency
with which L. E. P. individuals
come into contact with the
entities health program activity
or service the nature and
importance of the entities
health program activity or
service and the resources
available to the end to get
costs those are the factors that
are considered in the first
instance safe harbor is just
something you go to in the
second instance so that's why we
need the planning process for
the agencies to assess that if
there were thirty eight people
in Harding County that we're
assessing medical services which
are very that's very very
important and there with the
resources to do it and they were
frequently in contact then I
would suggest that there plan
might include a plan for
language access services whether
it's a telephone line or what
whatever again it's it's a
balance of of all of those four
factors and I hesitate to to
predict how an agency would come
out on that very issue through
the planning process that is why
we need this bill.
Also so madam chair and senator.
You said thirty eight which is a
five percent of this seven
hundred fifty
Less than thirty eight would
there still be the potential
that those services would have
to be provided again that would
depend on the agencies
assessment assessment how how
much in need perhaps in this day
of COVID nineteen yes so that
people could understand what was
going on but that would be not
my decision not your decision it
would be the agency's decision
as part of this planning
process.
Madam chair I hate to interrupt
but we've got three minutes left
on roll call in the house.
M. thank you for that.
Madam chair
So I think I think the the
bottom line is in question us
out.
The safe harbor statement
regarding the number of
languages secretary of that that
may have to be utilized it's
not.
Five percent of the state it may
not even be five percent of the
county population it could be a
much lower threshold that that's
the testimony that that I'm
winning from from the senator
primarily and so you know we
look at at how many languages
are is a state that are going to
have to provide various services
for of I would suggest that you
know the fifty thousand dollars
didn't get us very far and again
I just don't see
The need for this legislation of
the federal government has
already
Covered this subject matter and
I've already made a requirements
with the.
maybe we need a memorial that
suggests to the the governor
that the the agencies need to
fall in line but the the to put
on the books the stuff that
really doesn't mean anything
yes there is adding words to the
statute so I'm I'm certainly not
the not mine favor this and I am
really concerned about the costs
that are going to be anchored by
the agencies in the long run
if we are taking it beyond
what's already required in the
federal government or the
federal statutes R. A. M. and I
think that's a real possibility
because I think that this is
more
this budget provides for
additional plans that go beyond
what I would anticipate will be
in the federal statute yeah I
haven't looked federal statute
but talks about the having a
competitive salary structure for
employees from MS and that
you know how that goes.
That certainly is an issue
that's not going to be in the
federal statute so with that all
all shut up so we can go down to
the floor but the.
I'm sure well the last two years
with the this bill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert
madam vice chair.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I move a do
pass.
We have the motion produce
passed by Representative vice
chair John sent a second by
Representative K. goes
There's no more comments so the
or questions of the clerk to
call the roll please.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative great goes yes
Representative Knightsbridge no.
Protests yes.
Representative Rehm.
No more then I'd like to explain
my vote Representative Zamora
no.
At madam chair Johnson I share.
Madam chair blue.
We need to go back to
Representative Chasey first
okay.
Representative Chasey yes.
Madam chair with yes so we have
a we have a due pass and
Representative Rehm to explain
his boat.
Madam chair as I said in the
beginning I'm not opposed to
this but the FIR brings out so
many areas of concern I think we
need to address those before we
move it forward and as a
Representative Nighbor said it's
covered by federal law so I
think we're already there but
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so we have a due pass
on house bill twenty two I just
want to thank everyone for your
time today especially those
members from the public that
have joined us we will move
house bill sixty two and eighty
six to our agenda on Monday and
with that we are adjourned
thanks everyone thank you madam
chair and committee for the
group health thank you
Representative.
