Madam chair blue.
Thank you so we do have a quorum
I see some yawning I know it's
early.
Go ahead and begin the meeting
because we start or session at
ten thirty so we have a Senate
bill thirteen.
And Representative Romero.
Are you presenting this morning
I am hi good morning madam chair
aren't ready committee I do have
two experts with us this morning
at if we can let them and it's a
Regina check on and Stephanie
Salazar there she is awesome.
Okay region have you could raise
your hand these we can promote
you to a panelist okay great we
got a perfect.
Senator Lopez as well got it and
senator and I'm glad she's here
excellent.
Good morning senator.
Great.
Welcome.
Good morning do you want to
presenter is Representative
Romero presenting.
Representative Romero were both
co sponsors are she's like I'm
here to that maybe just a few
words after she finishes thank
you great thank you welcome
traffic thank you madam chair so
before you is Senate bill
thirteen and with us in our as
our experts are seventy Salazar
a council for Indian Affairs
Department and Regina chuckling
with the department public
safety I'm of course Senator
Lopez my co sponsor and what
we're presenting today is the
missing in New Mexico event bill
just first a bit of background
in twenty nineteen we can be and
the missing and murdered
indigenous women and relatives
task force this legislature
passed that bill and we were
able to get started on looking
at policy initiatives that could
really help the indigenous
community of New Mexico
unfortunately having to deal
with finding missing persons
this is one policy that came out
of that task force it of course
it's it's a thirty day so that
we can get this through as
quickly as possible being that
it's a one day event that brings
all New Mexico families not just
families
in our indigenous communities
together to be able to help
recover the losses of a missing
persons I just want to add that
this a task force I I think our
state owes a debt of gratitude
to for having uncovered and
understood some of the missteps
in in the way that our law
enforcement agencies it set
track work together this is one
way in which it brings together
many agencies to be able to
collect information and work
together to to be able to bring
justice to these families just a
couple of facts for the
committee and and then I'll go
to my co sponsor they're
currently in nine hundred and
twenty six active missing
persons cases and twenty and
identify missing person cases
than the NCIC
and so these are huge issues for
Committee our our communities
and it's harrowing situations in
which we've left many many
families and so this is so
critical at this point and of
course this is the first failed
to pass through the Senate it's
too important and it was
unanimous and so we hope that
this committee will we'll
quickly get this through as well
thank you madam chair and I'll
I'll let our Senator introduce
yourself and then of course our
experts.
Thank you I'm and thank you very
much Representative Romero and
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I am I
appreciate and cannot add much
more than what Representative
Romero mentioned with one of our
C. additional as I have
mentioned when I was presenting
this bill in front of the
committees in the Senate what
originally even for myself and a
personal note
became even much more aware
With regards to missing persons
in the state of New Mexico.
We just celebrated and I don't
mean celebrating a way of
celebrating but Rick knowledge
meant
the incident about thirteen
years ago where we had I'm mask
right that was found here on the
southwest Mason no
Representative and madam chair
you and I represent the same
area
where we there were.
Bodies of women that were found
along with the fetus and
you know working with the
families talking to the families
and learning about what the
state of New Mexico had not been
doing with regards to missing
persons cost a few changes to be
made to the statute
Representative was a few years
back but as we continue to work
on and I'm honored to be part of
the task force also
and realizing that we have still
so much work to do part of the
issue madam chair is members of
the committee is also to get the
word out
to work with all of our
communities across the state of
New Mexico because we have to
high numbers too high numbers
with regards to missing persons
and specifically with our native
American indigenous communities
those numbers are just too high
and and of course the data does
support showing us that we're
New Mexico ranks nationally of
course even in my hometown of
Albuquerque in Gallup is also in
the top ten of the state of the
nation state as to where we are
for missing indigenous women.
So I just wanted to say those
three words and I appreciate it
thank you.
Madam chair just to introduce
our experts I'm here today and
and two very instrumental people
on the task force that has
brought this policy to fruition
as a Stephanie Salazar you go
ahead and introduce yourself
just trying to get a sense.
madam chair and members of the
committee it's pleasure to be
here with you this morning to
talk about Senate bill thirteen
missing in New Mexico event I've
had the pleasure of supporting
the amendment your task force
since two thousand nineteen and
this is a piece of legislation
that came up from one of our
task force members who works at
the grassroots level supporting
families who have missing
relatives she saw the success of
this event in Arizona brought it
to our task force and
recommended that we replicate
this for New Mexico but not just
replicated that we build upon
and improve it and that's why
we're here today requesting that
this be put into legislation so
thank you all for your time.
Regions.
Thank you madam chair and a
retention center question
apartment up here.
Thank you members of the
committee and to our sponsors
for bringing this legislation
forward I at I've been a part of
that and then money W. R. task
force for the last year and I've
been honored to work with the
team to to make sure that we're
we're bringing out of the the
issues that that we need to work
on as as a government agency and
and the missing person the band
is something that is it's
crucial to bring families and
law enforcement together to work
together and all government
entities all nonprofit
organizations that that we can
bring families together to to
bring our loved ones home thank
you.
Thank you madam chair that will
go ahead and stand for questions
already.
Great thank you let's go ahead
and start to pull so that people
it better joining us from the
public can developed whether it
like to raise their hands as
part of Senate bill thirteen or
opposition.
And we'll keep that open for
about fifteen to twenty seconds
and then if you like to speak in
support go ahead and raise your
hand starting now and then once
we close the pool we can call
and you.
Okay great so we're gonna close
the Paul we have thirteen and
support a hundred percent of the
folks that voted.
thank you all and first we will
go to secretary trail.
Welcome.
Good morning you know what we
number madam chair members of
the committee thank you so much
I and not only that cabinet
secretary for then Affairs
Department I've also had the
distinct honor to serve as that
chair for that and my dad Mr
task force since it was
appointed in twenty nineteen and
as was stated there's been a
tremendous amount of progress
that has been made in our state
I want to acknowledge the work I
Stephanie Salazar who really has
been leading this effort for the
department and the incredible
sponsors of this legislation the
original that legislation.
She legislators such as yourself
madam chair and also
Representative Hernandez joined
the task force meetings
throughout the years to support
these efforts here in New Mexico
if garnered on national and even
international attention for all
the good work that's happening
so really encourage members of
this committee to support this
bill and issue a do you pass on
thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee and
thank you to the Sanchez.
Great thank you Secretary
Trujillo
We had some weird feedback so
I'm hopeful that that's just.
Small technical issues so we're
gonna go ahead and move forward
pueblo action alliance you are
now and it.
I good morning everybody my name
is rest of war I'm from the
public he missed but I currently
occupy so your territory
thank you to the sponsors for
pushing for this bill
you know I I am part of
collection lands but today I'm
here as a mother a sister an
anti in a given so much thanks
to all the all the people all
the committee members to
stakeholders have contributed to
the task force thus far since
it's creation and I stand here
and the I want to say I support
this because this is a much
needed community resource that
is needed for our families and
all that are impacted because
you know on a grassroots level
I've been also advocating for in
the might of you our work with
our our community with our use
and.
there's just a lack of resources
and I feel like this is a strong
step and making I'm sure that we
get some justice for our
family is and hopefully begin to
curve the pandemic in the rates
that we face because we know
that so called Albuquerque each
is one of the top cities that
just listed for missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives and it's disheartening
to say that because.
I just you know a woman who
identifies you know as a
business as well you know it can
happen to any one of us and we
always need to make sure that we
can have the resources thank
you.
Thank you.
Right you know you are now and
made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Khan
or Chino and I and the
restaurant lobbyist for the
couples of child St Aqaba.
And that we are in full support
of this bill and we really
appreciate the efforts of
Senator Lopez as well as the
Indian Affairs Department and
secretary Lynn Trujillo
And we firmly believe this bill
will not only draw attention to
the need for a statewide
recognition of what can only be
described as a crisis in the
country and the impact it has
had on families and loved ones
and those who have been declared
missing and murdered.
But also the need for
Resources to be devoted to.
Investigating and
as well as law enforcement
efforts that will hopefully
result.
The person is being held
accountable for these horrific
crimes so for those reasons and
sure we stand in support and the
committee will give the ability
to pass thank you very much.
Thank you.
Yeah us you are now and it it.
Sorry about that now you're
unmuted.
Okay thank you.
Warning madam chair and members
of the committee my name a song
to peyote I'm the vice chair of
the Democratic Party is someone
County and at the native
American democratic caucus of
New Mexico and we stand in full
support of this bill and thank
the sponsors for bringing SB
thirteen forward having attended
MMI W. R..
Rallies in San Juan County has
brought so much and the MMI W.
our task force meetings has
brought so much awareness to
people in our communities about
how do this epidemic goes when
you see mothers and fathers and
sisters and brothers testifying
at these rallies about how much
hurt the experience because of
the lack of response from law
enforcement or lack of response
from even you know community
resources to find their missing
relatives or once they are if
they are found
help to heal from those
traumatic experiences that they
went through
Really.
You know touches.
Touches us in a way that we can
not not do anything it's
unacceptable to to ignore this
problem so again great gratitude
to
the sponsors of this bill the
Indian Affairs Department and
everybody working to eradicate
this issue in in here and our
and our homelands thank you so
much.
Thank you okay you are now and
it.
Good morning madam secretary and
committee members.
My name is Shelly Begay I am the
native American liaison for the
Human Services department and
office of the secretary.
HSD stance in support of Senate
bill thirteen.
And would like to appreciate the
sponsorship by Senator Lopez
that of course Indian Affairs
Department HSD as a sister
agency will support the proposed
importance and
crucial
event of ensuring that we pay
attention and acknowledge are
missing individuals in the state
of New Mexico HSD support to do
pass on Senate bill thirteen
thank you.
Thank you your record.
You are now and it.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is near record
the policy council and regional
manager for you so you Mexico I
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this very important
bill the community has spoken
very eloquently this morning on
why this bill is needed right
now so I have nothing to add to
that the ACLU strong support of
SB thirteen in order to do
passed thank you.
Thank you Williams you are now
and it.
Thank you madam chair good
morning committee members I'm
Patty Williams a registered
lobbyist for the Navajo Nation
council office of the speaker
the Navajo Nation fully support
this bill Senate bill thirteen
the measure to help return and
recover and at least account for
missing people and to bring
murders and traffickers to
justice and it's a good measure
that we urge a do pass for thank
you.
Thank you Alina.
Revenue.
Build excuse me.
You are now and made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Elena ribbon felt and I am the
legal director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs we stand in full
support of this bill and thank
the sponsors for bringing it and
we urge the committee to do the
same thank you so much.
Thank you.
This is why.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name mission
and fire I am the public
relation officer for the hearing
pagination angles in New Mexico
and the history of pagination is
in full support of this bill and
we urge the committee to give it
to pass on Senate bill thirteen
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you but we have some
participants from.
The room three oh five so you
are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
David land and I'm a student at
UNM School of Law and a
registered lobbyist working
which we had a group
Representative Planned
Parenthood of New Mexico we
stand in support of this bill
because we believe that
investing in New Mexico event is
a strong step forward and bring
justice to those families who
are missing loved ones the
coordinated effort can help
bring together resources from
various agencies to those
families who desperately need it
we appreciate the Sanchez we
just had this committee move the
bill forward.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay thanks committee members.
Representative Ely and gentleman
who do pass.
Thank you Representative Eli a
second and we have a second by
Representative Ortez
Representative Nibert
discussion.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one question.
Director.
The representative to page three
line one.
Probably ought to look at the
bottom of the page two as well.
We hear the word.
Tribal sovereignty a lot this
committee and yet so.
Strikes me will our the the
state of New Mexico is now
requiring tribal agencies to be
part of this
It says shall be used by all law
enforcement agencies including
private way this is in the state
and I just wanted to make sure
that that was the end of the
sponsor thank you madam chair
thank representative.
Madam chair.
Representative Nibert that is
correct currently with some of
the cross jurisdictional
challenges between tribal
agencies public agencies we just
wanted to be very clear and
specific that everyone
communicates and that data
that's collected in one place
shared amongst.
Law enforcement agencies and
sectors to be able to recover
and understand the issues that
are going on and enough
indigenous communities so it was
intentional that and I will
defer to our experts for any any
other comment on that in that
regard.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert that
portion of the
bill is actually existing
language that's in line right
now so that
That just insures that tribal
agencies have access to utilize
the missing persons
clearinghouse which Regina
chikan can speak a little bit
more about why that resource and
tool is really important not
just to all of our law
enforcement agencies across the
state but tribal law enforcement
included.
Madam chair and representative
we are
It's when we include tribal
agencies in in the language we
we want to require them to
report missing persons so we can
utilize the resources that we
use for the rest of the state so
we're what we're trying to do is
incorporate
them to to report a missing
persons report what what
information that we need to do
to get into NCIC and then so we
can start tracking and and then
report to the national missing
and unidentified persons system.
Madam chair and and
the Representative.
We.
Don't include federal agencies
here and I don't think we care
about.
But I would have thought.
In light of all the other
conversations we have that would
change a little to be encouraged
our tribal law enforcement
agencies to be part but.
The sister in laws point out.
Basically says that they shall.
Those those agencies and I I
just I just find it.
A bit on a lot of many of our
other conversations regarding
the issues surrounding the
dynamics between state
government and then the tribal.
Governments particularly tribal
sovereignty just simply pointing
that out our support legislation
R. but I that back just to.
jumped off very gently thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Nibert
Representative Johnson.
Thank you good morning good
morning madam chair committee
members and that I just wanted
to say good morning and thank
you thank you Senator Lopez and
Representative Romero.
Or this bill Senate bill
thirteen I absolutely support.
You know and helping return and
recover our missing relatives
you know life is so precious.
And every single effort counts
and this is so crucial.
Because I I know many families
who are still searching and are
devastated and grieving.
So I just wanted to express my
appreciation and I know it takes
time it takes hard work I know
we have these processes but I
appreciate the continued work to
solve our missing persons cases
just wanted to say thank you.
Thank you madam vice chair
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this bill
forward I just want to ask one
simple question is can somebody
give me the definition of a.
Missing person.
Madam chair go ahead and defer
to our experts.
Representative the definition of
a missing person in New Mexico
is a reported person who anyone
who has knowledge
or or any type of relationship
with that person if they feel
that they are missing they're
able to report that person
missing and and and as a child
it's any any person who has any
type of guardianship or any type
of state of specific type of
relationship with that child can
report that child missing New
Mexico is has has come home.
Way and also actually leads the
country in that type of thinking
where we don't require twenty
four hours we don't require any
of that what you know if the
teacher report the child missing
that chart the it's investigated
and it's taken seriously and and
and action is taken on that
missing child regardless if that
teacher was a guardian or not
there is trite contact made with
the family there is that there's
a a pursuance of that report as
opposed to just saying I'm sorry
your not you know you're not
able to report and as an adult
it's any person who is has any
type of knowledge of that person
so co worker next door neighbor
a family member a significant
other the anybody can report at
missing person.
What about the missing person
the sales if somebody leaves the
country.
Or say for sake of the country
where he lives or she lives
if they're not all it may don't
want to be found.
Is there any crime against
leaving without letting anybody
know and then therefore they'd
be a missing person.
But in all reality they wouldn't
want to be there.
Or one want to be found.
Is it and madam chair and and.
In the.
Thank you Mr call is ready to
answer your hand.
Thank you madam chair
representative you are
absolutely correct to them as an
adult you have the right to be
missing you have a right to to
take responsibility of yourself
and and go wherever you want to
be that what there is a
procedure for that so like let's
just say you you get up and
leave and your significant other
reports you missing
and that the law enforcement
will take the report there's no
exited circumstance no imminent
danger to yourself or to others
then what will happen is that
that report will remain as a
missing person so we're still
able to report a missing person
as a missing person you're
entered into the database but if
if law enforcement happens to
make contact with you what would
happen would be that a the law
enforcement would ask you as a
missing person do you want to be
missing are you are you missing
are you in danger are you okay
once that law enforcement verify
that that person is safe then
they will they will
they will send out what's called
a locate through the NCIC system
and notify the law enforcement
agency that that person is safe
and and that they no longer are
missing person.
Okay and and and that's very
interesting because I found
when we you know and and this is
kind of getting off the subject
a little bit I found the
definition of homeless people in
the state of New Mexico to be
pretty brought.
So as we talk about missing
persons and and and proceed with
this it's a I find it very
interesting.
Just what the definition is and
and you're not you're not
holding any any laws really
you're just is this is this
larger coroner's this just an
opinion of what it is to you.
I'm madam chair representative
if the business standard of of
missing what a missing person is
inner missing persons as statute
we have we do have what a
missing child and and the age of
of a missing child and who can
report a missing child but as an
adult we we do not you brought
up Madam chair representative a
very good point about the
homeless and and how a lot of
family members and and people
who care about them report them
missing all the time and so it
it actually has helped we've
seen first hand how it's hoped
for family members to know their
they are welcome you know to be
homeless they're what they're
welcome to it to go off and
never speak to their family
again if that's their choosing
but at least it gives family
members and law enforcement of
peace of mind to know that
their that their loved one is
safe and and that's really what
it's about is to it to make sure
that they know that they're
safe.
Okay and I'm all for that I'm
I'm for helping people find.
Their missing relatives and and
but every case is different and
and I think we have to realize
that in in in when we count
missing persons you know what
are we County and and I find
that very interesting and thank
you for your answers and and
thank you madam chair.
And I look forward to to see how
this bill.
Thank you.
Representative expect that
everyone we do have a motion and
a second and before we go to the
vote I just want to thank.
You know the Sanchez and thank
you senator for that simple real
life example of why this is
needed so much unfortunately
but many thanks to the Indian
Affairs Department for it doing
all the work during the inner on
this bill with the task force
I know you guys met several
several times because I was on
the advisory and unfortunately I
can't participate as much as I
would like to but you guys did
have a listing so I I just want
to thank you all for that there
were any of members on the of
the task force thanks to
everyone for your participation
and and here and at.
The clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy a ghosts yes.
Representative nine point yes
Representative Ortez yes
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Zamora yes.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes please.
Madam chair Lewis yes.
So Senator you have a do pass on
Senate bill thirteen thank you
and with everything moving
forward thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
thank you everybody who's
participated in my I'm like
sponsorship thank you thank you.
We are now moving on to house
bill fifty six.
Representative Martinez are you
presenting on that.
yes ma'am good morning madam
chair in the morning.
Thank you.
Given that need more the
panelists.
I thank Dr Carol Brantford mayor
madam chair okay great we will
pull over.
Great thank you.
We're ready when you are now
excellent thank you so much
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the time
this morning I am presenting
health the fifty six this is a
bill that are former a colleague
Representative beating but it
just worked very hard on during
the interim and during the
session and and I've I've taken
the bill up hoping to to get
this done for her it's a very
important bills per specifically
for our community madam chair of
the bill house bill fifty six
creates a the allowance of
issuance of the six month
temporary permit.
For non resident veterinarians
who are employed or contracted
by the state or local government
to provide services at
nationally accredited zoos or
aquariums
currently the veterinary
practice act allows for the
issuance of the sixty day
temporary permit to non resident
veterinarians this one would
create a permit that is six
months and could be renewed.
Up to two times with me is Dr
Carol brand Bradford from the
ABQ Albuquerque bipartisan.
Who does have to jump off in
about twenty minutes or so she
has a we're gonna see procedure
with one of our favorite animals
you madam chair just to kind of
give everybody an idea why it's
so important there we don't have
enough of these veterinarians
that are experts in this subject
area and the Albuquerque's was
actually lost two elephants over
the past few months.
To to a viral illness that you
know in in large part probably
could be prevented had we had to
do you know the the the
professionals here this bill
will allow you flexibility for
our zoo for our query and to be
able to contract with these non
resident veterinarians to
provide the services with that
madam chair alternate over to to
my experts and and then to you
and and the committee thank you.
Thank you welcome respect for.
Hi everybody thanks for having
me here today I'm not sure Carol
Bradford and the senior
veterinarian here the file part
and as you can imagine As You
veterinarian cares for a variety
of the animal veterinarians here
care for everything from fish to
elephants and every creature in
between so what we're asking is
important and able to be able to
bring into that Marion's from
other states in order to give us
assistance when we need extra
help or if one of our
veterinarians is said current
vacation are has resigned the by
part only has two full time
veterinarians and there are
about a thousand animals on the
new side and then we also take
care of the.
Where and where there's tens of
thousands of fish so as you can
imagine it's it would be
difficult for a large or small
animal veterinarian to come in
and take care of these animals
so this bill would give us the
opportunity to bring in relief
veterinarians from other states.
Thank you madam chair Senator
questions.
Thank you let's guidance
articles so that those that want
to raise their hand in favor or
in opposition of house bill
fifty six we'll keep that up for
about twenty seconds and if you
like to speak in support of the
bill go ahead and raise your
hand and we'll call on you after
the poll closes.
Okay let's go ahead and close
the pool we have hundred percent
and support six individuals that
participated.
And let's go to Scott Scanlon
you are now and muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
morning my name is Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for the bio
parks society and we stand in
full support of this bill like
to give a shout out to
Representative Barreras who
worked very hard over the over
the summer on this bill and and
thing Representative up Mr
leader for picking up the
picking up this bill in and
running with that
As a as Dr Bradford said this
bill is is important to the zoo
we worked with our we we visited
with the veterinary society and
also with the board neither one
of them expressed any opposition
to this bill
and and just on a personal note
Madam chair I know that you are
a big supporter of the zoo you
friend you run in the in the
five K. and so has the leader on
behalf of Jasper and all of his
friends we we urge you to
support this bill and thank you
for your time.
Thank you it was actually a half
marathon another ten K..
Okay okay dry in you are now and
muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Paige Ryan I am government
affairs chair for animal
protection voters in animal
protection New Mexico thank you
for the opportunity to speak we
appreciate that this bill will
give captive wildlife in
nationally accredited facilities
better access to longer term out
of state veterinary care and
consultation which does benefit
the welfare of those animals so
we stand and support and take
floor leader Martinez for
carrying this forward thank you.
Thank you it looks like we have
at least one participant from
Roma three oh five you are now
unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Patty
Williams I'm not here today in
support of this bill is a
registered lobbyist but in my
role as the vice president of
the New Mexico by part board of
directors and the bio parks to
five eighty as you know runs the
wrong and does fundraising
activities for the by part and
was very instrumental in funding
the efforts to
provide that Neri care and care
for the for the act keepers
during the quarter of all
rigs of she Galia I'm at the
primates last year and the
outbreak of the E. H. B. among
our friends and we became
acutely aware of the problems
that
Care for captive.
Animals in
facility can create for their
veterinary care and we really
need a bill that allows us to
get the best care to those
animals as quickly as possible
outside the constraints of the
normal care provided by Dr
Caroline the other back so we
deduce a past for H. B. fifty
six thank you.
Thank you Salt Yard she you are
now unmuted.
Good morning members chairman
members of the committee my name
is on to pay a champ by chance
the native American caucus of
New Mexico and we stand in
support of this bill and thank
the sponsor Representative
Britney that address and the
other sponsors for the work you
did putting this bill together
and urged the committee for two
passed thank you.
Thank you.
Would anyone like to speak in
opposition.
Okay seeing then we will go to
the committee members
Representative Chasey.
I think you were first.
Representative.
If you're not ready we can go to
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair in the.
Go read also has perhaps by the
way.
To start out the madam chair and
ask the question why is it
necessary to treat the
veterinarians that work for a
government entity differently
that.
Veterinarian that may work for a
private entity.
Madam chair and and
Representative Nibert thanks for
that question I I believe that
that was just the way of really
narrowing this bill and the
scope of the bill.
the issue we are trying to
address is the shortage of of of
these professionals in our zoos
and aquariums and so this was
the best way for us to be able
to do this and just tailor it to
the need that we were seeing.
Well Madam chair representative
that may be the need that you
see a metro area in other parts
of the state we may see that
same issue with respect to
Gary's with respect to other
large.
Introduce a have a number of
animals that that the veterinary
services so I was a bit
surprised to see that we're
differentiating to.
But so the other surprise madam
chair representative is the
short time period.
And so it's it seems to me that
that what we really needed to do
was probably treat of foreign
veterinarians of that
temporarily of the State.
Well them to practice for maybe
longer periods of time so I
would I would encourage you to
look at creating.
Marion's who are non residents
who are licensed elsewhere to
come to New Mexico and practice
our staff here in Madison.
For maybe longer duration right
even with respect to the
government entities you're
limiting them to.
You know early short period of
time.
So it seems to me that the.
That we ought to just treat
Representative Marian's from
other jurisdictions the to come
to the state and maybe allow
them to practice for for up to
up to a year without having to
get licensed in New Mexico and
perform those services so it
looks to me like we could we
could treat everybody the same
maybe give them a little bit
longer period of time all right
I like it here hopefully they do
maybe the one of.
I thank the board and you can
become of that area in New
Mexico the the if we have that
critical needs it's not just in
Albuquerque or in other cities
and absolutes if so it's in
other areas and I would point to
maybe the dairy industry as well
so.
Madam chair representative I'm
I sure would like to see recent
work on on the
combining those two sections of
the maybe more a little bit
longer.
I agree the government needs
better than you treat the
Providence street thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative I'm
Representative Chasey.
Are you ready.
I just wanted to say.
On a personal note I supportive
because I have a cousin who is a
veterinarian and that she
generally does the small animal
practice but to her.
This was in Phoenix was in
private practice in there she
works for someone else after
having it out of the country for
a few years.
One of the things she did was
she spent time in Thailand and
worked with an elephant reserves
so and then she also went to
India and
vaccinated and spayed neutered
dogs so
but she's worked with large
animals but it does take
extremely specialized skills to
do that and I know we all valued
by park so much so I wanted to
just speak in support thank you.
Great thank you I'm
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative when we asked
about the fees that are paid and
I assume all of them go to
regulation and licensing what is
the fee paid for a bet to
practice for sixty days and then
what is the fee paid by of that
used Weissenstein how on a
satellite since period for that
fee good for that license for a
regular that state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative bring great
question departs my expert on
that.
I don't have the fees in front
of me years ago when I became
licensed here I do you know that
that the was certainly less for
the temporary permanent but it
is four
the one your licensure that are
that New Mexico licensure years
ago I believe it was around five
hundred dollars per year for the
regular license and maybe I
don't know one or two hundred
for the temporary but I'm sorry
I don't have that information in
front of me.
You
madam chair and expert why would
I not or can only be an out of
state that and be licensed to
practice in New Mexico.
You know for you for a year I I
do the full I go whatever
requirements out of regulation
and licensing and I can practice
on and off in New Mexico for a
year can I.
Madam chair representative
current the current statute
allows for a.
Two one license that can be
renewed no more than two times
for non resident veterinarians
and those are not limited to
user cram that's across the
board the change the the the
chair making the statute or that
we're proposing is to add that
section to allow for the two
consecutive.
Six months permits for those
practicing in zoos or aquariums
so currently they are allowed in
a very limited fashion.
Madam chair and representative
Martinez still we.
Are we in need of that's or do
we have an abundance of that
should New Mexico.
Madam chair and and and
Representative up this not
really being my will house I'm
gonna make an assumption but I
would venture to say it's
probably safe to drive Bradford
correct me if I'm wrong but as
with any many other professions
whether it's nursing health care
workers I I don't think we have
an abundance of it the state.
Madam chair and Representative
that's what I would.
Get out of that we need board up
that's in the state of.
All righty.
I would wonder if we would
impose this restriction on the
medical doctor human medical
doctor
who wants to come and help us in
New Mexico are you I think that
we need to extend this time.
perhaps you know there's a
temporary permit and there's you
know yeah and out of state map
where you can work for the year.
You know why I think that we
need to get more services in New
Mexico and.
I share the same concerns so
Representative Snyder I think
it's good but.
I think that we need to extend
that time figure out how we can
encourage them if they come over
here and they start working for
six months ago then I got
Act alike New Mexico I'm gonna
move here.
Anyway that's my thanks chair on
that point yeah.
Representative Ely on that point
got so Representative reading
I'm sure refer to human medical
doctors are the veterinarians
not humans I just wanna make
sure that we're not approving
dogs or cats to be veterinarians
and so I just wanna make sure
that we're not confused by that
issue thank you madam chair.
Okay.
Moving on Representative Zamora.
Madam chair and representative I
believe.
Representative Viber brought up
a good point as to why don't we.
Check
and make it across the state.
Because I work for dairy for
twenty two and a half years and
and there's a lot of that work
to get done on the dairies.
I know one one of my little
towns that I represent.
Santa Rosa.
It was having a hard time
getting dogs spayed and neutered
so.
A mobile spay neuter program put
together they would come into
Santo road to Santa Rosa to spay
and neuter so I think I think if
you would change this to across
the state.
I think would help your bill a
lot I don't know if you want to
change it here in this committee
go forward with that and see how
how it.
Progress is.
And then the.
And I lost my train of
treatment.
I lost one of my other question
is if you're gonna tell me my
bill is somewhat yes you have a
billing and Britney had a good
bill and and we look forward to
see what it does thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative E. thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative I only have one
question is and that's whether
you started training for the as
you run.
Madam chair waiting for my
invitation to go training you
and still waiting for it so I
know when we start it's not a
verbal invitation you're
currently now invited.
Great representative Ely I'm
sure I'm moving to pass.
We have a due pass motion by
Representative.
A second by Representative
bankers I'm.
Our folks on Cameron.
Can you get the committee
members Representative Chasey is
there anyone in opposition to
the past motion.
I know Representative Chasey is
supportive but I just want to
have our get on her I'm sorry
yes I'm fine okay great so is
there any opposition seeing none
you have a do pass showing all
members present voting in the
affirmative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the great hearing.
Great we will move on to house
bill one forty nine and we're
doing great on time.
Representative.
Hi Committee hill.
Great.
Do you have any witnesses
experts.
Joining you.
Okay ten weeks.
Great welcome Representative
we're ready to hear about house
bill one ninety four thank you
madam chair my hair is looking
not good this morning good to
see the members of my former
Canadian agency you guys hope
you're having a good session
this is house bill one ninety
four.
Early
And what this bill seeks to do
madam chair is that it creates a
funding stream for local
behavioral health services for
those that are criminally
justice involved and are dealing
with substance abuse issues
particularly alcohol addiction
it does that by taking the
portion up taking a portion of
the liquor excise tax that is
not already allocated to the D.
W. why grant Fund or other
programs and directs half of
that money directly to counties
for behavioral health services
and have to that health and
Human Services Department the
reason we're sending half of the
money madam chair to the health
and Human Services department is
to take advantage of a Medicaid
match to maximize the value of
the state dollars and health and
Human Services Division will
then distribute that money to
counties throughout the state
all the distributions happen on
a per capita basis which will
allow us to provide statewide
funding for local behave
behavioral health programs and
various counties throughout the
state I think you've already
promoted my experts madam chair
Dan weeks I will defer to him to
see if he has anything else that
you'd like to add.
Welcome.
Thank you madam chair.
Because of the committee.
You know we have a lot of
general fund money this year and
basically what this bill does is
it directs the fifty percent of
the.
The correct size tax that is now
going into the general fund into
to what I believe are really
needed funds one will go
directly to the counties to
address the issue on a local
basis of alcohol and substance
abuse prevention and treatment.
And I think it will fill a lot
of the gaps at the local level
in the delivery of those
services.
And the second component is as
the chair as the sponsor related
to is to allow for a portion of
this fund of these monies to be
leveraged by Medicaid and
specifically there's a new
program that has been put in
place at the federal level under
the American recovery act the
the allows the so funds to be
used for what you're calling
mobile crisis team mobile crisis
teams are basically teams are
set up at a local level local
level to address emergency
issues so that if there is a
call for example the goes out
for a behavioral health or a
problem somebody's having that
the team actually includes of
social services or as a
psychological a person that can
help deliver services instead of
just the law enforcement going
out from I know those programs
are on a on a pilot basis
happening in a couple different
counties but I think it's
something that we need to look
at the leverage itself is going
to be very significant it's
eighty five percent of the
specific program which means
that roughly twelve million
dollars that will be available
for this particular fund can get
leveraged and bring in probably
close to eighty or ninety
million dollars so with that
madam chair I I stand for
questions and I appreciate the
the sponsor for bringing this
it's been a long time coming
back in the day alcohol excise
tax used to go all and alcohol
programs but it was diverted we
did have general fund money so
now that we have it I think we
should use this money more
effectively and actually for
what it's supposed to be used
for thank you.
And with that madam chair we
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative I'm
let's go ahead and open the
whole for those that would like
to raise their hands it's part
of house bill one forty excuse
me one eighty four review like
to vote and opposition will keep
that open for twenty seconds and
if you'd like to speak in
support go ahead and start
raising your hand and we can
call on those that would like to
speak.
Okay.
You can tell it's a Friday we
have one hundred percent and
support.
One individual that voted you
like to speak in support.
If you would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Okay we will go back to the
committee.
Representative Nibert.
You madam chair.
I.
I do have a couple questions and
as I understand the bill were
diverting the the
Tax to from the general fund to
basically challenge
municipalities have the large
portion of that will go to the
FBI Act grant funds that is up
an accurate overview of this.
Chair Representative night very
yeah that's that's.
Accurate and it's approximation.
madam chair.
As a county commissioner yes and
I'm sure Representative reply
probably dealt with this well
and Sierra County.
We we were somewhat responsible
for the.
Allocation of the DWI farms and.
Yeah it often struck me that the
we were
Always wondering whether we got
our our fair share of that the
distribution of so my first
question would be
Is there any mechanism by which
the counties share.
The Enquirer or audits.
The money that are supposed to
go to the county through this
particular.
program or through this.
Mechanism that you're setting
up.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that's above my pay grade
funding to defer to my expert
and we might actually have to
ask the tax revenue department
of the state my expert has to
add.
Who is.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert.
First of all this doesn't touch
anything relative to the
existing allocation.
Of the of the fund roughly forty
eight percent of the fund now of
goes into the PDP Act grant
funders a little bit I think
that goes to Farmington and
there's another little portion
goes to drug court this is just
the non
Allocated portion that goes to
the general fund right now so
this doesn't touch any of the
existing programs to that to
answer your specific question
about auditing this would be
subject to any kind of overview
that the legislature wants to
impose on that I'm sure that
through the interim committee
process so be a lot of.
opportunity to request
information on this and because
this public dollars because it's
going to the local governments
of the the Department finance
administration local government
division will be able to audit
or they can.
Develop rules promulgate rules
to have periodic reporting of
those types of things we do want
to be too prescriptive in this
legislation because I think a
lot of the programs that might
be put in place under this will
best be developed by the local
governments to address the
particular needs in their
specific communities.
Well.
I know that the the counties and
the cities of that difficulty
dealing with taxation revenue
department on gross receipts tax
issues in fact I think there's
been litigation all of that
and this is this is just another
area where money goes from the
local community up to Santa Fe
and then.
We have to trust that the proper
improper sure comes back
and that's often frustrating for
for local governments but.
The other the other concern that
I have is.
We're adding
more money to this program or it
results in more money for local
programs.
The counties have been given
pretty wide berth on on how that
money is spent and I think you.
You too.
I don't know somebody was asking
me a question up.
But you yes
Is there sufficient of.
Guidelines.
To expand these monies for
things that we see about title
of.
Use prevention and treatment
And certainly deterrents.
Our important but.
My concern is a lot of this
money as I look at these
programs across the state of.
Thank you do those things but a
lot of that money is going
toward
other.
Thanks in fact the.
When I was a kid Mr we used to
refer to the the W. I. program
this
you know what what do you guys
find this this year to to to
hand out of the for our that
we're giving all these give
aways away which didn't do
anything in terms of
attending to treatment programs
attendees to real preventive
programs and and so we're always
fighting for your office the if
you will of their desire to
spend money stand in ways that
the really don't touch all the
things that I see it in the
title of the place so is there
some sort of mechanism here to
try to fight back up a little
bit.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I'll defer to Mister
weeks.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert
there are not very prescriptive
accounting and auditing
assurances here but I you know
like a lot of other programs
that good to allocated to the
local government we have to have
some confidence and the you know
the director of in this
legislation are for treatment
and prevention and so I guess.
You know we have to just to have
a little bit of confidence and
assurances from local
governments as can be spent
properly it's all going to be
subject to audits at some point
in time and I will tell you the
LFC from time to time has done
audits on the D. W. I. grant
Fund and so deficiencies that
have been identified in those
audits or or them subsequently
have to be rectified but
You know I just I don't really
know how to answer the question
other than you have to have some
confidence and trust in your
local government officials to
comply with the directives in
these in the Fund and it will of
course be subject to reviews but
not all of the executive branch
but the legislative branch of
the state auditor so I don't
know if we need to have any more
protections in there but it
seems like that's kind of the
situation.
Well.
Madam chair.
Districts thank you for for that
answer and I would just are you
know it it does take.
Elected officials of the county
municipal lever to.
Really make sure that that they
direct these funds to the.
Intention of the of the
legislation.
Because there's always at school
from bureaucracies to to.
You know do the things that are
fun not really accomplishing
what I see are the real goals.
I always support getting money
back into our local communities
and things of this is a
mechanism to do that so I
support the bill I just raise
those issues because it's things
that are I have experience both
dealing with taxes
Representative.
On the one hand and the
secretary we dealing with by
owner tornal bureaucracy the the
FBI folks you know on the other
their desires to spend these
funds maybe a little bit
different manner that that
really truly gets of the crops
of of what we're trying to do
that is to educate women eight
of.
The.
Huge problem that we have all
Mexico our word so thank you for
your time thank you for bringing
the legislation.
Appreciate the good discussion
thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Thank you Representative
committee members.
And it would you pass chair.
We have a due pass by
Representative Ortez.
A second by Representative
Gallegos is there further
discussion.
Okay the clerk to call the roll
please madam chair can I make a
quick comment okay go ahead
Representative Johnson thank you
madam chair and committee
members I just wanted to thank
the.
Sanchez and everyone supporting
this bill you know in my
community I think this mobile
crisis team and work is very
important.
Actually in our local and rural
communities especially now with
COVID and the post comment
crisis our emergency rooms are
hospitals get overburdened
without the assistance of
behavioral health specialty care
and specially in the winter
months you know I think this
program these types of programs
can prevent even like
Exposure consolidation.
Overdoses and things of that
nature so just wanted to say a
quick thank you and good
morning.
Thank Representative and we do
Representative Hochman Vigil so
with that we'll go to the
but place.
Representative Chasey.
I would like to explain my vote
and I vote yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Ortez yes
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative the more.
Yes madam vice chair Johnson yes
thank you and madam chair blue.
Yes.
The past and will go to
Representative Chasey to explain
her about.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to comment and I I don't
know whose idea this was but
it's a brilliant one.
Maximize those Medicaid dollars
is just the way to go.
It helps us out so then if it
was yours Pat yourself on the
back it was the sponsor the
brilliant Representative Hochman
Vigil who we've just cut
yourself on that but please
convey my my admiration.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee always wonderful
to see you have a great rest of
your morning.
Thank you you have to pass on
house bill one ninety four and
with that Committee members you
know just want to thank you all
wish you a great we can we will
not be meeting this week and and
thanks to everyone that joined
us from the public we appreciate
your affect your participation
and we are adjourned happy
Friday.
