Representative loft crescent.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little here.
Representative Rehm your.
Representative Zamora here.
Thanks chair Figueroa here's.
Chair Dr.
We have four thank you.
Good morning everyone.
From colleagues and the
attendees members of the
audience.
Percent and on the webcast we
have little deviation on our
gender this morning we're going
to hear house bill two six five.
Because we're.
Has to be.
This morning so with that
Representative.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I am joined today with
chief John the scarecrow.
David shields Clinton nicely
nicely more cars and more more.
Eighty two sixty five
the infrastructure burden on
communities that surround state
park.
Although my district includes
allocate you there are many
other areas around the state
would benefit from this bill.
Admittedly state practice not
raise their admittance rates for
twenty years with the lack of
investment in state parks it was
clear to see that the
communities around these areas
will undoubtedly be asked to
pick up the costs.
Thank you the city is here the
population slightly over two
thousand people forty two
percent of the community is over
the age of sixty five.
The median household income is
thirty seven thousand and ten
and the population is below the
poverty level.
In contrast to the small
community elephant Butte lake is
the largest lake in New Mexico
and one of the most visited in
the state.
Offers miles of trails sandy
beaches and magnificent views
for forty three miles admission
into this parking is five
dollars per car or fifteen per
bus or toward van and an annual
day part passed the forty
dollars tens of thousands of
people visit the latest weekly
however he holidays this tiny
community slightly over two
thousand people swells to a
community of over a hundred
thousand people.
Common sense would say will help
if you.
They are now capturing gross
receipts in abundance from the
fact that is not the case I'm
sure many of you that travel to
these large state parks or even
to elephant Butte the reality is
we stopped our groceries from
our home communities have our
campers with half of our
vehicles and rather than leaving
behind money through purchases
of lodgers tax or purchases what
we leave our traction store as
we clean up and we go home.
When there's an emergency event
locally merges the services are
called to transport these
victims the state of New Mexico
does not reimburse the city for
the services they do not
reimburse for emergency trash
for damage to roads bridges nor
do they reimburse for losses
lawyers Tax.
For for the cost of first
responders including fire
emergency rescue.
HB two sixty five it is an
attempt to rectify this with the
one dollar addition to HSD.
I want to clarify this is not a
tax as some have implied.
As with all the neighbors we
need to ensure that our state
parks also preserve the welfare
and care of its neighbors.
You'll read that this increase
make costs the state five
hundred thousand dollars to
changes literature and its
website.
I hope this does not deter you
as it has been twenty years
since that date was done.
An update is needed.
As with thousand reason must
choose entries state parks must
support a healthy relationship
with its surrounding
communities.
As it does no good to kill the
host.
We stand for questions.
Thank you.
This is is she missed Care.
And he is also the city.
Yes.
Thank you okay let's go to the
audience those in support of the
bill please raise your hand.
All right the let's go ahead and
begin my range of please make
your comments in one minute.
Thank you cedars.
ten thousand and eleven you and
we are in support of this bill
as we see the state parks you
know where State Farm is people
that are coming in but I myself
in trouble you and as
the representative stated hi to
academic amber get us off the
ice everything ready and I stay
on the line there really.
Unity to visit the community on
this urgency or.
After
three.
We still.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative some data
sales funnel and is present in
the city of LA compute if we
support this bill for the city
thousand view based on.
Because the impact that has on
their current infrastructure
roads water sewer trash of
course registry services are
right that on average that is to
develop a beaut and spends
proximity hundred fifty thousand
dollars a year on maintaining
their major arterials and fifty
thousand here on their minor
arterials this and just all the
well help relieve some of that
burden of costs that they
are we get along on other state
and federal programs to
supplement their maintenance
costs.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Thomas I have a as president of
ACC New Mexico sit on the state
board of directors of that
organization for the past
fifteen years
The ACC American council of
engineering companies is a
national.
That sort of thousand companies
and over six hundred thousand
engineers surveyors and other
professionals in the industry.
Mexico representative firms like
mine that employed staff that
are needed to Mexicans I myself
was born and raised in New
Mexico as we work in
organization this organization
as firms and people working in
these communities that we live
in that we work in these are
families and.
ACC Mexico supports legislation
that creates a stable funding
for infrastructure and House
Bill to sixty five creates
funding for this policies given
that access and the ability to
use and maintain what's planted
proves critical infrastructure
this round state parks time.
Thank you madam chair committee
I'm more billboards and from the
city of bills do I stand in
support of this bill more I feel
strong my responsibilities my
constituents to ensure that
their taxes and their
investments in the city are well
sought after look after
I'm an infrastructure background
retired but that'll
infrastructure and I understand
the cost of maintenance repairs
the affects the others because
when they come to different
towns and municipalities my wife
and I have been a lot of time on
Monday morning through that lake
shoreline just picking up trash
and greatly appreciate your
support and consideration this
bill thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee Clinton by the
risk services director New
Mexico self insurers fund
registered this for New Mexico
mislead the stands for Beijing
to sixty five it provides a
really good to from the
opportunity for adjacent
Communities or state parks to
make sure your to stay in the
folks are visiting those parks
as well as ensuring that their
liability is well for the
maintenance of the surrounding
areas to record low profit
opportunity of the support and
we're here in favor of two sixty
five today thank you.
I am more Jeff Kerr from the
last I stand here in support of
this bill I
State parks in this lake state
park in so much pain state park
right next door
Just a year ago we got emergency
area mass back up and running we
have a more volunteers and we
are constantly struggle.
we have a good relationship with
parks yeah we're gonna we're
gonna we're planning on running
water and sewer lines like state
parks hopefully.
Next year the next few years we
get the funding to do that so
this will really help us and
help all the other small
communities state.
You have those okay let's go to
the webcast.
We're hearing supporting
comments Leslie Fernandez.
Thank you my husband way
Fernandes and I stand in support
of this bill we live on the road
to sugary state park the gem of
the northeast portion of New
Mexico for state parks I sat on
the New Mexico state parks park
advisory board in the past and I
know the importance of the state
parks to the municipalities.
We hope that you will support
this bill for the betterment of
rat tone and should read state
park thank you.
Thank you.
I don't see any further has
forced comments stay on the
webcast we have any opposing
comments.
CNN will go back to the audience
do we have any opposition.
Sir.
good morning we'll see us told
us he's on the directors The New
Mexico state parks division
stand opposition to this bill
not because we don't have great
partners owner communities we
have thirty five C. parts of the
current twenty five of thirty
three communities across the
state however state park fees
have not changed over twenty
five years and higher rate of my
career we're the business
enterprise agency seventy five
percent of our revenues
operating revenues come from
fees twenty five percent only
come from General Fund from the
legislature does have been
diminished special buyers should
almost fifty percent we too are
struggling to maintain our
operations on the field right
now L. W. the state department
thirty percent vacancy rate for
staff primarily when we can't
find operations we we of the
just under vacancy savings which
is not good for the services of
natural resource management and
is our services meeting and
exceeding expectations we
certainly feel that our
communities need more funding
and they need that assistance
for the offer structure but not
necessarily off of the increase
from New Mexico state parks and
with that was that in opposition
thank you any further comments
from the audience in support or
opposition thank you
Representative Zamora thank you
madam chair and thank you
presenters for the bill.
I think we need to look for
another Avenue for the split.
It's you know we've we've worked
on.
Of state parks even knowing that
they are under budget and on
that and we have built go
through.
Through the capital here.
They give a.
Fees for if the brakes for
people can enter the parks free
if if they.
Foster kids a people can enter
the.
For less price if we.
If there are differences are
over a certain age problem we
can go on and on.
In a C..
Where we want to get out I get
people up to the state parks but
I think we're going the wrong
avid because we're trying to.
To suck money off.
Somebody that's already heard so
that.
If the state parks headed excess
money and they're fully staffed
and.
And all that.
I'd be looking at your bill's
more closely and.
Four words it's just not the
place to.
I just I just can't see that I
were wrong Peter to pay Paul.
The doesn't have any money into
this to support this and.
The O. T. L. Romero to maybe
help you with rules.
Madam chair and.
I.
Expected.
we own those roads they're not
state roads those are roads that
are owned by the city.
That lead to our.
To.
Mr Muscat yes.
Maybe we can work on your roads
being classified different.
For the state could help you
with your roads
and maybe look at the other
issues from from different
points
I did I just.
Miss madam chair.
Just David so I have to use just
Representative somehow we do
that city about fifty utilizes
and Community funds.
Annually.
Our board for that.
G. R. rapper opal.
Funds
but those funds don't complete
they don't completely Department
city on all of their.
So as they do receive project
here but it's not enough to
continually maintain their
work rate system gravel roads
There's a lot of you're still in
the past so the most of their
funding is going to.
paid those rules that they don't
have to make.
And I'm just kind.
Madam chair and presenters I'm
just kind of looking outside the
box that you're asking for you
know if the.
You know my ideas of and another
thing is is a lot of the state
park.
right there might be too close
because we have always a state
park and it's it's out in the
middle of nowhere so it's not
fair to that part.
They're not going to be able to
improve anything around there
but they have trouble with this
tumbleweeds blowing off the
tractors and farms and in the
late gets full of tumbleweeds
and people go up there to
sedition I mean you can't hardly
see lake and
The.
I just I just don't see this on
sorry.
That's all that's on the COVID
insurance presented thank you
next we're going to go to
Representative which would
respond.
To shore.
Madam chair representative
the fact that you haven't been
increased for twenty five years
and and that the park is is
thirty eight percent thirty
three percent understaffed is
exactly the reason why these
communities must respond.
And
And that is why they are asking
for this funding so it's very
much the service well that are
non reef reimbursable.
More.
We're not asking to take money
that they already have a way.
We're asking to.
To the currency so we're not
asking to take anything from the
park.
We're just ask them to add that
dollar to help us out.
Thank you.
To the can I respond.
Quickly please in in operating
the dollar but I think it on the
state with the state parks they
can improve and maybe then they
can have enough staff and stuff
where you guys would be so it
wouldn't such to be they would
be part of on Hughes but I and I
understand the fees and mid
range what we do have some of
the cheapest fees in the state
of New Mexico in New Mexico if
your neighbor in state law
higher but.
But we also need the state parks
we have we have two things we
need to fix your aspiration and
Office of suspected money thank
you by chair.
Thank you madam chair
I have a I'm just gonna dive
right in okay thank you based
three line twenty one.
The replacement and construction
of critical infrastructure
is kind of undefined but then it
says including roads bridges.
The provide access to the state
park so I that extended
definition.
This could not be used for trash
pick the for extending sewer
lines for EMS equipment or
salaries which are some of
these.
That are costing these
communities so much and that
need to be addressed so I'm not
sure that legislation as written
is.
Where you go.
And the other point at all that
you just want to either both but
the other point I want to bring
these that this kind of
legislation usually at.
And I think this one eight some
kind of report out requirement.
To make sure there's follow up
how much funding is collected
how is it being used is it
sufficient is it overly
sufficient we would never know
without writing some kind of
reporting out of flies if.
So those are two issues in
addition to those raised by the
previous representative which is
it it changes the whole
structure right now that the for
the park.
And the fee goes to the park and
this is is a radical change has
been created.
Go ahead and respond because you
know you have to go.
Thank you madam chair and
representative we we are
agreeable to to amend it so that
it doesn't meet the needs.
Of these communities.
basically you're right it is the
structure of EMS this suffering
is is sewer gas and trash so we
we are entering into to do that.
Madam chair and representative I
was not prepared to craft and
then during our meeting that
might be something that is
rolled it down I do not sure but
I believe that with you madam
chair those are all my questions
thank you Representative Chasey
I have Representative Rehm Jr
And.
You have the before the meeting
from could probably address your
amendment.
Correct that before you go to
the next committee for roll your
bill I do not want to okay so
Representative right.
Madam chair and of
Representative that was one of
my comments when I read this
over on page three what you
described capital improvement
projects and of we've got
capital outlay.
And to that point and Mr
director of like talk to you
afterwards I think our state
parks we've got they are in
great locations and for about
the last three years I put
capital outlay ask those parts
to improve access.
And I think I think the park
fees really do need to be
increased
and I I mean we have a tool of
state parks we need to bring it
up.
You know pay for roads and
they're all stuck every part
that I see every community needs
you know more of everything and
I think a lot of what you're
talking about could be of from
capital outlay and I know we all
staff were requests and we can
still.
Such is the nature of the game
madam chair and representative.
You know the US the with the
state have said EMS Fund K. new
access that they have an immense
fire fund or something like
that.
Virgin Islands.
Chair of the round of there is a
fund out there you know like
everything else you I.
You take your chances of
getting.
But.
I'd like to just explain how we
work the fire department and
health in the state are.
Were volunteer fire department.
Somebody capsizes the boat out
there in the lake.
For the ones that get called
with the park Rangers.
So that's an expense to us.
Responding out there for car
fires truck fires rescues and
water of boats sinking there's a
picture of a pontoon boat in my
pull out there.
These are census us these guys
respond to that late for
dumpster fires car fires smoking
millions whatever it is we
respond.
Nobody else does.
We do there's a lot of fire
department to protect elephants
park.
Well you said.
So it's.
It's that dollar again we're not
trying to take away from the
park.
We're just trying to get that
dollar to help pay for roads.
And in the end the stuff and
then we have the rescue memorial
weekend last year.
That.
Twenty two kids were in water.
Because of a pontoon boat.
That's health and beauty part of
our out there making those
rescues we've had to adapt our
fire department to provide quick
specifically for rescues for the
lake.
We're just short of buying a
boat.
Else we can do.
But we respond out there in the
morning and we responded to over
forty eight calls.
Fires rescues EMS.
This dollar.
Is very important.
In all come down sometime.
Of the weekend and run with us.
Please.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr resco I'm actually retired
from Bernalillo county sheriff's
department so I'm aware of
what's going on
I also work with the state
police dive team so I don't
state police on those weekends
go down there and increase our
presence of I I realize that
there's a lot of demand upon
your community I wrote.
But madam chair and
representative.
Let's talk about what is the
economic impact of elephant
Butte on the City of.
What what are they get for years
on the impact.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative of we.
The city wealth index does not
have a lot of G. R. T. tax for
businesses we have.
Anymore other businesses in our
town.
So when people come they come to
introduce our guests to the
highest since we have a couple
small mom pa restaurant type.
That's about it I mean they're
both campers everything else
you.
But like it was set earlier when
they come to elephant Butte
quipped for a week to stay at
the lay.
And they do.
Even our local grocery stores in
tier C. which is Walmart.
We don't have a grocery store.
We don't have any revenue coming
in our motels has about eight
places the state.
So there's.
You know we're kind and actually
growing supply but right now
there's not a law.
So again we're not asking for
this to build things in our city
to build a new city hall we're
asking to maintain roads that
these people drive to go to this
card which they have to come
through all of you.
It is the the fire respond it's
not just the mass the the you
know there's just as many
questions in there is there are
you Mexico but we got heart
attacks strokes heat stroke he
cautioned.
Drowns.
Again of volunteer fire
department.
It's time to learn bicycle could
be out there for six hours doing
stuff.
I mean.
We're we're just a small.
Department.
This is a big weight forty eight
miles west of lake.
You know.
Was built the buildings are put
there.
The fire department was us.
State park this is all part of
our word for.
So again.
Madam chair was sort of scary
brought up exactly points when
I've been down there when I go
down there I go by I go by the
gas and you know I haven't found
a good way to keep my screen so
I have to go by I screamed so.
In the area so you know.
Money is coming into the I mean
you look at the yes
Representative I think it's
eighty million a year some point
that I don't know what you guys
are bringing in and you know
there's a cost to the city to
run that balloon fiesta well
there's a cost to you guys to
have that the the the economic
offset I think is something
else.
I don't I don't know what the
numbers but anyway let's move on
Madam chair of Miss Mister when
I look at the FIR it says you're
going to get about six hundred
thousand out of the one dollar.
We have parks in twenty five
counties how we gonna divide
that up.
Madam chair
representative I think that the
answer is on page three line
six.
In proportion to fees collected
from the state for citizens that
that I mmhm.
No she's got it right with this
of palletizer jurisdictions that
service the state park so for
elephant Butte it would be the
city of elephant Butte Sierra
Vista hospital because they run
the ambulance service.
I believe the cashier facts of
the Rangers when they called so
the county would be involved
there find a lake.
Violations of building where by
the fire department under Sierra
this a reading under Sierra
County.
They respond to that late for
rescues like lead so they would
get their their share through
town.
So
other state parks that are
attached to others this is how
these it's the municipalities
that are serving part.
So madam chair the service here
what the point I'm trying to
make is six hundred thousand and
big pot of money and you start
you know there's now you
mentioned the sheriff's
department's going to get money
the seven the fire department's
going to get the money you know
there's too many hands in the
pot for anyone really the
benefit of
So you know by a big increase of
that I don't know what do you
let me ask it this way.
Service was Carol how much do
you need.
We we didn't feed madam chair of
the service center we we did put
a dollar amount on what we're
asking for.
We.
Anything we get would be helpful
okay I'm not asking for a
hundred thousand dollars a year
you know just a little something
to help offset our cost of
maintaining our roads and our
fire and EMS now split it up.
That's the state's job to split
that up.
I don't think I think it should
be portioned out for how the
entities response to the state
park who responds to most to
those most you know if they're
piece of possible who does the
most work.
That's all I with the SEC
charges alright so and I'm only
asking for.
It is not just for me this is
for the whole state of New
Mexico so I'm not the only fire
department here in town.
We did this for the whole state.
Madam chair of the small scare
of just on the road request
basically you're asking for two
hundred thousand.
And that's a third of money and
we haven't even got to EMS or
anything else anyway that's my
point so thank you madam chair
Representative.
Majority floor leader Chasey.
Sure thank you Representative
part of your and I I appreciate
that Representative Figueroa has
taken over here.
I I found this.
The.
The police from small
communities around our beautiful
state parks really compelling.
And as as we've gone through
this and this Representative
Rehm is talking and you know I
guess I have always question
whether it's a good idea to that
state parks and enterprise.
I see one of my former
colleagues nodding your head out
there.
Superintendent of the due to you
know it seems like we said
you're not important enough and
so raise your own money.
And and yet the state parks are
as you stated in your state to
that and they're just so
important.
not only are residents tourists.
So
I guess what I it wouldn't
hearing and seeing because it I
don't know that we can.
Provided that the state parks
division will races fees because
that's not the message that
excuse.
I wonder if the bill could be
changed to
Indicate.
Intention to do this differently
and to set up a working group to
figure it out
I I I hear the urgent need and I
also hear the support from
bipartisan support for the
communities and state parks but
this seems like we need to work
on it and it.
I know that in the past I
tricked committees where I said
to people to get together and
sit down with with the state
parks
director this is who we the
director or the director of
state parks.
You're correct okay great
and you know you may not have
the authority to say oh yes the
state should fund the state
parks instead of having it be an
enterprise but if this committee
says we'd like to look at a new
model.
And have you perhaps not figure
out everything but say these
people these representatives
will work together in the task
force available.
They will advise as.
By next session.
I know it's you know everybody
hates those things but.
The Economic Development
Committee that perfect and I
rural economic development
perhaps but I just.
I I hear you and I just so that
we have a solution right here in
front of us but we need one
clearly so I'm I'm.
I'd be happy if we.
I'm
don't take action on this and
ask you to start talking and
come back to us and see if
there's an alternative because
we can do a substitute bill.
And try to get that going as
fast as you've got something for
us the expansion thank you
representative Representative
Zamora madam chair I agree with
Representative Chasey that we
need to try to do something.
to help these communities is.
And help help elephant Butte and
and what they have the problems
they have going on.
I don't know I don't know what
steps to take or what.
Thank you Representative
Representative vice chair do you
have a comment.
Regarding our application
madam madam chair
She.
The sponsor clearly indicated
her desire to not rule this bill
and IAD reminded committee if
it's we choose to table we can
take it back off the table sure
they revised the bill and come
up with an alternative
suggestion I would request that
the committee.
The.
So that option rather than do
not pass it is the way the
committee is planning
to two thousand opportunity for
this bill to come back in better
shape.
But I need to respect the
Sanchez clearly stated wish on
the record to not roll this
that.
Thank you Representative I agree
and Representative remain the
representatives are.
Madam chair
I I I mean it's kind of an
unusual motion to go if you make
a motion to roll Bill Evans
just.
Yeah well I guess I guess we
could we could just table that
was just that.
Sentence MARKOSEK at the.
Okay so Representative motion.
So we have a motion to.
Table the bill we have a second
do we have any opposition.
C..
Cabling of Bill for the purpose
of
revisiting the bill and giving
it an opportunity for revisions
and bring back.
Thank.
Representative.
Please.
For the.
Our.
This
Representative marine.
Five nine of madam chair this is
an agency bill and I guess.
For calling from the.
Who has most of the knowledge of
what we need to do that so I'm
discuss thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
this is interesting Turner.
Goes in circles but I actually
Representative re when I was
with the the HSD Levin years ago
and it was the PI bill that
stress together and has this
long friendship this is also
becoming my committee choice so
it's nice to see you all again.
We're doing a couple of things
to do I feel this year and
also just going to go down the
list and happy to answer any
questions there currently isn't
a process for us to licensure
instructors but were required by
curriculum and instruction for
the security guards for levels
one two three it's been
problematic in that all we can
do right now is.
Look at what their
qualifications are in their name
on to our website and say that
will accept them thousand
structure so we're trying to add
of a small licensure fee for
instructors so that you can
actually.
Designated designated
instructors that will provide
that curriculum and training
we are making sure that for
private investigators we've
added in the attorney's employee
is also simple health Turner
attorneys are exempt from the
private investigator
responsibilities to be they
don't have to be licensed as a
private investigator also
including their employee so
that's just taking a little bit
step further we're adding in
that there's going to have to do
some specific training for crash
reconstruction and that's being
recommended by the the U. S.
department of transportation
we're also included skip tracing
this part of the PI Authority
to under their license we're
removing good moral character as
you've heard me say in other.
That is impossible
to use.
A very to the license to
removing a license because there
is no definition of what we're
good morning Carol character is
so it's not legally defensible
we're adding in of requirement
for taking away the sureties
bond I had come to the LFC
earlier this summer and
requested that the surety bond
be increased it was pointed out
that there's a significant cost
to increase that so I went back
to the staff and asked him why
why are we looking at increasing
the when there's kind of some
confusion about general
liability insurance versus
sureties bond we came to the
conclusion that the best option
is forced to eliminate the
surety bonds not ever been you
we couldn't find any record of
it be use and require those
individuals out the general
liability the city for the
private federal companies and
the C. I. companies that they
have general liability
insurance.
We've added in a spot of private
the troll employee there's a
definition for it under the act
but there's no license for it so
there was some sort of
disconnect probably years ago
act was first adopted so we've
created the licensure for the
private patrol employee that is
the equivalent to the private
investigator employee we're
changing the renewable to fight
and he'll we're trying to get
all of our licenses on at least
identify annual in the
ministration of the act he's
here we also of currently only
have authority to require
psychological evaluation for
security guard level three
security guards level three of
the only security guards that
are authorized to carry a
firearm and they do have to
provide a psychological
evaluation in order to get
license the department has been
requesting psychological
evaluations from anyone who
cares a fire arm and we did not
have that authority for initial
licensure so we're asking that
any of the professions PI
private control.
PI employee now private patrol
employees as well as security
guards provide us with the
psychological evaluation upon
initial licensure not every
renewal just upon initial
licensure and then but we're
extending this sat I will say
there's already a sunset bill
this is expanding the sunset but
we want to make sure that
there's not confusion if the two
bills get signed and at what
point they get signed one after
the other so we're including
that in this bill to.
And madam chair for full
disclosure I am a licensed PI
and while I I have a security
bond I have an Ian of insurance
as well.
Thank you.
And do you have an image.
Us is.
That we didn't know if it down
the.
The.
Here.
The.
You don't have.
Okay.
Yes with you.
Thank you okay have a motion to
discuss the amendments okay.
Brady has issues to discuss
imminent.
You madam chair will be
explained that the committee
what it is amendment two two
five one two.
Twenty one so let's go to page
three line twenty four.
We were looking at.
Attorney employee this is up to
the do the background
investigations things like that
we noted that we needed to make
it very specific with and we're
adding quote working under the
direct supervision of the
Attorney so that it's not some
outside person outside the
agency the of the next one that
we see is we go to.
One of the four to the top of
page five yes the standards came
from the department of
transportation and in our
discussion would be better for
the rulemaking so that they can
fall over the changes made for
rather than having to go back is
running to start over again so
so on that what we've done is
going to and changes that we're
going to make.
that it will be approved by
rule of the department.
And the on page five.
Warning I the other person who
does traffic crash
reconstruction is of licensed
New Mexico engineers so it just
makes it clear that you've got
of the licensed agent here
actually go we have individuals
that come from out of state this
would just clarify that as well
with that we stand for questions
discussion of them and.
To adopt
the motion in this document.
Do we have any opposition seeing
then you have a job did and do
bills Representative.
Sure that will stand for
questions okay so the audience
do we have the in the audience
supported the bill would likely
COVID.
Opposition seeing let's go to
the webcast anybody on the
webcast to life to make comments
and support.
Hello.
House bill two five nine four
opposition seeing members
Representative Chasey.
Enter.
I'm this is I have looked at
everything that I notice on our
Committee analysis it
it does require coursework to
provide practical.
Traffic crash reconstruction
investors specialty
Representative three
the question is do all private
investigators need.
Of Madam chair is.
Representative Chasey not all
private investigators what it is
is a special group of private
investigators I don't do I'm not
a level one two or three
security guards.
In north White one of the.
So as I see madam chair so
they're different requirements
for different types got it.
Let me just ask do you.
To read Harry foster.
All my.
Two very much.
We.
Representative Lawson.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
And so so on line three of what
it says.
That attorney's employees.
Think of the.
I investigations.
In the janitor that works for
the.
For the for the Attorney in this
office.
And that's just to get.
This is the best chair
representative so more yeah I
under the direction of the
attorney's office.
On that for the tough with the
well as a manager Representative
Zamora what the.
Many if they're legally it's
going to in check into the
backgrounds of.
Client CO the posing.
Individuals that would be on a
court case so you know we want
to recognize that leads that
sexual
Okay madam chair.
That's all the questions I have
for the rest.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I believe with
the superintendent.
Said that would not need a new
psychological the doctor if you
already got your certification
before is that correct madam
chair representative madam chair
representative that is
absolutely correct so only be
added additional licensure so if
you're already medicines yes in
a sense grandfather grandmother
etcetera we have psychological.
Thank you.
Next year.
Thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I'm
wondering if one can I.
T..
You want to repeat the phrase
working under the direct
supervision of the Attorney.
Five one fifteen.
No.
Looking at the wrong one.
We don't committees that for
this.
Okay face.
Yes I won fifteen
madam chair and then vice chair
that would be a friendly
amendment in when the draft of
the ability to catch some.
So.
Sure just to clear.
Is is representative reinstating
we would duplicate the
previously adopted and then the.
Right right there in that
section.
In my fifties.
There we've got.
It would only be.
Wanted to.
The superintendent.
Definitely.
Yes.
So we'd be adding in working
under the direction.
The part so it would and the
comma Mexico.
The exact same amendments.
That are on here number one the
purchase.
Madam chair and
Representative Chasey yes.
Madam chair representative.
I move the amendment moved it up
to
management and the just.
Madam chair I think it would
that would come after employees.
Why fifteen.
Correct.
Okay so we have a motion to
adopt different management.
Okay as worded by vice chair and
executive Representative Chasey.
Have a question I did have a
question madam chair
representative and I think it
might fall under before we move
that amendment with those
changes I think it might help
clarify that because my
questions also page five lines
for at because we struck out
department transportation
replace it with
I will department would that be
the department of transportation
the justice department the the
chair and representative on on
to when you see the heart and
it'll be the the agency that
it's
One
see all here in our committee
this morning I am presented a
house memorial twenty.
The this this memorial this.
Prices on our southern border
where we have many young
children being separated from
their parents and traffic into
the United States.
we also large amounts of
federal.
United States that is causing a
public health crisis currently
with this memorial we are
requesting assistance from the
federal government to finish
construction of a barrier on the
southern border to protect the
children.
while also ensuring that that
fifty one point three open miles
of border is protected by our
federal government so we will be
sending this to our our
president and department of
homeland security as well as our
governor and you know this is a
very pro immigrant anti
trafficking memorial that's
meant to target the the crisis
that we have in New Mexico and
to make sure that the reserves
to protect these children and
these minority communities that
are being taken advantage of on
the on the.
The travel we also are
requesting that the United
States it's with action to make
it easier for us to get into the
United States illegally and so
that is the meat of this bill
and I will stand for questions
chair thank you Representative
rather.
Go to the do we have any members
of the audience in support of
the bill.
In opposition of the bill.
Okay please make your statement
within one minute.
The chair members of the
committee Cat Sanchez time with
full futures on the policy co
director there I am borderlands
kid who was raised two miles
from the border and this bill
this memorial is not more
mentally or justice sound we of
urged at do not pass New Mexico
thank you.
Next okay thank you let's go to
the webcast.
Do we have comment comments in
support of the bill.
David yes.
Yes what about sure committee
members so I would support this
bill I think it's a common sense
of bill I think it'll our
providers so with a tool to help
control the what's going on
ordered given our for patrol
agents a tool to help them
control situation I think
this'll work out is so consent
part of being a humanitarian
thing as well because of state
could not allow the people down
there to allocate resources
As possible particularly the
folks attempted to enter our
country twelve to support the
civil war thank you very much.
Stanaway have.
Any comments in opposition of
memorial.
Media record.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee avenues
near record the policy council
and regional manager of the ACLU
of New Mexico and I'm based out
of Los crucis and also a life
long border residents but here
in California.
I'm here to propose HM twenty if
the goal is truly to her to
manage hearing resources on
migration and discourage the
impact of certain drugs are
communities there are better
alternatives than what this
memorial proposes and I urge
this committee not to pass this
memorial thank you.
Okay next have jasmine.
Good morning New Mexico are
members of the committee my name
is prince yes of the requirement
senior policy attorney at the
New Mexico and grant lawful
Jareth and I'm here to speak in
opposition of how the morale
thank you I I so what these
varies and we were just playing
merry communities across the
border and again there are
better solutions to what is
moral and right thank you.
Thank you I don't see more.
That's so committee members yes
Representative Zamora Madam
chair of the justice.
We have.
You have some memorial Senator
mission to table.
To listen table Ariel I have a
second.
please Raul.
Madam I don't know if anyone
wants to talk.
They have any questions we have
to do that for them I'll have a
motion to table well I did call
out to committee members
sentencing hands race I want to
represent someone.
So
Please take roll for a motion to
table.
Representative on your new yes
to table Representative block
the table.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative ring no matter.
Representative Zamora no.
Figueroa yes to table.
Madam chair Johnson.
Table.
I agree.
Tables you madam chair.
I look forward to working with
you to fix this crisis and.
Discuss.
You
fact we have.
Bill two six two.
Trance New Mexico ranch for.
Question.
We can do if.
All right.
Last year's gonna sit in for.
Representative on this bill.
Already.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee.
I am happy for you House Bill to
sixty two.
Regarding updates to the New
Mexico can.
These updates are needed.
To increase the flexibility and
speed that our office of Russian
axis access.
Has to respond to opportunities
to I heard federal monies and
grants that come up.
The
other states language.
That needs to be updated now we
have a specific office of
broadband access the and it
leverages changes made in the
anti donation clause by the
voters of New Mexico
my expert witnesses deputy
director of the office of
broadband access utility Diane
Strom and madam chair we have a
committee so that probably
should be passed out we have a
okay.
The someone want to move that
for discussion can I have the
yes we have a motion by
Representative Rehm.
And second that is let's go
ahead and discuss a committee
substitute for House Bill two
six two thank you madam chair
the committee said differs from
the original bill only in the
definition section there are
several updated definitions
there.
For example the definition of
infrastructure.
Page two the definition of
broadband infrastructure and the
definition of Department
Got rid of some language that is
unnecessary.
If you remember those of you who
are here when the New Mexico act
was passed is H. B. ten it is
this a broadband did not exist
so it was an accident under
department of information
technology
And now that we have an office
of broadband Senator states are
needed.
Also in definitions page three
definition of user.
Because broadband access to
multiple points to get to that
end users but you do have to
define the end user where to
often consumed.
So to speak Page four also has
some definitions for under
served and unserved that are
tremendous improvement over the
original connect New Mexico act
because it specifies speeds
target speeds.
Of the rest of the substitute is
the same as the original bill
managers.
Thank you.
The.
Let's go to the are you ready
for this document committee set
up for just yes yes.
And second okay.
Works motion to adopt the
committees changes for double
checking can you read the number
yes ma'am the committee seven
point two two four nine eight
two point two okay and we have a
second.
I don't see any opposition so we
have adopted.
Committee substitute for House
Bill two six two I.
So now are you ready for this
yes ma'am we'll go.
As go to the audience to have
any comments in support of the
bill positions.
Let's go to the webcast we're
going to hear comments in
support of the bill.
Let's go to.
I cannot pronounce your name.
The ability of the hello tiaa
impact Tianma OTL looking.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Osama then and the advocacy
director for a a RP New Mexico
and on behalf of our two hundred
forty thousand members many of
them who live in rural areas The
New Mexico this is a the central
service that is unavailable to
many of them and this bill
supports our New Mexico's
efforts to deploy of broadband
services across the state by
refining roles and
responsibilities between connect
New Mexico counsel Office
broadband expansion as such we
strongly support on and
respectfully ask the committee
to vote in favor thank you.
Thank you next we have Joe
Dickerson.
Madam chair members of the
committee John Dickerson was the
veterans and military families
caucus and we fully support this
bill because it would make
broadband more available for
veterans who live in rural and
underserved areas thank you very
much for your time.
Okay thank you we'll stay on the
webcast do we have any comments
in opposition of the bill C..
We go to committee members.
The men's Representative the the
you know I think that the
broadband issues like.
Very huge issue especially in
the Navajo Nation and places
that are very really well we
don't have.
Access so I'm wondering how does
this work with.
Emergencies such as starling and
oneweb and all these other
companies that also.
Do this but it's not technically
broadband Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and representative
there is no language in the
original connect New Mexico act
that specifies a certain
technologies so it's a grant
application process open to
whatever technologies serve the
community that since every
community is has different
geographic requirements and
different needs
but I will say this bill doesn't
change any factors which.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so the word
broadband.
Industry or infrastructure that
would include.
All folks that would provide
internet services and can
activity.
Is that correct Mr loopy
inequity by service could be
there any facility Fannie.
It is left open intentional Jeff
okay Sir thank you
Representative compressing
analysis here except that.
The criteria for public versus
private entities.
Do we know what those criteria
are regarding what did what did.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative yes
that is one of the updates
additional make due to the
passage by New Mexico vote of
changes to our constitutional
into.
to pay.
Page ten.
References private entities and
you welcome to right and then
also on page twelve never leave
madam chair representative you
are referring to the criteria on
page twelve correct yes.
Yes the interior are slightly
different public entities and
tear with the bill was
originally passed only public
entities tribal nations
municipalities counties
government entities could apply
for these kinds of requests
because of our agent in the
surplus and they already have
very structured garden though so
we've built in the criteria for
those kinds of requests with the
uncontested passage of the
changes.
We have to put in descriptions
of the guardrails for private
entities here on page five.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative said.
Whatever sees this department I
think it's under the department
of information technology for
the council currently is Madam
chair representative.
Yes although I will let the
deputy director explain more
detail if you encounter chair
thank you madam chair look at
thank you madam chair
representative box
we so the way that we look at it
and the way we believe that
structured under statute is at
the office of broadband uses the
department of energy
information technology as our
administrative branch because
we're young and small office
we're growing we're expanding
but we need that help with
Paying people making sure our
contracts get through in a way
that polisario of the lost
tribes of the state of New
Mexico so we have that
administrative help the director
of the office of broadband
reports to the governor.
The the rest of the employees in
the office are classified
executive agency employees the
council.
New Mexico council is under
anyone exactly so that's one of
the interesting part about fifty
pounds of.
Also is wanted by different
entities so there are the
governor does appoint one member
of the council different
agencies that deal with
broadband from members of the
council there are tribal members
Representative
and so.
They they report to themselves
essentially off the property is
there with the turns to support
them.
Madam chair representative I
would clarify that none of that
is changed by this bill that was
all this damage in the region
got it thank you madam chair
thank you Representative all the
questions I have for you I
appreciate it thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
On in news.
In order.
We're seeing.
