Representative little here.
Right your.
Representative Zamora.
Here vice chair a few.
Here.
Thank you.
Warm this morning and we will
begin house bill four we have
three bills to address today and
we have to be on the house floor
at.
Eleven o'clock okay we will not
hear testimony for house bill
four as for.
Public comment last Friday.
So with that I'm going to hand
the gavel over to madam vice
chair.
Thank you madam chair usually
You have anything you want to
say before we go to the.
I would like to introduce.
The.
State fair with.
And I like to thank everyone for
the hospital.
RT has that opportunity to
present today.
Thank you thank you madam chair
secretary thank you madam chair.
We'll go to the committee.
Representative no.
Thank you.
I want to begin by saying first
of all.
I really love this bill I love
the concept and I had one area
of concern that I think it's
been addressed by one of the
over one more time just for my
clarification because my concern
is with automatically enrolling
people to be registered to vote
I want to make sure that we're
not accidentally involved.
and documents people have the
models and do not so much
because I'm worried about.
Right aspect because I don't
want them to do that.
He was committing a crime that
they didn't have any other.
so to make sure that I
understand that states are not
automatically registering people
who are eligible but if we turn
to page thirty.
Eight subsection.
One fifteen fifteen thousand
qualified or qualified residents
to provide documents
demonstrate.
The women's of affected people
get their.
Thirteen thirteen thank you Mr
chair the.
Yes thanks committee five
fifteen and sixteen of those
qualified elector or qualified
president.
By the document demonstrating
United States citizenship
I think that takes care of that
but it also references a
database.
I just want to know if the.
Mention databases that and my
twenty nineteen and twenty I
think database that exists or
that will be created with this
bill.
Sure Madam chair representative
and so the existing process.
Or automated well it is
automatic the registration
again what this legislation does
is ships the opt out to the back
end of the process rather than
remember the process them so
that exist currently when an
individual conduct a transaction
for a driver's license or
identification card they are
automatically I before they can
complete the transaction offered
the opportunity to register to
vote
when if an individual.
For that purpose listens or
that.
Education for their providing
documentation on the front end
and and they're basically three
categories there are individuals
that and PED knows for after
citizens individuals that they
know for a fact not citizens and
individuals it's unclear and so
the way this process will work
is the same as it works
currently on the front page only
individuals that we know for a
fact are United States citizens
are going to be automatically
registered so that information
is very contained within the
database at.
Thank you very much.
Secretary and madam chair yeah I
just want to make sure.
Any vulnerable people and like
cross hairs of an over US
attorney has to make that so I
just want to make sure that my
concerns regarding that aspect
were heard in that I have.
Thank you very much chair on the
Senator.
On that point.
The only madam chair I am
amendment that would address
this very concerned about this
Representative we we can't.
Whereas on on that point but you
on the list and you can do it
is.
Thanks for adding me to the
lists you bet.
Representative source so yours
is and thank you thank you then
next on the list we have
Representative some more.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Madam secretary and.
Representative.
On on the license part of this
thing toward.
It states that if you have a
provisional ball in.
They will automatically register
useful my corrected this that's
one of states in the bill.
Madam chair representative so
yes and and that being said if
the individual is not of legal
voting age as we treat all
individuals who present what
what what we call registration
sixteen and seventeen year olds
they will remain at eight.
What we call us SantaFe will
they achieve voting age.
Madam chair representative and
is that an existing manager and
madam secretary seven sixteen.
lawyers if it's in the state of
the state this chamber.
A
of I was concerned about that
that we were getting out of
place there
Madam chair and and that's
that's all the questions I have
for now.
Thank you Representative
somehow.
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam chair
I just have a couple of
questions regarding automatic
voter registration and the I'm a
little confused as to the
sequencing of all of us and so I
wrote my questions down here and
then of course you can find them
says that can be one second.
Act persons registration time
it's false phoning under section
one dash twenty dash eight in
the state only other person
knowingly and willingly took
voluntary actually register to
vote with knowledge that the
person is not qualified.
Or is ineligible to register
knowingly and willfully voted
with knowledge of because I as
nonprofit elector is no so madam
chair madam secretary is that
just a fancy way of saying well
the point of this this bill is
to register as many people as we
possibly can on the front and
about and if you didn't know
that you weren't supposed to
vote you voted anyway you're not
going to get in trouble for.
For your votes gonna count
anyways and you're still not.
So the question madam chair
representative so under current
law and in under the current
process you know any individual
who knowingly and falsely
represents themselves to be at
qualified elector and does
Register indisposed is
considered to a committed an
offense against the election
code and and support three
felony they can be prosecuted
Center and in in most cases you
know really what this faxes
vigils who are in the pipeline
for citizenship and in fact
their citizenship status so this
is just a fail safe built into
the process in case there you
know as we know databases are
pretty good especially in the
meeting amazed but not perfect
and so even though this
individuals going to be provided
information at that time of the
transaction and then they're
going to receive a follow up
post her after the transaction
that should really capture any
individual who is not a US
citizen and and is there going
have all information that you
want to say no to this and not
be registered if a mistake is
made through the process so they
would have to deliberately
continue to remain registered
knowing that you know having
been provided the information
twice and and it will be the
same as as under current law
chair representative thank you
so much madam chair and
secretariats exactly what I was
hoping the answer would be
and then the last question I
have is so.
A motorist will get to choose a
party while out in the right
but isn't that consistent with
the back and voter registration
process because they have
already what will I have already
started as defined state.
And then they have to go back in
the process of re select what
party they want to be with hot
if you can make to the station
there for me was really gonna
help me figure that part of it
in madam chair representative
it's actually really applaud
that we ask them to select a pre
before they leave and and right
now again to just talk about for
process.
You know you're you're ****
these questions before you can
leave a freaking completed
transactions would you like to
register are you sure you don't
want to register etcetera make
sure this is correct please
select party etcetera and of
course with all of that
presented it is to ensure
because we have a close
relatively closed primary system
here in New Mexico that gap that
individuals do not accidentally
select out of that process
because so election of party is
at before they leave is that
initial opportunity say okay
that nerdy being informed that
you're being registered to vote
in the process so select a party
now when when that post postcard
will time a month later that is
really meant to just capture if
they had not already selected a
party and so they don't have to
do anything they don't have to
respond to that postcard if they
want to be registered voter
happy with thank you they don't
have to do anything Madam chair
representative and madam chair
secretary if they are unhappy
that gives them the opportunity
to March back down to our office
the retainer filiation and chair
representative they don't even
have to do that they can change
it on that card they resubmitted
they can go online through the
online voter registration
process they can change party
Act either of those ways or you
know chair representative okay
thank you very much madam chair
secretary of appreciate you
answer questions.
Thank you Representative.
Limited block.
Yes my turn thank you madam
chair and thank you madam chair
and madam secretary receive one
here regularly talk about
election.
So I have a few questions to
hear.
The first of all I just wanna
make sure that the county courts
were involved in the process of
drafting this bill did you
consult with any of the county
clerk's of regarding this Madam
chair representative madam
secretary Madam chair
representative on I was not the
individual drafted this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and
Representative madam chair did
did we have sessions with any
county clerk's regarding HB for.
The
vice chair committee members I
believe we have that positive
that that I can get that
information for you okay thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative because I asked
that since in the testimony we
heard some county clerks from
across the state from Rio Arriba
county all the way down to the
curry county and it concerns
regarding funding for these
extra drop boxes is there any
kind of mechanism madam chair
representative madam secretary
to ensure that they do of those
resources yes Madam chair
representative we already have
current funding
existing funding to provide
additional drop boxes as well as
chair representative in our
budget a request we are at and
we are and with the cautiously
optimistic that we're going to
receive substantial funding to
the election funds to be able to
cover any
additional are investing
expenses chair okay thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative ask that as well
because I know that some people
of huge counties where they have
to worry about where we put a
drop we've put it in the north
part of the county we put on the
south part we could central
where do we put it and also is
there a requirement for where
that has to be in the vicinity
of the county Representative do
you have a requirements where
has to be like miles.
Madam chair representative
we really rely on the county
clerk's to other counties and
the best possible locations for
those that will be.
And madam chair representative
blot past year question I have
been informed that yes the bill
drafters have consulted with the
county clerk's interacting still
great thank you Representative
and appreciate that it's good to
have those cliffs in here and I
I don't know if there's any here
today but setups guys the do a
great job and so
Regarding that so I I just would
have a.
Question so if you are county
clerk in your required have to
drop off that that's within the
law.
Would you be ready at least for
to drop boxes right outside of
the clerk's office right next to
each other madam chair
representative.
Excuse basically are just our
coverage list I.
For our.
But I'm Madam chair
representative we actually had
situation arise like that so
there is
the partnership between our
office and the county clerk's
regarding the location of the
job losses and while Madam chair
representative they could do
something like that we also
provide in rural of labor to
request a single drop box you
know for any county that has
been designated as a minimum of
two.
so that just would be necessary
to.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so I I
understand the last election
there were outside groups that
help fund some drop boxes I
don't know if that was
specifically in New Mexico or
for countrywide but is there any
provision that that keep these
outside groups from funding
those boxes madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative we
have had no outside funding for.
Election administration it's all
okay.
Thank you for access.
I think it will be I think
that's a good thing I think that
we should definitely keep it in
house so good for us on that on
that and so madam chair
representative I'm just reading
through this bill is pretty big
bill things like forty something
pages and so I'm just wondering
what's the impetus for the the
background as to the the big
three right now provisions of
the LFC.
And then secretary.
Thank you of Madam chair
representative.
we.
I
to enhance that different areas
of this bill including the
automatic voter registration all
the things that are in this bill
repealing replacing the driver's
license voter registration and
so forth and of course in
activities we're concluding
rights to protect our places and
address other issues as we can
the last election you know we
were.
We've.
Office working in these
especially in rural New Mexico.
Live in Gallup and.
You know you are member at the
city your community County
you're a community member have
the Navajo Nation and so.
Understanding all those
processes and re involved in
different you know you have to
go to this building to vote for
the state to go to this building
to those for tribes.
You know so okay thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative you know I think
that's a good thing I think that
maybe even this what I would
consider putting this native
American voting rights act its
own bill because I think it's
very important to make sure that
that specific community has
those resources and and all the
rules and everything promulgated
from the secretary states that
they can work with those tribal
members and tribal.
Sure that they can have that
access so
Yeah.
And madam chair.
Madam chair representative I I I
concur with the the sponsor as
well as
just to reiterate that you know
the election code is is
extensive it's complex
as far as election field go
over the last sixteen years that
I've been doing this is one of
the shorter ones we have another
bill that this committee is
going to hopefully look at
eventually that is really just
an administration focused bill
and so the so madam chair
representative is more focused
and you can't miss and new
material I'm.
Those
Tweaking the administrative
process to make it better for
voters snatcher thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
thank you madam secretary so
then my next question would be.
Were there any people in the
last election of the last two
general elections that were
denied the right to vote in New
Mexico madam chair.
Secretary chair representative
unfortunately I'm as good as our
laws are in terms of your team
both access and integrity and
security of the election so
there are still individuals who
struggle with access
particularly as you raised
Representative on honor roll
tribal nations and in areas and
so a lot of the thrust of this
legislation madam chair
representative is to make sure
that those people can officer
cracks.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I I know it's
it's hard sometimes to reach
voters and tribal areas you know
they don't they don't usually
have those a lot of postal post
offices and then rural areas in
general like we're saying you
know that the travel thirty
miles or something to go to the
polls.
So I certainly see the need
however I think that currently I
think that we try our best to
make it accessible to.
It both with throwing in your
mailbox and wait for the mail it
up or you know sending it to.
A drop box or whatever I I would
contend that there are two
places that you can do that and
I just think maybe we a better
option would be to have more
voter education Madam chair
representative does this have
any voter education aspects to
it in this bill madam chair.
Madam chair representative I I
can agree with Representative
more more of the more better
education.
and in the
both our budget request in in
the the bill that's going to
come over from the Senate side
eventually I hope
we do address specific
components of our education and
providing dedicated funding for
those particularly you will see
and Senate bill one eighty
information that actually
restores.
A a work of former requirement
that that was way before
actually I think it went away
when I was a baby County where
back in the late aughts that
required mailing to every single
voter I'm informing.
Four.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative it's great to
hear that that is a big portion
of what we're talking about in
this legislative session so
are there any aspects of this
bill that would.
Secure our elections from any
kind of bad actors trying to
intend to.
Change the outcome without the
democratic process etcetera
Representative indeed yes madam
chair representative in fact the
the provision that
Representative Hochman Vigil
referenced you know just
clarifying penalties and
offenses for folks you know
knowingly participating in the
process and they are not a
qualified elector etcetera and
again in Senate bill one eighty
which is going to come over
which again is a more technical
administrative and very security
oriented bill you'll see a
number of security
professionals.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so then going
about security issues that is
from the topic now on page four
there's.
That says the.
With some not be transferred
this year they.
Twenty percent off of the
requesting parties agency or
organization and still not be
made accessible to the general
public on the internet or
through other means chair
representative so.
You know I know that many.
Datacenters that the party the
Democratic Party you know the
UPS do do data center adds.
Credit part as the band called
it so
With this lewd those democratic
and Republican entities from
utilizing this data to get to
their candidates madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative.
Okay.
Madam chair representative so no
I think that this is an
important because there are
other third party entities as
well like I know L. two data
they they get data from your
office and offices across the
country would they be banned
from getting this kind of data
is not for a specific campaign
as stipulated Madam
chair representative I'm not
familiar with a to data so my
apologies what I will say is any
entity or individual that
confirms my the affidavit that
the data will only be used for
governmental or election camp
services will be permitted to
have the state chamber.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
So it's anyone pretty much could
get this data as long as the
signed affidavit saying that
it's for campaign for.
Other for election purposes is
that correct Madam chair
representative as well as
committing through the course of
the affidavit to the permitted
terms of use and the
you know the potential.
the fences and penalties that
could result for unlawful use
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative yeah I would have
the question what if someone did
not intentionally.
Put this information miss
Iglesias say they put it on our
website is sent to a candidate
and and candidates email address
got hacked or something Madam
chair representative would there
be any kind of protections for
those entities since they did
not intend to for public we'd
send out this data Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative
obviously you know when
committing.
Our guests when when we when we
submit a criminal referral for
unlawful use of data it is
because the.
Affidavit abuse has been
knowingly violated
and so madam chair
representative I'm not a
prosecutor but I would I would
be hard pressed to think that a
prosecutor would.
Many count for something yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative could you point
me to where it says that the two
of those protections this is the
big red book chair
representative in the existing
election
do you by chance know what
sections finance.
Give me a minute on that.
Look at.
I guess I'll move on to another
question we're looking for that
here Representative.
So I see the bills this campaign
election campaign versus the
definition bill on what
campaign is Madam chair
representative.
Representative.
Secretary.
Madam chair representative a do
not believe we find a specific
definition within the context of
the.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative because then I
could read that this is in the
business round with where I come
from.
A campaign is something that you
use to target your audience so
could potentially be used by
businesses to target specific
voters madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative on page for the
which is specifically election.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so then I guess
if you are a political
consultant that would fall under
that since that is election
technically.
Madam chair representative
certainly if the acquisition of
the data is for use if your
local consultant part of
watching campaign that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so what this
affect in any way the absence
the register for when candidates
know who's requesting absentee
ballots nineties and mailers
them etcetera Madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative no this bill does
not touch on us to register.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so this would ban
anyone from using that data in
that way just to be crystal
madam chair.
Okay sounds good the line for
over section five them.
The my question is what does
that mean that our registration
officer will review the
registration immediately before
that.
Well quite a elector folks chair
representative Madam chair
representative Michael Jeez I
just wanted to go back to your
previous opposition
this statue that you were
looking for is the same one
dashboard I.
In terms of the unlawful use of
voter data.
And that is your question madam
chair representative
The current process was designed
such that
In a and that is are you
subsection five key token drum
Regis recent voting location yes
in the registration so madam
chair representative
The process was physically
developed such that when an
individual presents at a polling
location with the proper data
through the registration officer
at the polling location that it
is.
In real life time transmitted to
the clerk's office they have
individuals that are designated
to sort of watch the queue as of
where we have a cue statewide
registration system to look for
saying the registration during
the course of the election
process to review that decision
process that application the
same way that every other voter
registration applications
process in New Mexico county
clerks are the the entity and
Office that are charged with
Maintaining and updating voter
registration records so madam
chair representative that
Representative directly in real
time to the coming for it is
reviewed it is added or rejected
accordingly and then madam chair
it is pushed back to that point
location in real time so that
and then.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so in this review
process is there any specific
guidelines that they have to do
that chair representative yes
Representative those guidelines
are outlined in both statute and
extensive administrative role on
and there is a matching process
it's an extensive matching
process that has to be
undertaken in order to process
your registration thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I won't force you
to look through your booking.
There is a.
so thank you so Madam chair
representative so what this bill
does not require the qualified
elector to produce their full
social security number to get
that madam chair or would only
be like the last four digits
something.
Madam chair representative
They do need to find either a
full social security number or a
driver's license in the last
four which allows the
registration officer AT the
county clerk to process that
that but extraction thank you
madam chair thank representative
so every single voter would need
either an ID or social security
number in order to register and
madam chair representative in
the case of same day
registration and ideas were.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that brings me to
my next point which I had on
that.
Which is my amendments I don't
know if you've got a copy yes.
Hi this is Eunice presented will
pass them because we do.
Thank you.
And once everyone has.
Gentleman to explain.
The.
All four.
Right.
The representatives.
So I had all my talking points
amendment or somewhere.
The three percent this is on
page one line fifty after the
semi colon.
It is requiring operators to
present identification for
voting that.
The purpose of the bill would
be.
And that first paragraph which
is already pretty long but will
add to it.
And so then section yes section
one new material in that would
be a voter ID provisions and
this provision essence with
require voter ID for absence
here in person voting and that
the tool would if they don't
have an ID that is given by the
state then they would be able to
obtain one free through the NMED
and that's essentially what this
amendment Madam.
Thank you Representative Sanchez
as a friendly amendment thank
you madam chair Kali this is not
requests for.
This.
So more yes.
These.
Thank you.
Any discussion on the amendment.
Representative you madam by here
and of.
Representative walk
You know since I've been up here
I've noticed.
There's whether it's correct or
not there's a perception that
our collections are not
It that are their compromise and
I'm not saying that they have
okay I'm just saying there's a
perception and.
I see this as one way to go into
and the address that perception.
can you give me examples of
other countries maybe that use
voter idea requires right.
Course thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and so
one country that's very close in
our hemisphere is Mexico other
national elections have voter ID
so they have in the past they
they had a lot of fraud in the
elections in the eighties we had
one allegedly so elections in
Mexico and so they tightened up
all that language and now the a
voter ID and there you know
it's.
The process manager
Representative if the Madam
chair representative walking and
at the end I'm not in any way
of that elections are still with
us someone's doing that but
that.
But you know I see that as the
main identification card when
this police officer you know
individuals have that card from
that was verified ID I think
this is really important to
advance
the public get more confidence
in our election again I'm not
saying stolen but I I think this
is an important aspect of that.
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Chasey to table
the amendment thanks.
Table.
To proceed further discussion
thank you bye.
You.
Call the roll table the
amendment.
Representative human nor do you
yes to table.
Representative block no ma'am.
Representative Chasey.
Yes to table.
Representative Hochman Vigil
fiesta.
Representative little yes.
Representative right no ma'am.
Representative Zamora.
What.
Yes.
Madam Johnson yes to table.
By a vote of six.
Six of three.
Amendment has been tabled moving
with discussion before still
yours thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and the
all right I will keep on going
on appreciate that little to
discuss something that we've had
there for a second.
He could be allowed to vote
chair representative that there
anything in this bill that
would.
I would mandate that the
department of corrections and
those jails across the state
take those individuals on
election day to vote Madam chair
representative.
Hello madam chair and
representative and and I think
specifically what this bill is
addressing isn't necessarily
individuals for currently
incarcerated in jail who have
not yet thank you Mr Lee
because out of all of for their
bone mass Madam chair
representative this particular
bill addresses madam chair
representative individuals were
were being discharged from
prison for felony.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
madam secretary so madam chair
this would not apply to people
who are currently incarcerated
in prison that bill would still
not be able to vote Madam chair
representative correct
Representative.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
This point.
I don't like on that point.
Individuals awaiting trial.
Now have have not lost the
franchise.
So I think that like metro
detention center brings voting
machines and.
They don't they take them to the
polls I I actually think
no stick on the Madam chair
representative there's actually
sort of it current gray area in
which that there's nothing that
precludes that but that it
doesn't happen in practice and
so madam chair representative
there is a technical eligibility
about but we have an Sir
comprehensively address that
either in legislation or rule
thank you madam chair thank you
thanks for the painting course
thank you and good question
there madam.
So all right that concludes of
money my question because I just
wanna make sure that those
people who still have the right
to vote Campos speaker this is
where they are if they're in
jail they still would be able to
get that Madam chair
representative.
And madam chair representative
at technically yes okay.
I guess there may be an access
that questions regarding how
exactly does that happen madam
chair but still they're both of
the right so I guess they could
ask the card madam chair
representative jail to to get a
after the ballot for them or
some kind of.
Other so madam chair
representative that's actually
conversation we're having with
election administrators as to
developing a process for that.
Okay thank you chair
representative.
Appreciate that answer so then I
I guess going back to the
security of.
How this person gets an
application how they register so
it says the utility bill.
would be required for some kind
of other residency form is that
correct chair representative.
Madam chair representative where
are we we were still in
sections section six where we
are madam chair.
Madam chair representative
will provide.
We are on.
Representative actually for the
section on state you are
restrictions that.
Your initial eight.
Yes Representative the reason
for that given that one of and
this is an existing statute so
you know.
If I understand that this is the
current process when individuals
presenting themselves to
register the order after you
registration of.
At a polling location we do
require that information so that
we can address them properly
because often madam chair
representative even though
they're required to show
government issued ID such as a
driver's license and may not be
a current
address so particularly to see
you you have from house to
house.
And you're doing senior
registration whether you're new
registrant or an updated
restaurant you want precincts in
the right place madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative so.
I guess then they can use an ID
from out of state fugitive from
connected to say.
What if the ID with.
Fired in that state Madam chair
representative would still be a
valid form of identification in
that instance so madam chair and
representative to the best of my
recollection regarding senior
registration we do need a valid
current rate at he's
identification Senator.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative talk and that
I the could also be like a
military ID chair representative
Madam chair representative yes
right.
We do want our military folks
out we want them all to go to
the polls if you're listening
please both Matt Representative
all right great so I just wanna
make sure that like at the
facility for instance it could
be like.
If it was a forced utility bills
for instance chair
representative daily.
Why not someone's name and then
use the typewriter or word
processor to put their own name.
And if that spent after the fact
to be non.
Appliances could that person's
vote potentially be taken out of
the voting process after work
chair representative Madam chair
representative that individual
be found guilty I would hope
I'm for three final at penalty
prosecuted to the full six and
live the balance Office pride
Madam chair representative and
our our election officials don't
have any way of doing what
challenges.
Madam chair representative to
the best of my knowledge we've
never forged.
Document used to dress.
Okay.
Representative.
All right so then my question
now would go to the automatic
voter registration diverted the
discussion about.
So madam chair representative I
question would be regarding this
if you.
Put your name forward once the
and the.
And then you get system madam
chair representative how would
and beating now if you or if you
he passed away.
If you treat transportation
anyway chair representative
would there be any kind of
provision that.
Keep that person's voting
location to where they are
currently.
Currently madam chair
representative the way the law
works regarding the registration
is that an individual is
required to update their
destruction when the moon's
first now not been allies folks
with losing their.
To the if they if they do with
but madam chair representative
one of the points of this
legislation is that and we do
tends to be one of the most.
Updated points of contact in a
government database Madam chair
representative so if there is a
specific law that requires you
when you move to update your
your address with Andy
and so the whole notion and
having this particularly not
just with the new restaurants
but with this registration dates
is that this provides us a new
factor to automatically updated
Motors address in the file
because it tends to be
probably the most likely
government agency in which an
individual touch base after the
action.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so then regarding
this automatic voter
registration so I I think we
heard testimony before it was
someone who is on the Navajo and
the Navajo Nation basically
chapter houses that's a they
were concerned about ballots
getting the wrong hands chair
representative is there any
protections to make sure that.
Those individuals out to get
this.
At this chapter houses properly
chair representative I just
wanna make sure no one is
getting access to those people's
voting.
At ten.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I am not aware of that
situation and I think
We have a good election process
I know that our election staff
and get.
Rating in education through the
process myself
and it's organized and.
you know there's a process can
just all you know.
The.
they take individuals one eight
one you know there's a line
there Sam station staff and
election.
You know there's training
process so and I'm not aware of
that situation okay thank you
madam chair representative yeah
I just want to bring that up
because someone said that.
Madam I just want to make sure
there is concern for math so
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so
I guess talking about the native
Americans voting rights act
which is compass in this
legislation.
I believe the I don't know what
page it says but I've read it
before chair representative that
there are like five or six
individuals who are allowed to.
To go and find through the
ballots from individuals who
requests to Representative at
the moment chair.
Alright so madam chair
representative there are at so
any individual.
Requesting an absentee ballot
house requests of their own
volition they have to provide.
Specific information including a
signature to that whether to
request I believe the provision
you're referring to madam chair
representative
It's scary existing
Your family relationships so
care taker and you know
immediate family member to
deliver balance which is already
existing lines that around for
years and and anybody
they were all second our death
bed with the flu like I needed
someone to come out for me and
you know take it to the county
clerk
Sign off on the on loan have to.
Center and in this particular
we still also prescribes that an
individual who is designated by
the tribal governments and
particularly we're looking at
the individuals who are the
community health
representatives to already have
a role in going around on to
talk you know to to interact
with community members also the
individual what we found in
twenty twenty and I remember
this scenario in particular in
twenty twenty in which we have
not just COVID lock down but in
like families you know entire
families that were either
housebound COVID visuals with
and home and so somebody leaving
that home to deliver ballot was
not.
I think within that tribal
communities.
These tribally designated
individuals could be response.
Alan.
Thank you madam chair thank you
in the.
All right so that clears it up a
little for me so these
individuals for health.
Community health experts.
Would be the way it's on I think
madam chair yeah yeah thank you
madam Tay thank Representative.
Through the screening process
beforehand.
That is a manager thank you
madam chair thank representative
so this is also regarding the
drop boxes are they required to
have video surveillance Madam
chair representative madam chair
representative at every month
container in the state is
required to have twenty four
hour surveillance I video
during the in the period where
dollars can be returned Madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and then I
believe most of my County clerk
and she said that every time
someone drops at the ballot box
there's an email that Senator
office is that something that
happens chair representative
Madam chair representative we do
also have monitoring that.
The technical term limit
technology built into each
ballot box and so they are made
aware any time it's it's touch
Madam chair representative.
Thank you Representative so I
guess technically I wanted to
see.
The Dunkin and play a prank on
my County where I can just go
touched about box on I. four in
four in the morning madam chair
representative and not and will
not be happy.
The storage so it wouldn't
require wifi or wireless chair
representative so madam chair
requirements within the statute
Tend to not only the
but into our sense of
administrative hall if that any
disabilities or any area that
we're the
The drop boxes contained there
has to be some existing
Infrastructure to provide that
twenty four hour video
monitoring requirements so that
is a requirement Senator the
representative so that would
include internet connection to
the surveillance that's correct
chair representative I just
with.
You know I know our broadband
issue here in New Mexico this is
want to put that out and you
efficiently as possible.
madam chair and madam
secretary so.
When we go to
H. thirty six
under that of one five section
more you know one section a.
So we have.
The do not have of old school
address.
Unfortunately as those that.
Thank you for and.
Can burn.
The committee.
Thank
you for letting me know.
