We have a quorum.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that order of
business committee reports to
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to is been referred
house bill three forty eight has
had it under consideration part
same as recommendation that I do
pass and then see for to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
What are the options available
to put on house bill three oh
three all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Those.
The as of a committee productive
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to miss been referred
house bill three zero three has
had it under consideration point
I was recommendation that to
pass finance refer to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
For the option of federal
committee for the house bill
three thirty four of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Posing a test of a committee put
up Mr speaker transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill three
three four has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Dayan Hochman Vigil
chair.
Thank you for your move
adoption.
The thirty fourth.
Three.
Optional for Rukum the report on
house bill three thirty for all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Opposing the S. seven committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to it's
been referred house bill three
thirty nine has had it under
consideration point it was a
recommendation that I do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Dayan Hochman Vigil
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we're
on a job should have a federal
committee put a house bill three
thirty nine all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Goals may be as a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill three
forty eight has had it under
consideration point I was
recognition that it to pass and
then for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Dayan Hochman Vigil
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption for the
diversion of a recruiter for
House with three forty eight all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those may just have a good
report opted.
Mr speaker your agriculture is a
gas and water resources
committee to is been referred
Senate bill two hundred as
amended has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Susan K. and a chair.
Mr speaker move adoption for an
adoption referral committee
report on house Senate bill two
hundred as amended almost
everything of us and I.
Jose yes I'm a committee report
on.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of Business third
reading of legislation soon
objection it is so ordered is a
gentle lady from Santa Fe ready
an item number one.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
give me to the point that the
record reflect that election is
Sir for placing House Bill seven
as amended has been.
Fund president taking it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the generator's
going to.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
seven the reproductive and
gender affirming health care
freedom Act ensures that we are
not adding fear to the host of
reasons people have trouble
accessing health care in our
state it simply prohibits public
bodies from discriminating
against individuals who choose
or refuse to use reproductive or
gender from health care
including abortion care
healthcare New Mexico as many of
us know can be hard to access
causing many people to drive
hours or wait hours for simple
procedures and for those of us
who had to seek reproductive or
gender affirming health care we
know that it can be the
difference in life saving
treatment as many of us know
eight out of ten maternal deaths
are preventable and prenatal
health care can make that
difference eight out of ten
gender for that transgender
individuals considered suicide
yet gender affirming health care
reduces those numbers
dramatically what this bill does
is ensure that they are not
discriminated against once they
get home it does not change
parental notification in
abortion care for anyone if you
vote for this bill if you vote
against this bill it does not
change parental notification if
you vote for this bill it does
not change the scope of work of
the scope of practice for any
teacher or healthcare provider
or those that work for public
bodies if you vote against this
bill it also does not change
that scope of work it does not
change help gender affirming
health care is provided to the
fore in our state and for many
kids that something as simple as
using their preferred pronouns
or preferred name and it's often
with family by their side to
make these important a critical
eye decisions and very tender
time of life.
In New Mexico we probably have
said that individuals in our
state and our state remains a
place where they can make
complex decisions with their
doctors because as many of us
know the line between an
emergency C. section and a
pregnancy is planned is
instantaneous a difficult for
many New Mexicans citizen vital
to ensure that all New Mexicans
know that no matter where they
are in line for what they're
going through that they can get
quality health care with the
doctor that they speak to.
Our law also acknowledges that
down families exist and
sometimes too often young adults
have to rely on well laws or
aunties because their home just
doesn't feel safe to make these
very difficult or complex
decisions it just says to all
those individuals who live in
our state including in counties
where they're considering
proposals like this that you
were seen and you are respected
and with that I'm I want to see
them in decided to have this
debate because I know everyone
here tonight is here because we
all believe in the future of New
Mexico we love our families with
the families that make up our
districts and I look forward to
that debate but for the moment
I'm gonna turn it over to my
colleague my co sponsor if I may
the gentle lady from tells
Representative Ortez deliver
tells thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady.
I'm gonna tell you a story about
why this legislation is so
impactful the way it's written.
As we know gender affirming care
and reproductive health care are
under attack.
I've gotten permission to tell
the story about how this
legislation is intersectional
and how it affects people's
lives.
Twelve years ago I met Billy.
I used to be an avid runner
Billy worked at Towson
outfitters I was there because
my feet had gotten really wide
after my first kid and your new
pair of trail runners.
Billy was super helpful and can
I became fast friends and over
the years
I learned his story.
Billy was assigned female at
birth but from the get go and
these are his words but we knew
that he was a boy he terror
addresses off for other clothing
that just didn't feel quite
right to him.
He was miserable.
He was bullied.
It was done.
When Billy came out as a lesbian
in his twenties he thought that
that was what he was.
But he wasn't.
He was still deeply unhappy
because he was not himself yet
he felt he fell deeper and
deeper into depression.
He told me that his mom had to
literally talk him off the roof
of the building.
Later on in this is again
something that he gave me
permission to share.
Billy was right.
When he got pregnant.
And he got an abortion.
New Delhi believes that that
abortion save his life.
Not that long after Billy
started Corman therapy.
And included house where he
though it was difficult at first
he began to get the gender
affirming health care that he
needed.
Billy is now sixty four and he's
feeling great.
He wanted me to share this
message with the body into
anybody who's listening today
that you can be in your right
body.
That you can be looked at the
way that you want to be looked
at.
This is the message that he
wants us to give to young people
today.
So I wanted to let you know what
gender affirming care looks like
and what and and what it does it
looks like.
Using the correct pronouns and
the right names words matter and
they make a difference the right
word can save lives gender
affirming care looks like mental
health and behavioral health
care for gender expansive folks
this is the biggest need in the
queer and non binary and trans
community right now this is also
this was also believes the
biggest need as he was on his
journey gender affirming care is
also surgical and medical care
and those procedures must be
protected.
And I'm gonna be really clear
here standards of care dictate
age appropriate care.
Billy story is unique and it
ends on a positive note.
That is not the experience that
are clear trans and non binary
kids have we know that eighty
percent of trans people consider
suicide because of the stigma
and shame they feel and their
communities.
And right now there are three
hundred pieces of legislation
all around the country including
in this body right now that will
further stigmatize harm in shame
trans and non binary young
people.
We are not that state.
And those are not our values we
must set the example and protect
our trans and non binary folks
thank you Mr speaker thank you
calendars on the fifth thank you
Mr speaker I'd also like to hand
it to one more my Sanchez the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Webster Penske
the lady from Santa Fe
Representative is a Penske thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
lady from Santa Fe
one of the reasons that I am so
pleased to co sponsor this
legislation is because it deals
with something that has been a
long time passion of mine which
is access to health care.
and access to health care is one
of the most important issues
that we will face during this
legislative session and I think
for some years to come it's
certainly been something that
has been a long term issue and
our state and you know.
My constituents are already
dealing with long wait times for
appointments.
Limited access to specialty care
last fall I sat in the kitchen
of a long time friend as she
explained to me the struggles as
she was having in getting care
for her husband who was dealing
with a movement disorder.
But now imagine Mr speaker
injecting politics into access
to health care imagine a
checkerboard of access across
our state.
And I can't imagine something
that would have.
A more negative effects on
access to health care then it
having the rules be different
from location to location.
This legislation prevents
localized restrictions.
Health care is already regulated
at the state and federal level.
In this bill would mean that
patients can access the life
saving care that they need.
Where and when they needed.
And in our state we're we're
already struggling with health
care access Mr speaker we can
not further fragment that access
to this lifesaving care the full
spectrum of reproductive health
care and gender affirming health
care.
Mr speaker.
Mineralizing.
Providers and patients is also
something that this legislation
will prevent will prevent any
criminalization of providers and
patients at the local level.
And I can imagine.
Something that would have a more
chilling effect.
Then the providers concerned
about potential legal
ramifications on their provision
of health care when they have
trained for those moments when
they see those patients and they
know exactly what type of care
that they would like to deliver
to those patients and to have
them concerned about local legal
restrictions that's not the kind
of access to health care that
our New Mexicans deserve.
And you know of all the efforts
were making the session all the
attention that we're placing on
health care.
Expanding access talking about
reimbursement rates making it
easier for health care
professionals to be licensed in
the state
making it easier for health care
providers to deliver the care
that they want
Creating a patchwork of access
to health care would be a step
in the opposite direction Mr
speaker there providers across
this country that are currently
dealing with those legal
questions around providing this
lifesaving care as we speak as
we speak providers are making
difficult decisions about the
choices and the care that they
are able to find and Mr speaker
I this legislation will allow
for us as a state to determine.
The kind of health care the kind
of respect that we want to
provide our patients and make
that uniform across the state
and allow for those health care
providers to make those
decisions in conjunction with
their patients which is truly
where that decision making bold
belongs
to Mister speaker thank you and
thank you lady for Sam from
Santa Fe for bringing this
legislation.
Thank you Mr quick Mr speaker
briefly one introduce my my
experts I have of I'm Aaron
Armstrong an attorney Eleanor
rush forth an attorney with the
ACLU and Dr Malinga claim who is
a gender affirming provider in
the state thank you and with
that we stand for questions
there is a debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
lane and before we go to present
lane is a request for colds
members remove their coats that
is okay and also at some point
this evening there will be
dinner served will make the
announcement when that is ready
members gentleman from San Juan
resembling.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Santa Fe yield yes I
yield to the gentle person from
San Juan.
Mr speaker I know that this
bill these issues touch some
real Senator people and I want
to try to be as thoughtful in
this debate as I can and as
articulate as I can and make
sure that that we Representative
both of our constituents I think
in a.
In a respectful and honorable
way and I and I think Mr speaker
gently from Santa Fe Santa Fe I
think that you and I are capable
of doing that so that's my
approach here this evening.
Mr speaker I want to know who
does this bill applied to house
bill seven is this a bill does
it apply to schools.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen yes it applies to
public bodies in our state and
that does include schools.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe to with this bill then
applied to individual teachers.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen of the insurers that
individuals cannot discriminate
against students or other
individuals however any
penalties would be on this on
the institution and not on the
individual teachers or
individuals working for those
public bodies.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe I understand that the
the civil action that this bill
contemplates cannot be brought
against an individual only the
public body but is there
language in here that flies this
bill to individual teachers at a
public high school middle school
elementary school thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen yes
if they're acting on behalf of
the public body in their skin
their work as Bellotti they
cannot discriminate against
individuals as it's laid out in
this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe can you provide me is a
little bit of help in
understanding section three
paragraph B. as in Bravo.
So and whether we're talking
about reproductive health care
gender for me health care those
are those are both phrases that
are essentially given a legal
definition whether time either
one of those I want to know what
does it mean for percentage in
indirectly interfere as those
terms are used in this paragraph
thank you Mr speaker thank you
for the question you know that
terminology directly or
indirectly appears with over
four hundred times in New Mexico
statutes and it is really
applicable especially when it
comes to discrimination on you
know as we know as especially
you know if it comes to the law
the details truly matter and so
that is what that is is
applicable towards and all of us
including all members here are
under statute and laws that
would also have similar
language.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe so what what does it
mean when we talk about
indirectly interfere.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I I guess I'm a little
unclear on the question as we
noted here and many other places
in the law people can be into a
discredited and indirectly and
that is applied in the courts
and that's already happening and
statuesque speaks.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe can you point me to a
statute word it it encapsulates
this concept of interfere or use
that term to indirectly
interfere.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jim McMenamin.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen we can find them in
public corruption statutes as
well if you like I can have my
expert get a citation for you
but that applies to the ethical
standards that we all expected
to uphold on the that we're
expected to uphold thank you Mr
speaker gently from Santa Fe
appreciated statutory citation
thank you Mr speaker thank you
don't give us one moment.
Mr speaker gentleman you can
find the regular good live
regulatory code it's one dot
seven dot six dot ten.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
From Santa Fe that we're talk
about statutory provisions that
sounds like administrative code
which is comes out executive
agency.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman it's in the government
governmental conduct act NMSA
ninety seven eight chapter ten
article sixteen thank you.
Mister speaker July from Santa
Fe can I get a specific statute
citation you gave me chapter in
code by any to section.
Thank you Mr speaker it's NMSA
ten dash sixteen dash three.
Point one a.
Yes.
Mr speaker joined from Santa Fe
so I C. director in directing
them directly coercing.
I'm failing to see where it says
director indirectly interfering
can you show me where it says
interfering thank you Mr speaker
thank you gonna give me a
moment.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John what we look for that
specific language I'm I'm happy
that we will continue I don't
want to Mr speaker gentle lady
debate further however if you
like I can come back to that if
you like it's up to the
gentleman.
Mr speaker generate from Santa
Fe I I do because the state and
I'll answer the body why would I
even care what the specific
statutory citation is.
Mr speaker what we're doing in
the statues are introducing a
and I would submit a completely
new concept in the law we talk
about coercion which was in the
statute that I was pointed to
that's a legally defined
litigated term we all know what
coercion means as we look to the
case law.
I think this indirectly
interfering is a new concept
that we're introducing the law
I'm not aware of any statute
that has that standard and so
why does that matter well we've
now attach civil penalties to
the statute this is not
punitive.
And so when I asked for an
explanation of what that means I
think the people of New Mexico
need to know what standards are
going to be held to if this is a
new standard that doesn't
otherwise exist in Los so Mister
speaker gentle in from Santa Fe
I'm still struggling with what
we when we talk about indirectly
interfering whether it's access
to reproductive health care or
gender from health care what
does that mean.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman for the question as my
experts look up we're indirectly
interfering may already exist.
Concept similar do are
determined by courts all the
time and so simple of indirect
interfering maybe something
that.
Creating zoning laws or.
It was only ones would make it
impossible for a reproductive
health care clinic to open up or
other with our other attempts to
block that access for
individuals in those
communities.
Mr speaker generated from Santa
Fe so maybe.
I appreciate simple Meghan maybe
I can summon simple to that I
think might be helpful and we
have this dialogue so.
Let's let's suppose that I'm an
elementary school nurse of
employee of of local public
body.
And a ten year old girl comes to
me.
She says I've known for as long
as I can remember that I'm a
boy.
And I'm terrified to go through
puberty because going to because
we look more like a woman.
And I want to use pharmaceutical
means to prevent my body from
becoming to look like more like
a woman so what are my
obligations as a school nurse.
According to paragraph B. to
this ten year old girl.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen first off when those
cases most often anything else
gender affirming care can take a
lot of looks and it can often
times look as simple as using
someone's preferred pronouns
they prefer name utilizing
things that are more permanent
or permanent changes can only
really happened after
individuals and is an adult
that's the only permanent
changes that can happen that's
what is in that aspect.
On the rest of your question
they are not expected to offer
additional assistance to seeking
any sort of care that they would
not already have been expected
to sort out so for example you
know I I'm related to folks that
do work in schools and when I
talked with them about what this
looks like an if they were
approached by an individual that
was looking for reproductive
health care or or gender
affirming care the steps they
took will and and this law or
any regular thing is what a
trusted adult would always take
which is to listen to the
individual a kind heart the
individual and help them figure
out their next steps however
they're not they're not required
to offer affirmative action or
to take additional steps they
would be expected to otherwise.
Mr speaker generally from Santa
Fe can you show me where in the
bill it says they don't have to
take affirmative action thank
you Mr speaker it says that you
cannot been gentleman it says
that you cannot be discriminated
against.
Mr speaker gentle in from Santa
Fe and I'm wondering where does
it say in the bill.
That I as a teacher.
Don't have to take additional
action.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen you know when we hear
passing laws in a conversation
with others earlier actually is
interesting.
We we we cannot be it's a X.
additionally prescriptive in
what we're doing what this bill
is specifically about is about
discrimination and if should
someone bring forth a bill about
taking affirmative act
affirmative action on either
of these issues then that that
would have to be looked at on
its own merits but this bill
does not talk about affirmative
action it when it comes to
reproductive gender for me
health care this bill talk
specifically about not allowing
discrimination on these issues.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe except the language in
the bill itself under this
program B. we've been discussing
says literally.
A public body or an agent of a
public body.
Although I think we struck out
agent now it says an individual
acting on behalf of or within
the scope of the forty.
Shall not indirectly interfere.
And so Mister speaker generated
from Santa Fe again.
If I'm a teacher and a ten year
old girl comes to me and she
says specifically I want to use
pharmaceutical means to prevent
this from happening.
Maybe I'm a school nurse either
one.
The way that I read this
language and again that's why I
raise the question is what does
it mean to not to do it you're
prohibited from indirectly
interfering this is a new
concept in the long some trying
to understand it trying to get
the people in Mexico understand
what we're voting on.
What are my obligations that ten
year old girl according to the
text of the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen there is no where in
this bill nor it is expected
that they would be able to go
beyond their scope of work and
find information additional
information on where to access
information on that and what
this does it ensures that
they're not specific for example
school rules that would
specifically prohibit on those
students from accessing that
kind of health care during the
school day if that was not
already a role within the school
for example.
Mr speaker joined from Santa Fe
let me ask the question this way
then let's assume same scenario
ten year old girl comes to me
but she tells me specifically
that she doesn't want me to tell
her parents am I allowed to tell
her parents underneath this
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen in your case when what
you're talking about a ten year
old individual that is seeking
gender affirming health care is
that I just want to clarify that
that was the question and they
did not want to tell their
parents is that correct Mr
speaker generally from Santa Fe
I think that's most of except
for the child gives specific
instructions and me as her
teacher that I'm not to disclose
this conversation to her parents
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen again they would be
under the same rules that they
are currently and then in the in
this and as you know and I know
everyone here knows it depends
on the age in very many
of the details but in this case
that the the professional that
whether that's the health care
provider or the health care
nurse or the
teacher whoever that would be
of would then be able to tell
the parent at that point yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe so if if everything's
the same amendment them what is
the purpose of this bill if it
doesn't change existing law
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman what we have seen in
our state across the country are
concerns that individuals would.
I would not be able to access by
the reproductive abortion or
gender for me health care in
their communities because of
what's been proposed we wanted
to those individuals that live
throughout our state are able to
access that information or that
are able to access that health
care without being concerned
that they be discriminated
against Mr speaker gently from
Santa Fe what what you're really
arguing is that this bill
prohibits local governmental
entities counties and
municipalities from enacting
ordinances that would prohibit
access to reproductive health
care and gender for me health
care and I think that's a good
discussion that this body should
have whether that's realize
within the purview of the state
or whether that's something that
local government should be in
the business of if that's all we
were discussing and that's all
the bill did that I think this
would be probably a much quicker
discussion.
Mr speaker generally from Santa
Fe but that's not all that the
bill does when you read the text
again paragraph be we're talking
about an employee of the school
they cannot in directly
interfere.
And so when I read that I'm a
pair I have two sons.
It terrifies me.
I read that and I take that to
mean that if if a child a ten
year old child goes to a
teacher.
Discloses information given
specific instructions this is
what I intend to do do not tell
my parents.
The teacher that we've created
this conundrum underneath this
bill is due why in my opinion do
the right thing and tell mom and
dad.
Or do I suffer the possible
consequences of violating the
statute Mr speaker gentle lady
from Santa Fe so again I bring
it back to when we talk about
indirectly interfering I submit
that is a troubling standard in
New Mexico law Mr speaker joined
from Santa Fe if you can show me
where I'm wrong an analysis
based on what's in the bill
itself not what the intent is I
would love to hear it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John I I appreciate this
conversation because in this
scenario that we've created in
that we're discussing right now
like many children New Mexico
that is a trusted adult that
that child feels comfortable
going to and across New Mexico
there too many children do not
feel that same safety and so
into your point they may not
feel safe discussing these
things with their parents but
they ask for an adult to help
the mediate that conversation at
times this is something the
teachers have been navigating
not only as a to comes in
contact with reproductive health
care or or
gender affirming care it's it's
how they talk about to be Frank
perhaps drug use and other
things these are issues that our
teachers are already well adept
at navigating and and and figure
out because they are teachers
because they want to be the
trusted adults to individuals
now the term interfering does
have a legal definition there is
there is legal interpretation of
what that means the
interpretation of directly and
indirectly also has been
utilized in courts and and and
understood in the past so these
are two and and perhaps this
three forward combination
doesn't exist but the longer we
we put we create
the longer the specific language
or looking to find yes it will
be harder to find that exact
hearing raised over interfering
does existing law and directly
and indirectly does not does
also it existing law as well.
Mr speaker joined from Santa Fe
I I really I know a lot of times
there is a body maybe to not on
these tickets.
But I really hope the bodies
listen to the exchange district
points.
We are talking about on.
Trusted individuals.
Having an impact.
On a child's medical decisions.
That are not the child's
parents.
That's what this bill does if we
get down to its essence if we
cut out all the fluff that is
the crux I would submit that my
party has a problem with this
bill is if you read on its face
there is the possibility now I
understand it's not going to
happen in every single
situation.
But there's a possibility that
it ten year old child.
To be influenced by a coach
trusted individual I don't know
what that means when you're ten
you're so impressionable.
But they can be influenced by a
trusted individual not my
phrase.
Over and above the influence of
their mom and dad.
That I think is the heart of why
this bill needs to fell the
night.
Mr speaker generally limit maybe
just boil it down to this.
Does this bill apply to a ten
year old child.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I appreciate this
debate because it's true that
there are complex issues that
New Mexicans no matter their age
are facing now in terms of a
child that is under the age of
thirteen and they approach a
teacher about needing
reproductive or gender
reproductive abortion care that
means that child is likely been
raped and that child has been
right in a crime has been
committed I need to be treated
as such to be very clear about
this we're looking beyond those
numbers in that scope the
changes now often times our
children are having
conversations with trusted
adults all the time.
I know that many of us are
coaches I know that many of us
participate in boys and girls
club and participate as big
brothers big sisters I know that
some of us go to the doctor all
of us should go to the doctor as
should our children go to the
doctor and their conversations
that those individuals are
having with our children already
this bill does not change those
relationships this bill does not
change what is already in the
books it simply says that if you
live anywhere in New Mexico a
public body or an agent of the
public body acting as part of
the public body cannot
discriminate against you so
while we are concerned and and
have differences about how the
values of New Mexico stand with
as the law stands now.
I believe that I am proud that
in our state our families can
get access to health care
between themselves a trusted
doctor when needed so in answer
to your question an individual
who is under the age of ten or
whatever this is again that that
you have to look at the all the
specifics of their and at times
unfortunately they're young
adults in our communities that
do not have access to an
individual that they can trust
when making very important
decisions about their long term
health and their ability to
survive.
Mr speaker gently from Santa Fe
I I agree with you this bill
does prohibit discriminating but
you keep quoting paragraph a.
Mr speaker gently from Santa Fe
I'm not debating paragraph a I I
understand the need for
paragraph a I don't think we
should be discriminating people
based on.
Race sex class sexual
orientation generating all of
that.
I'm not asking about
discrimination that's paragraph
a in paragraph the.
That's the rub is there's no
definition of a person in this
bill and so what that means is
that this bill applies to an
eight year old place to applies
to a ten year old place of
seventeen year old applies to a
seventy seven year old Mr
speaker gentle lady from Santa
Fe and the fact that we are
talking about right which I
recognize unfortunately is a
reality.
For children in New Mexico.
That in and of itself is the
reason why we need to involve
parents and now I'm wondering is
are having this debate if if a
child comes I mean the scenario
that I I explained.
That they don't want you to
disclose this conversation that
anyone.
And there was a possibility of
of rape as as you put it now now
the teacher they in a conundrum
attending contact law
enforcement is like the more we
talk about this the more red
flags I have when we we include
children in this bill.
So Mr speaker I have an
amendment that's floating around
I believe.
And I actually went for a copy
of it myself so.
Otherwise agreed to to number
thank you so Mister speaker I
move house floor amendment
number one to house bill seven
as amendment as amended the two
two numbers two two five three
five six point three and ask for
a roll call vote.
Your local.
We have
Seven House for remember one.
To house bill seven as amended
it is being passed out.
And we will check to make sure
it's on the website.
To make the read the number
again please we have to Mr
speaker point two two five three
five six point three thank you
very much that's the one I have.
Many believe it's been passed
out and they're pretty close
finishes when you explain the
amendment to thank you Mr
speaker so Mr speaker based on
the the debate here this evening
again this what this bill does
is IT dept defines the person
that applies it's eighteen years
or older apartments rate of
minor and again the ideas we
need to reinforce parental
rights within this context and
make sure that those rights are
being severed that that we as
parents are involved in our
children's medical decisions
and we need to avoid this
scenario where as I described it
the ten year old girl I think
based on the text of the
statute.
Could come to a teacher and and
and have the dialogue that
explains so it's designed to to
keep that St are from happening
thank you Mr speaker.
Can ladies is a friendly
amendment thank you Mr speaker
may explain a know it is not me
explain one certainly thank you
Mr speaker as I say that as I
mention our first discussion of
this fictional ten year old girl
that a teacher or a trusted
adult would be expected to
report any crime or to talk to
their parents as they're
expected to at this point
that already is covered in this
bill I would also would.
Be very concerned about ever
defining a person above a
certain age I think it's
important we knowledge that
people children are also people
as well and that's what thank
you.
Read amendment is not friendly
is there debate on the
amendment.
Okay.
Just seeing no debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval
Representative K..
Thank you Mr speaker on does the
general.
Sorry it's just started does the
gentle person the yield please
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman gentlelady from
Bernalillo and Sandoval.
Thank you very much yes
This is a gentle person.
Will you define what a so the
sole person is not a person
until they're eighteen years
old.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval we we
actually define the word person
throughout statutes and so
sometimes it's a human being
sometimes it's an LLC
corporation partnership so it's
not uncommon to find a person
and the intent here is to make
it clear that the person that is
being protected here is someone
over the age of eighteen.
Thank you Mr speaker a gentle
person it is the gentle person
mentioned that he was a parent
Since we're talking about
hypothetical ten year old girls
would be gentle person as a
parent allow.
A ten year old girl to make
decisions on where they will be
going for the day.
Mr speaker point of order I'm
not that we're not supposed to
talk about my personal life
sorry singer amendment please
and thank you and then stick to
the to the the letter of the
word of the amendment please.
I
thank you Mr speaker and please
forgive me as a as a freshman
I'm just very concerned about
this
As a as a parent.
How I protect my children.
is I give them the ability to
decide.
What they're able to do with
their bodies they're talking to
because I wanted to be able to
have the confidence to say no I
want them to feel comfortable
enough to come to me.
I want them to know that there.
They would be safe.
So this this ammendment very
much terrifies me that.
An individual under eighteen.
We do not have the authority
over their own bodies to make
decisions are have called
conversations with their health
care provider.
Mr speaker.
The body is the intent of this
this ammendment is that
individuals under the age of
eighteen are not allowed to have
private conversations with their
health care provider.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval is actually
in your in your intro prior to
your question I think you kind
of hit the nail on the head.
You said as a parent I've
instructed my kids.
Operative word I've been
involved in their medical
process that there for you to
talk to people and do other
things you made a parental
decision and I support that not
gonna tell you how you should or
shouldn't parent my point is if
you read the text of the bill.
Despite what's been said here
this this evening if you read
the text of the bill.
A ten year old can have those
conversations and mom and dad
have no idea that they're going
on.
Thank you Mr speaker so.
Mr speaker of the body so you're
saying the The New Mexico's
public health policies.
They've always been focused on
improving and expanding that
it's.
Of.
The confidentiality and
relationship between the health
care provider and the person
correct.
Mr gentle lady I I'm not sure
that applies to this amendment
but again I'm not aware of.
A statute that would cut a
parent out of his for children's
medical discussions with the
position.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
present well this ammendment
conflicts with existing laws or
statutes pertaining to minors.
Mr speaker gentle lady actually
no because it excludes miners.
Amendment excludes minor Mr
speaker Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and Sandoval it
defines a person is age eighteen
or older and or an emancipated
minor.
Mr speaker gentle the current
bill reflects a medical
standards of care.
It doesn't change the existing
minors consent laws for either
gender affirming care or
reproductive care.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and Sandoval again it
exempts miners from this bill so
there's nothing in this bill
that could affect existing law
as it reflects miners.
Mr speaker the.
Zoom and so you're seeing the
amendment excludes minors from
this bill.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo Sandoval it defines a
person as an individual eighteen
years of age or older or
emancipated minor.
So Mister speaker gentle person
this is my understanding that
this ammendment.
The.
The content of this bill is to
protect minors is it not in your
amendment is now excluding the
very production of this bill is
that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval no actually
this bill doesn't
the ten ten as I heard described
as not for minors this applies
to anyone and that's part of the
problem is that we have now
swooped in ten year olds
whenever I think we should be
focusing on eighteen older our
lease emancipated minors and
that should be the focus of the
protection because otherwise
where mom and dad in this
picture.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and and those so you're saying
that the.
We only protect me only have
built it protects adults
the do do not have other bills
to protect minors from a from
perpetrators or being able for
them to come forward on
information of that
They make it dangerous for them.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval actually
that's that's the point would
you highlight that this is
intended to protect minors
that's what this amendment does
is making sure that our miners
are in fact safe that mom and
dad are involved in their
medical decisions.
Mr speaker of the body so it is
so.
Of the.
What would a minor do if the.
If this is.
If they do not feel safe with
their parent.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and Sandoval we have
a whole civil system that is
dedicated that very thing.
Mr speaker of the body I.
In very.
I'm very confused about this
amendment the bill as stated is
protecting all the citizens of
New Mexico but I would say that
the most vulnerable in this bill
are minors and the amendment is
excluding the most vulnerable of
of what is protecting.
Thank you.
Is there for the debate on house
floor amendment number one to
delete from thousand percent
were to us thank you Mr speaker
does the gentleman from San Juan
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from house thank
you Mr speaker the thank you
gentlemen
Mr speaker and gentleman how
many bills.
Have come before you.
With the Board person defined.
In them Mr Joyce and Giles I've
no idea.
Mr speaker gentleman
guesstimate.
Mr generated from house I have
no idea.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
Would your amendment prevent.
A young person a minor.
Some of those under eighteen
from accessing
mental health care counseling.
Mr speaker gentle lady from tell
snow would not it would just
make sure that their parents are
involved in that decision.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
What happens if that minor.
Is seeking counseling for mental
health care.
That's related to.
A problem with their parents.
Mr speaker gentle lady from tile
so I'm I'm confused are you
talking about of.
And it typically accounts as a
private council which I don't
understand what's that I
understand this bill doesn't
sweep the member you talking
about a public agency counselor.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
know I'm I'm thinking
I think you really about.
What's happening here century
with this amendment is is that
we are creating you know to
classes of young people those
that have access to the support
to have support from their
families and and those that
don't and need to seek support
from somebody who may work in a
public body like a teacher.
so that's what I I think I'd I'd
like to understand where you
were you're thinking is Mr
speaker and and gentlemen you
know if.
The minor has a dangerous home
situation
and they are seeking support
from.
Let's say a teacher.
Concern is growing for child sex
I'm glad
giving up to to clarify those
perhaps I haven't been as clear
as I should be so when when you
define a person or this bill as
someone age eighteen or older or
emancipated minor it doesn't
therefore say because what we're
saying is the contrapositive
which isn't true it doesn't
therefore say they are
prohibited from seeking health
care whether that's mental
health treatment anything you
want to list.
All it does is when we talk
about paragraph be in the
underlying bill it means now if
a ten year old comes to me as as
his teacher and says look I I
want to take these
pharmaceuticals because I don't
want to go through puberty and
as a teacher I think that's a
bad idea potentially then I can
have a conversation with mom and
dad it doesn't exempting minors
from this bill has nothing to do
with minors being able to go and
seek treatment it just means
that mom and dad are not going
to cut out of that process.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
thank you for that as I read it
this current bill.
Reflects
Local standards of care doesn't
change
existing minor consent laws for
reproductive health care or
gender from care.
I'm almost asking question Mr
speaker and gentleman I'm I'm
I'm I'm getting there
I I'm concerned.
Really that
We're for we're forcing
interaction Mr speaker gentleman
you know between of minor and
their parent.
When they really want to have a
conversation with someone who
isn't their parent you know
that's that's the thing that
that's that that's a sticking
point for me do you.
Do you think Mr speaker and
gentleman that there are any
potential harmful outcomes from.
From the from this kind of
interaction Mr speaker delivered
thousands for questions so thank
to be clear that in this
ammendment there's nothing the
bill that requires the teacher
run to mom and dad right so
there's nothing in it that would
require that certainly the
amendment doesn't my point is if
we apply this to eighteen older
when we talk about paragraph and
be what we're saying.
A.
Agents or as we re define it.
Which I think is even worse an
individual acting.
They don't have to worry about
indirectly interfering.
With these types of treatments
when I'm dealing with a ten year
old their moves that's in our
all together so ten year old can
still go to teacher pour their
heart out that absolutely can
happen it doesn't change that
this just make sure that we're
talking about these protections
we talk about.
Actions that a local public body
has to refrain from we're not
stupid and miners and and and a
meeting parents through that
process.
Mr speaker gentleman what
happens if a minor doesn't have
a mom or dad at home.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
house than this this would
affect them.
Right so either they go to the
Senate civil system and they're
in foster care
or again paragraph body if I go
to the teacher and I say I want
to pursue this with
pharmaceuticals then teacher
isn't to worry about when mom
and dad know that they're not in
the picture this just.
Puts into this bill the fact
that we're talking about adults
we don't have to worry about
outside influences trusted
individuals who maybe someone
other than mom or dad or
limiting to eighteen over.
Mr speaker gentleman thank thank
you for that
you know we've talked about how
Gen gender affirming care is a
life saving care
in my my fear is that this
amendment could potentially lead
to.
Suicide forty percent more than
forty percent of
Of cleared trans and non binary
kids have attempted suicide so I
I want to understand
If you sink Mr speaker and
gentleman that your amendment
would.
Prevent that.
Mr speaker Joe infants also
again and nothing in the
amendment actually precludes a
minor from seeking services.
Nothing in here precludes them
from seeking services this bill
is not about seeking services I
think we're arguing about the
wrong thing here this bill
prohibits discrimination and it
prohibits local.
Individuals.
From being prohibited from
indirectly interfering with
these things and so again it's
it's trying to input parents in
the decisions of their ten year
olds.
Mr speaker thank you may I think
there is a problem for you know
for
young people under eighteen who
are in a difficult home
situation I think it would
prohibit some kids from from
seeking that but I think my
biggest issue is my biggest
concern Mr speaker and and
gentleman is that I believe that
this ammendment
Would allow a local.
Public body to restrict access
to healthcare for those who are
under eighteen you know and in
this scenario
city continues to require.
Print so.
For health care and I think that
that causes some conflict
between our state local laws can
you help me understand Mr
speaker gentleman how that's not
the case Mr speaker gentlelady
from Giles now you're getting
into preemption issues
constitutional arguments.
So when we talk about excluding
miners again the emphasis is
we're not going to punish
A individual acting on behalf of
their local municipality their
school.
we're going to make sure that
parents are involved in these
type of medical decisions.
Thank you Mr chairman let me let
me put it another way
Would your amendment conflicts
with any other state laws
regarding consent.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Giles no because it it removes
or more miners entirely from
this bill.
So there are no there there Mr
speaker gentleman there are no
state laws regarding consent.
Mr speaker doing from house I
don't know and that seems to be
right on the on the amendment.
Mr speaker John would you like
to spend a moment to find.
The statues.
Mister speaker July from house I
don't know what they are but
this bill exempts miners and so
I don't know how exempting a
minor from the current bill is
going to affect other statutes
that do speak to minors.
Mr speaker gentleman I
I think I'm done here thanks.
Deleted from earlier.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Tabling a motion for house floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven as amended.
There's a roll call vote
yes.
In the amendment is tabled a
vote of no and we're back on the
amendment.
Is now open.
Votes about to close.
The call members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Cadena.
Yes the table Representative
votes yes to table.
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
to table Representative Hochman
Vigil votes yes to table.
Representative Rubio.
Yes able Representative it's yes
to table Representative Sarinana
yes to table Representative
Sarinana votes yes to table.
The vote is now closed will
forty point affirmative twenty
three negative house floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven as amended has been
tabled.
Thank you so level thank you Mr
speaker want to ask my last
question around
page three.
The new paragraph he that was
inserted and and house Judiciary
Committee.
Can I didn't explanation for
what the one who is intended to
accomplish.
So Mister speaker a gentleman so
you were saying page three the
amendment will apologize the one
is that correct.
Mr speaker generally from Santa
Fe that's correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen that section ensures
that
that that individual is not
expected go beyond their current
Google work in that they do not
have to provide affirmative can.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe is this intended to
create some conscience
objections for health care
providers.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen that ensures that they
are not required to provide care
that.
They aren't required to provide
care that they don't already
provide so if that's a morality
issue if that is that they're a
podiatrist to that is whatever
that may be if it's outside of
what their purview is there not
required for this care.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe so are you saying that
I think you sort of something
they don't believe in or
something to have a can I'm
sorry I want to put words around
what was that you said besides a
podiatrist what what was the.
The the morality piece to that
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen it just ensures that
if the they do not want to
provide this care because it
against their moral code or any
other issue they're not required
to and that's also backed up
another statutes and federally
as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Tallas.
So I I think it I I appreciate
the intent of what we're trying
to do here but my issue with the
languages and it talks about
what the health care provider
doesn't otherwise have a duty to
provide and so Mister speaker
July from tiles I would submit
that that sweeps away any kind
of conscience objection can you
show me how wrong on the.
Is Mr speaker German you're free
to me correct I'm sorry from
Santa Fe.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe my apologies I'm sorry
just look if you so you're
asking and I I just to clarify
his little can use that but
that's not the first time that's
happened New Mexico state that
you're asking how that protects
individuals morality concerns
that we're asking.
Mr speaker generated from Santa
Fe so the language that they may
use is to have that they're
protected and less they have a
duty to provide under state law
and so Mister speaker gentle
lady if the intent is to provide
a conscious objection based on
some moral code I'm submitting
to the body that this actually
doesn't accomplish that based on
how this is worded.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen you know this
amendment was crafted after a
lot of you know we hearing from
folks during the committee
process and and their concerns
and their as it says the COVID
duty under state or federal law
morality clauses already existed
the federal and the state level
and I don't want people to get
confused if an individual does
not want to provide an abortion
or that kind of care they're not
required to there's there won't
be required to should this past
with this bill passage of this
bill failed they're not required
to they're not required to
referred individual to where
they can receive an abortion
either they're not required to
that should this bill pass or
shouldn't pass this language
just ensures that's in line with
everything else we're doing.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe did you say they're not
required to refer.
Sorry and Mr speaker gentleman
no they're they're not required
when it comes to specifically
abortion care they're not
required to affirmatively refer
someone to where they could
receive potentially an abortion
they are required to of new Mr
speaker and gentleman they are
required to let the patient know
that they don't provide those
kinds of services.
Mr speaker gentle lady from.
Santa Fe so can you point to
statute that that makes that
point clear thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman there's a
lot of case law on this already
that they're not required to
provide that you refer someone
to abortion care there's a lot
of case law that.
Mr speaker gentle lady so I I'm
concerned for our positions were
in state where we already have a
declining physician population
and telling them that what's in
case law.
is not very comforting I would
submit Mr speaker gentle lady I
think if the intent is to carve
out a moral
exemption then I think we should
just do that plainly.
and stand Mr speaker gentle lady
I submit when you look at the
statutory framework there is the
ability to not find the abortion
itself but there's nothing that
says that I have I have I have
the right to discontinue ongoing
medical services or make a
referral and so Mister speaker I
think that we should make that
abundantly clear that we yes we
care about the folks covered by
this bill but we also care about
our doctors who have a very real
conscious objections so Mister
speaker I move as I move house
floor amendment number one to
house bill seven as amended the
two two numbers two two five
three five seven point two and
ask for a roll call vote.
Your local gentleman I think we
should search for entities is
two to five numbers.
I've noticed lately they've
changed.
All right we've got for the
number one and it is being
passed out.
It is on the website.
The tension I numbers two two
five three five seven point two
and it is making his way down
the chamber.
And there is a role.
To the gentleman has moved house
for amendment number one to
house bill seven as amended.
Gentleman to explain the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
so this amendment six to make
abundantly clear that we're
trying to do exactly what the
sponsor of stated was the intent
and Mr speaker let me also
explain what this amendment does
to the body understands if you
read the actual amended bill
itself the only exceptions on
the basis of conscience even if
we agree with with the assertion
that this is already protected
by statute it's only to medical
and health care providers.
There's no conscious objection
for people that work for a local
municipality for a local teacher
none of those the the amendment
itself that was offered and
accepted judiciary's solely
limited to medical providers so
anybody else that has a
conscientious objector I'm sorry
Mrs teacher we don't really care
this is this is all about the
medical professions and so what
this amendment do is it provides
the same conscience objection to
both medical providers and
teachers in the classroom.
The ladies is a friendly
amendment no Mr speaker makes me
want please thank you Mr speaker
I think it's really important
explain why this is not a
friendly amendment especially
not only to the people in this
body but anyone who maybe tuning
in antennae doctors maybe tuning
in as we've seen in states with
a restricted access to abortion
care and reproductive health
care positions are fleeing those
states because they want to be
able to practice medicine and
understand medicine and serve
their to their people in
addition it also prevents
individuals to be able to give
the health care that they need I
will say and again because the
concern is statutes exist
there's the enter the church
amendments forty two USC three
hundred a dash seven coats snow
amendment public health service
act twenty ten public law eleven
dash the one seventeen one
twenty three stat thirty thirty
four there's a patient
protection and affordable Care
Act they can also list off there
as well title seven of the Civil
Rights Act and EMTALA as well I
would be happy to read those but
I know as a body we don't like
to read it statutes on the floor
so I will just leave it this is
an unfriendly amendment because
it is already protected the
provider should know they're
protected in the state of New
Mexico.
In Philly amendment is there
debate on the amendment.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Representative on
in our new.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from San Juan.
That gentleman from San Juan
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Representative so as was just
outlined it looks like
consciences objectors are
already protected under state
and federal law for all click
through all medical major
associations
And regulations and guidelines
is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo even
if we assume that that's true
which I I would dispute but
let's assume that that was true
that was the only defense that
was given for that the
underlying amendment once on
friendly look at the amendment
those adoption Judiciary applies
only to health care
professionals if you're a
teacher in the classroom and you
have a conscious objection sorry
you're out this amendment would
bring them in and out and put
them on equal par with medical
providers that have the same
conscious objection.
Thank you for that answer Mr
speaker Representative but when
the federal protection law trump
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo the the statutes that
were cited those deals
specifically with medical
providers the case law that was
cited specifically in the
medical context this idea of
having a conscious objection is
new when we talk about outside
of medical providers because
we've never impose these kinds
of things in the classroom.
Thank you for that answer
Representative Mr speaker does
every health care regulation
specifically outline conscience
objector exceptions.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo so if we're going to
impose a duty on someone to act
as we don't an online bill again
section three paragraph be on
things that that I think are I
think we all agree people fall
on both sides and they feel very
passionately about these things
and so when you get into that
realm can you deal with the the
medicine or the classroom were
talking about things that people
cared deeply about these are
these are ingrained beliefs and
they feel like you're forcing
them to do something that
violates their conscience that's
why in my opinion we may need to
make it abundantly clear that
yeah you can you can opt out if
you have a legitimate conviction
if there's a true conscious
objection and of course sponsor
we're doing that with medical
professionals I don't understand
we aren't willing to do with the
teachers in the classroom.
Again thank you Mr speaker
Representative for the answer I
certainly understand your view
point of why you're bringing
this ammendment but my reading
of the bill and my understanding
of the federal law.
Consciences objectors are
already protected
and this bill does not change
that protection and also if
we're not going to make
exemptions for consciences
objector for every medical
health care procedure I don't
know why we're doing it
specifically to this one so I
don't really understand the
purpose of the amendment in this
context thank you very much.
To further debate on the
amendment the deleted from the
line of representative Gallegos
thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from San Juan a yield
Mister speaker I just I yield to
the gentle lady from Dona Ana.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman so in listening to
the debate I I I understand some
of the the concerns.
As a child advocate
unfortunately I see so many
times children when we talk
about young children who are in
situations where they can't talk
to parents and where they're in
a position that they feel like
they have to talk to someone
outside of the fence family you
would you agree with that
gentleman from San Juan.
Mr speaker generated from Dona
Ana so I think that by
legislative conscious objection
it wouldn't prevent the
conversation I think what the
conscious objection is targeted
doing as we get into the shall
part of that you.
Cannot directly interfere it's
just making sure that we take
care of again likes our teachers
are are even though the social
workers that you have that they
don't have to go further and
participate in active accounts
objection to.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman from San Juan
where I have the utmost respect
for you and for the for the the
amendment that you're trying to
put through but I also want to
make sure that we talk about the
children that may be subjected
to feeling like they may hurt
themselves for even follow
through and kill themselves and
so a gentleman from San Juan I I
would just want us to make sure
that we are are talking at that
level Mr speaker generate from
Dona Ana so based on the started
describing I don't see anything
that would raise a conscious
objection so I think that would
be perfectly safe within this
amendment I think it's when we
we now impose a duty that forces
the the the social worker the
teacher in the classroom to go
beyond what their normal duty
would be and for some of the
violate their consciences trying
to protect that.
Well I guess in New Mr speaker
and and gentleman from San Juan
for me my faith is pro life and
so I want to make sure that in
the sense that we don't want
young people to commit suicide
and so that is where I'm coming
from when debating this motion.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Dona Ana appreciate that inside
I don't think there's anybody in
the in the body that would one
of the single person to to
commit suicide again this isn't
saying that people can't see
treatment they can't see
counseling the chance to help.
But it's recognizing that while
our medical professionals for
like there comes a point for
their conscience becomes an
issue.
And as far as I'm concerned
people in the classroom or are
the same type of human beings
and so for gonna offer
protection to one class.
While imposing obligations it
seems right to me that we would
find the same conscience
objections to that teacher in
the classroom.
Thank you Jim thank you Mr
speaker and and gentleman from
San Juan
once again I I understand your
view point I just think that a
medical professional has a
different relationship than a
teacher in the classroom many
times a teacher in the classroom
is there are many other students
and so they are not able to have
that one on one to be able to
have that that.
Carrying or the relationship
that would identify medical
help.
Mr speaker generated from Dona
Ana the.
Arguably two of the three most
important people in my life for
teachers.
And I I to agree with that but
that also puts a Mr speaker and
and gentleman it puts that
person who maybe does not have
full information of that child's
well being and health
to to have to make decisions or
give advice that maybe they
would not have all that
information.
Mr speaker doing from Dona Ana I
I'd actually agree with you so I
would I would submit is you
allow them to gather more
information if it's an issue
they're concerned about you
allowing the loop in the parents
in the conversation you don't
prohibit that from happening
but the way this bill as written
I think that's been directly
interfering in some of these
cases and you have a teacher who
is generally concerned has a
real concept junction were
saying I'm sorry you still have
to abide by the statute.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I guess this is where
we will have to have different
viewpoints I do I respect your
your
what you're fighting for I just
seem to have a very different of
opinion so thank you.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment the deleted from
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett thank you Mr speaker
will the gentleman from San Juan
yield to me Mr speaker I yield
the gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you you know Mr speaker
and gentleman I was a teacher
for twenty eight years primarily
with ten to eighteen year olds
do you know how many times Mr
speaker I had a child directly
say to me four of friends say to
me that they were considering
suicide.
Mr speaker deliver relief I do
not know.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan probably ten to twelve
times and I was required to
immediately not leave the child
alone and to contact a counselor
principal to come and get the
child.
Mr speaker then usually the
parents were contacted and I
bring that up because if the
child came to me with the
serious of a situation
frankly as a teacher I could not
refuse to listen but what I
would do generally speaking is
contact one of our professional
counselors.
in my school in my district to
take that child and and Mr
speaker.
And gentlemen I I think the
governor of Utah when he vetoed.
Bill
Not permitting transgender
students to do athletes he says
something I've never forgotten
he said when in doubt I try to
err on the side of kindness
mercy and compassion and I think
any teacher regardless of their
personal beliefs.
Would not take the moment to
listen to the child and then Mr
speaker.
And gentleman from San Juan
refer them to a person or a quit
and and our schools have
processes and procedures
actually including when there is
a parent to contact the parent
so I just Mr speaker and
gentleman I I feel like there's
not a need for this ammendment
it's already in place in our
public bodies of education thank
you.
For the debate on the amendment.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
The motion to table house floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven as amended a vote of
yes the amendment will be tabled
a vote of no and we're back on
the amendment.
Is now open.
What's about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Cadena.
AS to table Representative
animals yes to table
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
table Representative Hochman
Vigil votes yes to table
Representative Rubio yes
Representative that's yes
representative Sarinana yes to
table Representative Sarinana
votes yes to table.
One forty in front of twenty
four negative house floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven as amended has been
tabled doing back to you Mr
speaker thank you I I will click
I will quit inflicting your
members with amendments now I
promise and just gonna finish
with the statement I appreciate
the spirit debate I even on the
amendment so that think it's
important questions that we have
as a body and so I appreciate
the discussion I will say to New
Mexico that I I think we should
be concerned as a state once we
enact this bill is law sadly I
think we're on necessarily
pitting parents against their
children when it comes to very
important vital medical
decisions and I'm concerned
about swooping in people other
than medical providers for start
getting into the classroom were
served in the local government
arena our local libraries the
whole context of troubles me and
Mister speaker I I just submit
that this is not a good
direction New Mexico's heading
thank you.
The gentleman before we continue
to debate there is dinner set up
outside of the house lounge
thank you to the minority
majority leadership offices as
well as speakers office for
setting that up it is of course
open to all members and of
course as well to our staff.
Dinner outside the chambers of
read by the lounge.
Next we have the gentleman from
nine percent but a group.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Lee.
Mr speaker and gentle lady not
an attorney.
Didn't play one on TV and didn't
stay at a Holiday Inn last night
so bear with me okay.
Mr speaker and gentle lady my
first point to the the like to
bring up his in section three
B..
And within that.
The public body or agent and
actually I should read the
amended bill.
The language does change a
little bit of public body.
An entity or individual acting
on behalf of our within the
scope of the authority of a
public body shall not directly
or indirectly deny restrict or
interfere with a person's
ability to access for provide
reproductive health care or
gender of funding health care.
Within the medical standard of
care.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Most of you know I'm an engineer
so I'm approach system from an
engineering standpoint.
I want to give you an example of
them the Russian clinic.
For business I for a business
license within the city.
The city sends out the fire
marshal.
Billion official.
To conduct inspections related
to the international fire code
in the IBC of the building
codes.
Building is the building of the
business.
Two thousand fire inspection or
maybe is building inspection as
red tag.
Under this bill the fire marshal
and the building official would
be sued for in directly
interfering with a person's
right to reproductive care.
Mr speaker and gentle lady Ellis
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
section three seventeen six.
Each municipality is allowed to
adopt.
By ordinance any of those
building codes.
Building code fire prevention
code health codes.
So in this Mr speaker and gentle
lady would like for you to
explain to me inside this bill.
Where.
Not in the initial part of
construction but an annual
inspection and the fire chief
says is out of compliance and
somebody is not able to get the
care that they're supposed to
from that facility how this
bill.
Specifically addresses that.
Thank keeps the lawsuit from
happening against the
municipality or the fire chief
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman firmly I think that's
a that's a very important part
of clarity for any county if
folks are listening in for
anybody else if there is a cold
that is in the books that is
they are already to ensure the
safety or to do whatever to for
good policy in the community
that applies to everyone equally
that is not underneath this bill
that does that would not be
considered discrimination
against this bill right now for
example if that same County said
well you have less time to fix
the fire code problems or this
fire code is only applicable to
these types of health care then
in those situations that would
be directly or indirectly
discriminating against that type
of care however if it's just the
broad you know look at that
safety code or Vigil code or
school policy or however that is
that would that would not apply
to this bill because that that
group for that person is not
being it discriminated against.
The lady I I appreciate your
answer
The multitude of attorneys that
deal with us on a daily basis
disagree with.
The position on this Mr speaker
and gentle lady before I go any
further I'm not sure that I
remember hearing you introduce
your experts madam introduces
the experts at the beginning of
the debate thank you Mr speaker.
so with respect to that you know
there's pieces of this
legislation there's a lot of
pieces of this legislation the
leaves it open to.
Future case law and I would
assume Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's the reason section
six exists because Mr speaker
and gentle lady I believe that
the bill drafters believe very
strongly that there's pieces of
this legislation that.
Our constitutionally unsound
then we'll go to court and they
want to keep the rest of the the
legislation good.
With that Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I want to move to the next
please section three D..
Mr speaker and gentle lady
gentrified.
Cedar.
You Mr speaker and gentle lady
that the department of health
would be sued thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen why
this bill is very important that
it refers a lot to standards of
care on that are insured that
