I share federal.
Madam chair.
Here the level.
Thank you okay so we don't.
We have a lot of bills on our
agenda today I like to get
through all of bills as much as
possible.
And don't have any.
Bill Kalina or or housekeeping.
So we will go ahead and do our
usual public comment one minute
and
Will ask please don't be
repetitive and we're.
As possible.
Read so we'll begin with Senate
bill six three.
Chair we did have public comment
discuss the bill and
Representative who
was
sick and.
Had.
After extensive.
Efforts to negotiate
with the foundation for open
government which did not come to
an agreement Representative had
a.
Yeah revenues and all done it
was a great idea because it
expressed concern there might be
Enough public knowledge of the
diversity of the applicants so
we have an amendment that
Sure into several days ago but
it is making it faster than that
and
that if you tell me when you're
ready for the two of them.
The.
Okay go ahead and give us the.
It's two two six zero four one
point one okay.
And noted Chargers for.
What this provision allows for
is that the
State agency or institution
shows DELLOSO and maintain
process for collecting
demographic data from applicants
and candidates reported
appointed executive positions on
the following Terry in on the
space so the applicants will be
asked if they agreed to provide
the.
Demographic data that's listed
here and it's maintained as
confidential and not attributed
to individuals at the time that
the finalists the three
finalists are announced in those
state would be available as long
as the applicants who provided
the data
resurgence.
So we.
we are really address some of
the concerns and left at.
Okay thank you that the
amendment for discussion all.
Thank you and
we have a motion to the and then
the group discussions secondly
what position Representative
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Senator so this
amendment.
I'm sorry Christopher this is
totally voluntary of the candle
for the position because madam
chair representative I've
someone always said such things
as sexual orientation gender
things like that to be
Misuse of public square I would
want that person targeted
prisons so that is voluntary.
It would be not attributed to
individuals but people could see
afterwards we have so many women
we just.
Senate OKS.
Many this many native Africans.
It's.
Thank you madam chair and.
So then we would know who the
applicant's name.
You would.
The three five.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative but this data
when we release it which we have
all the tools that okay if if
the average individual
applicants chair the legislative
okay.
The aggregated.
Okay.
Just clarifying.
Okay thank you mentioned okay
for Dr.
Have a motion of work I have a
motion to adopt in the second no
opposition you have ended.
Representative right Madam chair
of the through pass on Senate
bill one eighty eight is the
system.
Senator.
We.
This is a good start.
So before I.
Move that.
It'll yes thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and I
guess my I did have one question
about thank you Representative
blocking ask the question I'm
interested in so when.
The.
Final three are announced that
the final three candidates will
have their name would have it
will be included will any other
information that there needs to
include the three.
So
you're going to know everything
about those three because that's
the way it is with all of the
snap.
Of the let's.
Thank you to the all the
information.
For all the information they
provided to the doctor.
It will be available for for the
public okay and
Thank you.
And the when will the aggregated
information.
Madam chair of the time that the
three finalists are now.
Okay so this.
It's it's the last.
I said yes but it.
When they're and now okay.
Thank you madam chair
representative one more time
Senator lock and then
representative right thank you
madam chair and for this one
thought you madam chair.
Like what if there were only two
candidates for instance madam
chair and representative and
there was they they both gave
the information.
Madam chair Senator
Representative.
I think it might be easy for
someone to correlate.
From just to applicant's what
gender identity sexual
orientation things and I I think
that could potentially open up
of targeting mechanism chair any
thoughts on.
In terms of your.
Thanks
former general counsel.
Shares of.
Representative I would advise
you to be common sense goes a
long way and I would advise that
you not to give information
that.
It's not necessary it's
voluntary so really we're only
two and someone felt there was
something in the question they
didn't want to have just moved
it up.
I think it's a good question
thank you madam chair and
representative so is there the
ability for the the locality to
not disclose if it.
Or maybe three because chair
representative I think that
could.
A little more flexibility to not
have to target those specific
individuals.
Madam chair representative I I'd
be.
I think some practice.
It is a good thing worked out of
it I don't think any would would
complain there is only two
people at its this.
Know who they are your reserves
are there there then.
So.
I don't think it's and it makes
it moved the whole business of
releasing aggregate data
services.
The following day Davis when
there's a larger pool of well
over fifty or whatever it is yes
you want to go the public needs
to know generally within the
out.
The specifics and madam chair
our list.
I wanted to call my attention to
the last clause in the lessons
provided that the data shall be
activated and shall not contain.
So if there's a situation where
it would be personally
identifiable it says it
prohibits.
Okay.
That.
Yes Representative Zamora.
Madam chair representative of
the extra business posted on
time to the extremely rare that
a hand cation with those willing
to application of capital the.
The.
I'm.
You to the applicants for of
COVID position.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you.
For the presenters Senator and
from Representative
I'm a little confused on on on
the amendment on the.
And
By earlier for.
But.
I guess I get enough attention
but that's okay
So so starts with the voluntary
and then it goes to show.
After the.
On the fifth one down is it.
Chair so some wondered how those
two if it's voluntary and you
decide not to and then I shall
after that.
Thank.
Try to answer to these two
Members on Sir.
Our expert.
The.
The shop is that the entity has
to establish a process.
And process individual
applicants need to.
They have to establish a
process.
The stars madam chair and and
Representative start to the
voluntary so if you don't want
to fill out any of the day after
Representative.
Madam chair representative is
voluntary but then if you agree
to provide information this is.
This is
not.
This is a major show live on
tour to I will Representative
Sappey that is the data
collected.
Shows the things that they the
individual out of the doesn't
need to answer any of it for
state the the and movements of
selected data plans.
That's just to.
Madam chair representative I
would only add to this the list
here in the shallows what the of
the entity shall ask for.
Is basically these this is the
list of things that individual.
I agree with Representative
James.
To answer one of those things
but just the just to make a list
of what it what the data.
Formal comprise what they're
interested in but that if any
individual also want to respond
within those sectors and so
that's the budget supported by
the voluntary in fact.
And if they decline they're not
going to be very can long and
anyway.
Okay.
Madam chair representative with
the federal government does this
same procedure okay and madam
chair so those are procurement
code.
Okay the public questions.
Yes very briefly we had talked
an appreciated chair and.
Senator Representative talked
about perhaps making a that
number of the applicant needs no
not the entire group but as just
that not get disgusted on madam
chair that's what what
Representative Dan offer to
discuss that with her
negotiations that there was.
Great.
I appreciate Representative
could as background is a
researcher offering these pieces
I was hoping to see a greater
number of them.
At.
It's not in the entire one I can
see where that would be not
productive kind of projected it
was if they were at full of
twenty or more candidates you I
was we were thinking the thought
was to have.
At perhaps the defy the top ten
and gathering this information
would be really helpful so that
was
Appreciate it thank you thank
you committee we have a motion
for the past Representative
three the staff on the Senate
bill fifty.
I have a second by
Representative on the morning.
Presacral.
Representative one in order yes.
Representative lost no ma'am
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman health.
If Representative little new in
order to explain these
Representative three yes.
Representative Zamora no.
If I share your off.
Madam chair Johnson.
No.
Forty four.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair very
briefly thousands information
Is transparency is very
important to me and I think that
the when we're working with to
help bring people on at this
level because it's not every
level and there would I would
like to see and I think the
public deserves to see the
additional numbers of
individuals that are fine I do
appreciate what is working to do
I think that the contribution
from the co sponsor content that
was very helpful and I think you
should be
I think that that is a process
that should followed any it just
makes for good information and
data we're trying to ensure that
equity and diversity is part of
the process thank you very much
madam chair thank you.
Representative next we have
Senate bill three three five.
Yes
yes yes.
Which.
Okay Senator good morning this
Germany
the.
The Senate three three five.
Open the theater is first of
eight expert witnesses there are
questions about the local
election act just to the little
lane is the the term secretary
of state's office.
So let me pass the local
election act that couple of
years ago one of the one of the
questions that was to be
consolidated to the.
Into the election.
It reduces over.
Iteration of exhalations is
going on.
Well as the mid Rio Grande
concert will also services.
And the memory of reading
Conservancy district is in my is
is a representative portion of
that district and and so the
they've been trying to work with
the secretary of state's office
to figure out a way in which
they can be there like to be
incorporated into the into the
general elections will.
the the dilemma is is is this.
The mid Rio Grande Conservancy
district has a different.
electorate then the general
election you have to be a
landowners you have to live in
the Conservancy district and and
everybody.
Their district doesn't
necessarily coincide with
precinct lines in county lines
it has to do with the this
organization being very
different also there are
elections are
Health according to the
districts that don't necessarily
coincide with.
The state house districts are
Senate districts are county
commissioners you each county
has one the representative on
the board the tribe said
Representative on the for their
at large members it's a very
different structure and try as
they might over the last several
years the secretary of state's
office working with them very
closely they couldn't they have
not yet recorded that way I
would say it can't be done that
they have not yet been able to
figure out a way which their
elections this year can be
incorporated into the into the
the general election election so
the the request here in this
bill is for the left not a not a
cancellation of the delay
they're continuing to work on it
and I think it's pretty clear to
me at least that what's going to
have to be involved is a change
in the in the way the mid Rio
Grande Conservancy district
selects it's who they allow to
go to and and and and and who
who who they represent and
they're working on it I think of
if we give them this Google here
the late it'll go through.
Thank you Mr anything additional
like.
Madam chair representative is
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I just hit
the nail on the head I think you
identify the issues very clearly
I know you're doing this very
long but this is a top priority
for our office the secretary of
state's office secretary
apologize not being here in
person she has a conflict as are
other priority bill is intended
to enter the house Judiciary
right now we work closely our
office for closing the
Conservancy district to come up
with this proposal it is only a
delay of one year of one
election and also
individualization six are
committed
Commitment to ensure that twenty
twenty five they were brought
into the regular local election
all Conservancy districts we
also have the support of of
course the bill Rio Grande
concerns the district and also
the.
The early Conservancy district
in quay county as well so also
those requirements okay thank
you senator thank you let's go
to the audience do we have
comments in support of the bill
please.
Good morning jobs observation
this for the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district for
purposes of time Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino said it very well Mr
Lang said very well this is a
priority then we would ask you
passes fill out so we can one
get the extension to continue
this work to find resolution and
and put this behind us and thank
you for as far.
Madam chairman of the committee
Larry around with this for those
in the Senator laid out the
issues very well effects of the
members of the Indian one major.
The right representation bility
to women in on these elections
we appreciate legislation thank
you madam chair thank you any
further comments in the audience
webcast do we have any comments
in support of the bill in
opposition.
The audience seeing then
Representative.
Thank you madam chair I move the
path thank you we have a motion
for act passed the second.
seeing no opposition please show
all their voting in the
affirmative Sen.
Then you have to pass thank you
very much.
Members.
Okay Senator souls.
Sentences Senator so let's do
one eighty eight first okay.
Over time in.
Eight one one one.
One of this bill
The the governor's.
Order on the committee says
regulations and costs this bill
would ritually started with all
licenses is for additional
licenses that is to the FIR got
that wrong.
For initial licenses and the
license keys for a period of
three years as we work and the
secretary to the over regulation
licensing he to me and said this
is wonderful but we need to make
a couple changes and took off
some of the boards syncing of
departments that we have in
excess we don't have a short as
many of you know New Mexico is
that of the century employment
right now and we've got a number
professions where we don't have
enough.
And so this would be a small
tool to get them to license in
New Mexico when they finish
school and were moved to New
Mexico with those licenses and
so it suspends the license fee
and it was supposed to be for
three years.
On page two of the original bill
in the finance committee.
In the end it was in this
Representative but they changed
it from twenty twenty six on
line the the page two twenty
twenty six that the twenty
twenty four which would be for
one year this would be a three
year plan to see whether this
works or not it should be only
for one year and so I would
recommend making that change to
change that date back to twenty
twenty six so three years to
gather some data see if this
helps improve the number of
professionals in the state by
removing those licensing fees of
the appropriation was dropped
off of it because the the
secretary to the indicated we
can do this entirely within our
budget and with that I'd stand
for questions.
Okay committee members to have a
Representative Zamora
the officer.
I think we should.
In
what I was madam chair and
senator are you asking for
amendment I am asking test run
amended on page two line into
the original bill shifted a
little bit but just change that
June thirty date twenty twenty
four back to twenty twenty six
it was amended to twenty four it
needs to be state is six.
Doing about.
Two two numbers because page two
lines.
Starting at line eight might the
dates I have say July first
twenty twenty three to end June
thirtieth twenty.
The amendment that was put on in
finance.
Start with other things change
that date to twenty twenty four
it should stay twenty twenty
six.
So we need so that is not a one
year it's a three year the very
short sunset your sense at this
point we can extend them is that
we can go back to collecting
licenses Representative.
Hello Madam chair representative
Senator I get it like that I
totally agree I just don't want
to have to go back for her and.
When you go back from current so
that the okay yes it would be no
problem for this with smoothly
on the floor nobody to talk to
that amendment was on there I
could have gone back in pause
this on and try to fix it there
then that would take a lot more
time to unwind all of that thank
you just a minute here.
Sounds good thank you Mr
Representative Zamora so madam
chair Senator what I was going
to ask is is it.
Are we allowed to take amendment
amended right back to change it
right back in yes okay seven I
never have done that in my for
you.
Check them judging very
carefully with our leadership
also this was the easiest way to
fix that.
Thank the state thank you.
Okay I'll make a motion to move
amendment.
So we have a motion to and the
amendment and the second.
And you want to reach your
amendment Representative Zamora
on page two nine eight four six
nine nine.
Seven madam chair you can read
it on the head.
On seven also seven.
Senator so do you want to take
us through that then it page by
page an orchid.
It's very very simple of it is
not on page seven any of the
dates on page seven the whole
appropriation section of.
Okay so what we're supposed to
happen in the finance committee
that the change this to.
So it's on page two and I
believe on the wonder looking at
online.
Change the date twenty twenty
six to twenty or twenty twenty
four as well to the amended act.
Okay.
For the June of June June
thirtieth twenty twenty six is
how it should be currently the
minimum contest at a twenty
four.
So.
We have a motion to adopt that
in the.
And again we have any
opposition.
Senator so you have a.
And now let's go to the audience
do we have any.
Comments in the audience any of
closing comments on the webcast.
Seeing none committee members
for.
Representative Zamora madam
chair and senator do you have a
list of the ones that were taken
off this list to not be allowed
to.
Does the pain the.
Representative I don't have a
specific list there were blacked
out in the amendments that were
made but there are ones like I
Mr licenses we don't need more
path to artists in the state of
New Mexico that's not one where
we have a shortage of
professionals that.
You too here's a list in the in
the.
Okay.
In my there are some of the
architect board specifically
said we don't want to be part of
this we already have one of the
costs couple of other the
organization say we already
suspend the license fees.
Applicants and madam chair and
senator I'm glad to see the
nurses on their we're we're
short on nurses were short of
students for short more often
because of the COVID air there
under thing they went through so
I'm glad to see the nurses on
there and that's all my comments
and questions chair Senators
Representative loft.
The tax second solution reduce
cascade Representative block
second by Representative little.
Question here thank you.
College honest man chair and
senator for being late this
I have received communication
from folks who are concerned
that the boards won't have
enough funds to function
effectively when this and and
will slow down applications at
that point
is there any response to that I
mean how it works presumption
that funds.
To the indicated that all of the
ones that jurisdiction that she
has the ability to cover those
and the funding can be covered
for the other she was the one
that came to me and said let's
take the Appropration off we can
do all this without that this is
a good idea to get more
professionals lives thank you
thank you madam chair okay any
opposition to the motion CNN
please show chair just one more
one moment Matt
madam chair and representative
for your let you be statement
there was a bill on the house
floor.
The days ago
Representative Lujan carry it
and she did mention exactly what
you're touching base off
maybe you can have a
conversation with their on.
I will do that thank you senator
thank you.
Thank you madam chair and some
clear fights I move to pass on
Senate bill one hundred eleven
has twice.
Making clear okay so it would be
committee substitute.
And then just and then.
Okay Justin all right.
Okay so no opposition please
show all those present voting in
the affirmative.
And senator you have to pass.
Senate bill one on one as
amended twice.
Man to Senate bill one eight
eight.
It seems the frontier bills
going through of.
I don't know if you've heard the
stories but I was at it image
with a with the fifth grade
classes and trying to get them
engaged in dolphins New Mexico
and when it got to questions
about the various additional
pieces of New Mexico.
Off of that the new red or green
is our official question it was
the kids I love the smell of
Chile roasting.
And from that it's like one of
the few street let's make of
Chile roasting the official
aroma for the state of New
Mexico when it was on the Senate
floor actually had three of the
students on the floor with me
ask my expert witnesses.
They've been trying to figure
out how to get back up here is
it went through on the house but
as you all know what the session
time doesn't really follow the
normal time stop here there may
be some of them watching the
webcast Saturday they're not in
school right now so they would
be watching as individuals
normally I would have them as my
experts but this would add to
our official list of things of
the robot of Chile roasting and
I would request one of the go
the Senate screwed up.
This.
Health and public affairs
committee that once backed take
me very clearly
in their when it got read out
the amended didn't get put on
and so then as it went through
the process got to the Senate
floor I was closing the State
should that be as amended.
The New.
The amendment was if you look at
it on the last page three it was
pointed out that we roast chili
all year here and it should just
in the fall so the strike in the
hall.
And so if you all as a committee
could make that amendment so
that is we celebrate the role
here.
Representative.
The state in a pattern.
Responsibilities.
Madam chairman of the amendment
to strike in the fall on the
line and nineteen page three and
video catches.
Thank you K. have a motion to
amend the.
As stated by vice chair and
second I see no opposition you
have an amended bill.
Thank you.
In a minute madam yes.
The those in advance or kind of
chilly coming.
Madam chair this is all chilly
in New Mexico I was doing it
either.
And someone asked about will do
other states Representative
actually and said well I think
Arizona Texas and California I
purposely left out.
Okay let's go to the audience do
we have any comments in support
of the bill in opposition let's
go to the webcast this might be
on the.
Do we have a student on the
webcast.
If you have information please.
Well that is wonderful I don't
know if you all got letters from
them Bobby.
So the the uses lots of their
curriculum to learn about
government to learn about read
the lobby in the practice of
public speaking and.
Lots of this great okay
Representative lock.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator my one comment is I
can't believe some people on the
Senate side voted against the
sixth grade.
Hello that was.
This is the Senate.
Do you have that.
Demonstration.
Some.
Thank you turn the and I love
how we.
Which is proper online Colorado
does have real to Texas is as it
is with the meetings yeah.
Representative are just second
question for to pass a second.
Seeing no opposition please show
all present voting in the
affirmative.
Before I and then the two passed
I'd like to thank Senator so.
he made this.
Yeah thank you
is.
As amended.
Okay Senator is.
Good morning madam chairman
members.
Have K. inclined here the
operations manager for the
administrative office.
And this is that this bill is
that actually a simple bill
because you it truly makes a
dream come true for many years
most of you in this year we
started to appropriate funding
for new magistrates court
facility in Santa Fe that we've
needed for so long for security
and many other reasons all
filled with my little funding
was appropriated and here we are
today finally the funding is
there The appropriation is there
the plans have already been done
in all we're doing is
transferring State Land to state
to get the bills and bills for
example we are transferring the
light from the department to a
department General Services
Department to the administrative
office of courts there is no
funding involved because it's a
straight out transferred out of
state please or otherwise so
that's what it does is a joint
resolution thank you madam
chair.
The.
Go to the audience do we have
any comments in support of the
bill in in the in the support of
St S. J. R..
Twelve any opposition.
Let's go to the webcast
committee members Representative
Zamora madam chair mood just
now we have a motion for to pass
the second seeing no opposition
be sure our voting in the
affirmative thank you.
The state we did manage to for
the stability provide.
Yes.
Steinborn.
In my next there was.
More.
At
four thirty.
The morning and there's the ALR.
Orders for sure.
Four thirty that is yes.
Madam chair committee good
morning.
we have house bill four thirty
in the state we always relating
to local government restricted
local governments authority to
regulate fuel retail related to
transportation infrastructure.
That we stand for questions.
If you want to introduce or co
sponsor interacts with thank you
madam chair.
That's kind of a stranger.
Representative Harper.
Of that Mexicans.
You madam chair and members of
the committee meetings act.
I work a few hassle to run the
those I thank you first for the
opportunity to to five point
eight I I'm first I service the
executive director for the
southwest region consumer energy
alliance see a number of
countries of voice for sensible
energy and environmental
policies consumers bring
together families farmers small
businesses distributors
producers and manufacturers also
support America's environmental
sustainable.
Organization also works daily to
encourage communities across the
nation to see sensible realistic
environment Sanchez will
solutions we are a nation energy
additionally a service vice
chairman of the national
Hispanic energy council.
The HSD was founded on a basic
principle of fair and equitable
energy for all Americans but
driven by the urgent need to
reduce the twenty percent higher
energy costs to spend tens rate
converges.
And lastly this is the time
almost out of I have to
privileges servings American
focusing on
provided little community in
northeast New Mexico we that is
out of about a hundred people
about thirty miles as the crow
flies from the Colorado border
often times we feel like maybe
we're kind of the red and step
childhood New Mexico because
we're always the last to get the
word process of fighting for
these like broadband providing
for these like basic services
better healthcare better roads
things like when public
transportation stuff in the kind
of take for granted urban areas
we're still fighting to have
those fees in modern day so I I
take great pride in fighting for
rural communities and I know a
lot of the because of because of
that past activism trying to you
know be out here and find a
voice for rural New Mexico thank
you for the application okay.
Representative Garcia is one
thing thank you so madam chair I
think one of the.
There is still not trying to
prevent anybody.
Being in communities this kind
of the
preventive within the committee
resources.
Thank you go to the audience do
we have any comments in support
of house bill four thirty any
opposition.
Ma'am.
Thank you chair members of the
committee I'm listening more
presenting this year this
chapter with thirty five
thousand members and supporters
we were close for thirty this
bill the preamble counties from
prior investigations to install
the the infrastructure and.
Asians there Townsend Wells any
sort of infrastructure to
provide access to a gas station
the other words this bill would
require cities to permit new gas
stations cities without because
that require electric ready this
businesses.
Providing incentives for
charging stations is
acceptable limits on local
jurisdictions yes.
Thank you thank you Sir.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee jurors on behalf
New Mexico in the school of the
league generally opposes
creation of local control these
types of regulations of the
local level and believe that
these decisions should be left
to the local communities thank
you thank you let's go to the
webcast of we're hearing
comments in support of house
bill four thirty.
Four comments in opposition to
help support thirty.
Go ahead.
Thank you shared committee I'm
going to ask you to please
opposes house bill four thirty I
believe that the measures
walking local governments from
taking action to support
electric vehicle charging will
hurt New Mexico's tourism
industry with many states
phasing out gas vehicle sales by
two thirty five having limited
eve.
Taking available New Mexico will
our state's economy thank you.
Thank you LA.
To any federal court go ahead.
Unfortunately not here you can
see I can see you're on mute is.
All right amendment longer will
we show up and then we'll come
back to you.
We should go ahead.
Good morning madam chair
members are I am was public
power New Mexico of we are
grassroots state article Senate
and that's working to empower
our communities.
I have to students their energy
future and this is for our but.
Let's see it is and we're going
to get all levels of for for for
for for.
Thanks.
Really difficult to hear you.
Over thirty.
For the separatist.
I'm sorry Alicia is.
Yes I'm gonna remove the.
Okay.
Our.
In just.
Go back to eighteen.
Texter chat
will allow you one more chance
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me now yes wonderful thank
you my name is Tammy people corn
I'm in Albuquerque city
councilor and I stand in strong
opposition to this bill as with
all preemption bills they are
designed to keep local
jurisdictions from being able to
properly plan for the needs of
their citizens and particularly
in this bill it would keep
Albuquerque or any other city
from looking forward into the
world where we will be an
electric vehicle land and we
just strongly oppose any any
preemption on local government
role thank you thank you Terry.
Thank.
Yes hello Tax K. committee
members Representative block
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so.
We heard today people I think I
think you'll understand
assessors with still.
Madam chair this bill doesn't
pan localities from putting in
electric vehicle charging
stations madam chair my
understanding is madam chair
this spans the state from
forcing them to do that so madam
chair representative so they can
very well do that if they like
we're not saying oh you can't do
this we're just saying the state
it's not preemption because
state regulators the localities
that correct madam chair that
that's correct and madam chair
all of my actions would to speak
to that softened me clarify that
so.
With the section to section V.
as the legislation so the COVID
was that there's not a.
This that we're printing local
installers and.
Section B. explicitly states
that deception is not printed
County special district of
political subdivisions of states
from adopting implementing the
law ordinance regulation policy
or resolution is not otherwise
inconsistent with the law
relating to side so we'll just
kind of clarify that so what
we're doing is we're printing
local municipalities from being
able to go in and say we're
going to force every gas station
in town they have to put in
charging stations.
We're we're branding them from
being able to say we're not
going to allow the new gas
stations to be built.
That's what we're preempt were
printing that behavior there's a
lot of data out there that says
that by twenty fifty that we're
still see a lot of internal
combustion engines on the road
what we don't want to see in
this is the concern I'll give
you a very simple in my area we
buy gas for retail they bring
gas and and and and they may
decide to quit provided services
happens with food happen with a
number of different services
we see if it is not feasible for
them to go and deliver to that
every year you start say say
some down on grocery stores now
grocery stores on a land area
knows only one this this take
that fox is there still to stop
providing services.
So our concern is that we don't
want to see local governments
adopting these just kind of
arbitrarily right now the energy
transition act stated that we
will move to a clean energy
future that is the law of the
land what we're saying is let's
not have any local governments
decided we just want to go ahead
twenty five years ahead of
schedule what could happen next
year exactly gonna
manifestations are today what
does that do to your families
who rely on their gas this what
is here local businesses that
are small.
I'll give it another great
examples on small business
owners like you to gas station
he does that because it's a
service to the community he
could probably.
Involved in more but he stayed
there providing that service
because it's a needed service in
our community Selz capital he
sells snacks to thousand number
of things if you goes away
there's one more stop it's off
the office that you can go and
stop there's one more sources G.
R. T. that we rely on is now
going to so in Albuquerque if
they go ahead and the state gas
stations is up or down
additional part sometimes yes if
you do that is the lone Mexico
you put a gap in the middle of
the entire county can't purchase
gas and so that that's what
we're trying to free now those I
will say this and all the rest
of.
I don't see a lot of local
governments trying to do this
this is sure to ramp the one row
the local elected and I we say
local issues.
Point at this this is just
fantastic question.
Why not let's do it today and
see what happens there is no and
last somebody it's a prime is a
local elected officials there's
no way to remove them from
office until the next election
there's no way to say you know
what we want to have a recall
election because we're not we
don't feel that they're no
longer Representative says no
way to remove this so we just
this again is a consumer
protection please this isn't to
say that local governments are
that's actually really hard for
me to bring this for is a more
to say preemption my concern is
that it just takes one it just
takes one person somewhere to
try this and before you know as
COVID while I watched happening
California where they have fans
gas stations in certain.
That is going to prohibit
certain types of the population
all state though the lower
income of course is the
population will be able to
travel to losers and more is
that a home and gas they don't
know which.
So I don't know it I have a lot
of the dollars that.
Garcia thank you madam chair
to look at the our extra would
you say is there if the cities
in the state of California the
budget will be there either
Bachechi.
Yes services yes water heaters
yes schools.
You know things have to happen
in the.
What I do is prevent that from
happening here we're not trying
to prevent anybody from me
anything you know we're not safe
you got will be gas station cap
which are two stations that's
not to you
In the bill we're just trying
to.
When people say you can't do it
anymore.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative clears it up
for me because I just don't I
think this could potentially if
we let these how these do this I
think at least where I live
Madam chair representative we
let folks of gas stoves gas
heating gas all kinds of stuff I
do personally and this would
hurt the lowest income
individuals and I think madam
chair representative I think
this is similar to another bill
we passed through this committee
I think unanimously about the
refrigerant.
Can have local.
Introduce them that I think this
comes compliments that night
this is common sense my pin
thank you madam chair.
Representative.
Thank you.
Chair thank you Representative
so
My.
Questions were also along the
line of.
As I was reading through this
this is pertaining only to
fuels.
And it's my understanding.
as we thought that this of the
impact on rural communities
might be maybe great
it does not I was have pleased
to hear that it does not keep in
and the municipality or
military.
The local government from the.
This is keep anybody from
opening up a.
The station is that correct
correct okay and.
I appreciate the question about
the.
But let me ask is this only
pertaining to transportation
tools that's it.
expert witness chair of the
committee Representative little
so we have two pieces of
legislation should be looking at
today this was specific to
things like gas stations and
fuel systems in your vehicle I
want to specific to utilities
natural gas or electricity but
they that this woman specific
just to the types of energy that
you put all.
Or.
Also madam chair and
representative and gentlemen
I do support and I did support
the bills for the claim working
moving towards clean fuels
and but I do want to have want
to ensure that we have a clean
environment clean air land and
so on we all benefit from that.
Well hi.
Madam chair.
May I add to that.
Madam chair representative.
This doesn't like if somebody
was going to put in the new gas
station the new field station it
doesn't prevent them to put it
in or or for the TV stations or
anything.
What it does is prevents
somebody to go in and say you
have to but the the stations.
And and it would be
hinder them to financially be
able to afford all that in the
and it might put them out of
business okay as I recall I had
written my question I didn't
remember where.
So we are working towards a
cleaner environment clean air
and clean fuels so is there a
timeline to this because I can
see if we're working towards a
goal for all working.
Not just some but doing what we
can to get there together to
those places so.
I'm just wondering was is there
a timeline for this of a total
of eight.
Madam chair I need.
One nine nine we all want.
Water pressure if
that happens to we'll go with
preventing.
Copy that are primed by the they
have the from but as far as.
The pandemic now there might not
be negotiations no we're not
going to burn up and would
strive to prevent different
taking what is there away from
people that needed and I'm gonna
use my district for example so
my district of the Brong old
people live a lot of the waffle
you know they have the.
Being
a college and we don't want
that way because these people
out there are not have charging
stations do have wrecked cars.
Hooper's of the bill is to
prevent.
That from happening to date with
the.
Problem.
You know they survive on
opioid natural gas we don't want
that will weigh in force these
people to see how you have by
the exterior gonna have to have.
All the great and that's you
know because the reality of it.
In Albuquerque that might be
feasible but out of the new real
world it's not I think that.
Madam chair live expert some.
madam chair we please restate
your question I was wondering if
there was a time line as such to
this so I would say not for this
piece of legislation I would and
I would argue that actually by
adopting this is this and should
we can hit timelines so the
energy transition act being
adopted if you're going to have
one community come in and say
they want to adopt their own
regulations on that that could
disrupt the path that we are on
as a state hit those energy
transition after goals and
timelines so it could it could
disrupt which could create
disruption within the market
could face disruption services
there's a number of things that
could be distracted right now
the ETA is still so much that is
has to be determined as we move
forward I would say that the
state has is not exactly have
the easiest goal of the energy
transition act here I hearing
debate regularly that there are
still clean up it has to be done
to that I would fear that we
would allow local municipality
to adopt something like that
when they're ill equipped to
adopt something like that that
may be impactful to those who I
frankly can't afford and that's
again with this is trying to do
so there's no time on to this
this this and this is adopted it
would just ensure that you don't
have local governments doing
whatever they want actually ill
impacting the the progress we're
making on energy transition to
ensure we get those time frames.
So madam chair.
And.
And representatives I appreciate
that and information I just I
want to ensure the that
if we're all moving towards that
it would seem that for this is.
Towards it a claim.
And everything that comes with
it that there meetings there are
some time line six I.
Hear what you're saying that
your manager that you're years
into
working towards this I my
concern is just whether this was
in perpetuity well we're all
trying to get there that's that
sent.
but I know that others have
questions so I will thank you
for providing the responses and
listen system more thank you.
Representative on your I thank
you madam chair representative
Mr more just to maybe expand a
bit on what I think
Representative was getting out
I'm kind of seeing a lot of
something of a security
situation occurred.
Thank you of my understand bill
is.
You just don't want to the for
by the state to like have the
statements that you must build
however many TV charging
stations
And I'm hearing you say this
people move toward electric
vehicles that you will of course
expand your infrastructure but.
What I ever thought about
purchasing a car especially
because then you know certain
research electric vehicles but I
want to make sure that that
infrastructure is there to
support my electric vehicle and
I feel like people will feel
disinclined discourage towards
purchasing electric vehicles if
they don't feel that they have
the infrastructure to support
that vehicle beyond their own
charging station at home so
that's my concern and
You know here to get you
mentioned before that you are
moving towards our.
Cleaner fuels at but.
I think without some sort of
establish timeline for them.
It was if it could actually kind
of hinder.
so that a clear laid out plan
for infrastructure I'm going to.
Toward like by the state will
have.
This last gasp of the old agency
much electric even if the gas
like the number of gas stations
you have your say is exactly the
same under just like building
out the number of charging
stations.
Without a clear timeline I don't
see how people would feel.
Encouraged for state to state
from furniture medic work but
you know
Comfortable buying an electric
vehicle known that
infrastructures there so that's
my concern about this bill.
Thank you thank you want to
share with us.
I think you made some really
valid concerns and here's what I
would say
you're absolutely right actually
to the look and you do not
before I came into in my County
there are very few decision
accident another has stationed
exception.
we and that's not for lack of
trying so last two years we've
actually apply for grant funding
so that we can put in the
stations it's not what we want
the cars.
We haven't received that refund
so I would say this is the this
is the issue there we always lag
behind getting with necessary
infrastructure just make us
more.
So what we're saying right now
because I know how government.
For saying that just don't force
us all to a lecture if if people
in our area are still driving
gas power tools that's what
we're asking for that you would
still be incentivized the state
credits are still out there to
put in things like you charging
stations they're still all of
that still exist we've adopted
things like clean fuel standard
are I'm sorry we're in the
process of adopting things like
the clean fuel standard which
could very well get signed into
law this year so I would say
that the state of New Mexico as
a whole is making advancement
point that no one of the COVID
that you that was made was you
know without clear timelines I
would say that that's actually
up to the state of New Mexico
decide what those are that's not
to the local governments and
that's what the energy
transition act exactly as it is
already laid out fine lines that
we are going to have to be this
you know we're gonna have to
have this much energy produced
from clean or renewable sources
by the state so that time line
is already there what I'm
arguing is that local
governments really don't have
that ability to plan that
intensively with the state
itself has struggled with what
that actually looks like so I do
appreciate the COVID certainly
agree with you I mean we one
stations this is again not to
create that for we want to see
those come to rural America but
the way it has always happened
for the last to get broadband
will be the last to get the
stations will be the last to get
adequate healthcare and I just
want to see things taken off the
list of options for us before we
get what we need in order just
to use the.
Cars that's my concern madam
chair.
Yes COVID is.
Not only that what we need one
what the forest of the poor can
afford.
And with that will stand for
questions thank you committee
members.
Representative.
We have.
Thank you madam chair I I just
want to kind of piggyback on
that committee from
Representative Representative on
in our new
in in a slightly different
recently slightly different
angle but.
Representative madam chair
representative I mean.
Don't we believe in the power of
the economy don't we believe
that if there is there continues
to be a need for these types of
fuels and that type of
infrastructure that the economy
and then the.
Economic a counties of scale
will allow for those products to
be provided especially in those
more rural areas.
Madam chair all of March or this
response.
madam chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil I would agree that
that you're right the on the
economy would get to that I
would say though that right now
with this being for the
committee is not because of
consumer demand it's actually
because of government mandate we
see laws being adopted across
the country they're requiring
this move towards electric
vehicles that that's not again
not based on consumer demand so
at my concern is is that you can
let the market do it but if
local governments as a what we
don't like that the market is
dictated we need to have things
like gas available to
communities that we still have
the option it'll force and to go
for selected.
That's the concern here so I I
totally agree but the date the
the markets is are you getting
we need to have gas stations in
internal combustion engines and
there's a segment of the
population doesn't want to see
that and so government mandate
is actually forcing this
correction Salazar negative I
think yeah I think you reserve
policy I would love don't love
building I yes I have to be
practical about we would charge
and things like that only to
that thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
an expert Representative I'm I'm
I guess I'm just.
Not more I want to use the
example of leaded gasoline I
mean we had leaded gasoline
options at certain gas stations
even when I was a little girl
knowing that additionally leaded
gasoline needed to be phased out
because of health issues and
and you know efficiency issues
and and all the rest but again
Madam chair representative I no
one is no one is.
No one has offered any sort of
proposed legislation banning
combustion engines nobody is
threatening that all gas
stations must have TV charger or
else no one is threatening that
you know this type of it that
the these defective
infrastructure especially in
rural areas can no longer exist
and it it I I believe in the
power of the economy
and I and I think that the
economy ultimately dictates best
what the needs of you know the
people the state of New Mexico
are so on thank you very much
madam chair representative
expert I appreciate the answers
but I cannot support this.
Committee members Representative
lot thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative and Mr
more that planning questioning
just maybe thank I believe madam
chair representative.
Representatives of more twenty
twenty twenty thirty five is the
date it was posted net zero with
the ETA so madam chair
representative Mr more I believe
that also includes natural gas I
believe we would still be at
five twenty thirty five in the
ETA my getting that right then
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair let most expert
witness yes I madam chair
representative as well yes
natural gas would still be part
X. okay thank you madam chair
thank you representatives and
experts so than I guess this
wouldn't necessarily even
interfere with.
The ETA from my understanding
with natural gas being used so
another thing that I.
Was that no one is forcing this
to happen madam chair
representative Mr more but there
been like we talked about in
California there were some
localities that did mandate this
madam chair Representative is
and then in New York there was a
bill to ban it completely.
On the state level so madam
chair representative snowing in
this legislature we probably
don't want to say well let's not
copy paste from another state or
whatever but in previous
legislation madam chair
representative so we have done
just that like the twenty twenty
one regarding abortion for
instance madam chair we put
forward legislation that would
have if Rowe felt would be.
Why Representative would you
please stay on the field Madam
sorry I'm trying to get an
example here pertain to your
bill though madam chair.
I think this is a good step to
at least help the most
vulnerable people in our
societies who may not be able to
afford it yes I would love to
test with you but you know right
now it's not feasible so thank
you madam chair and
representative if you have a
comment on Madam chair
representative and I think you
raise a great point about
California and I was in a lot
happens in California is a great
example California's adopted a
lot of like twenty twenty five
there's a stand gas power mowers
and state California now if you
know anything about who is
involved in landscaping and
things like that your biggest
portion of the population is
small landscaping California
your largest segment of
entrepreneurs in this in the
Hispanic community you were
talking about so that man's
going to directly affect the
Hispanic community and that's
just one example that well we
can say that the market will
dictate this indicate that we
see laws that are put on the
books that intention but they
have a negative impact on
communities that I frankly so.
The term the representative of
some quick points.
Thank you committee members
I have a question I thought I
heard you state that the
government is mandating.
That we are going to be moving
towards the extreme.
I can't remember what you said
that can you can you cite that
mandate for the federal
government.
Regarding where we're going
towards clean fuels and
eliminating.
Gas or propane or.
Matter yes madam chair more
schools and madam chairman and
and then.
the state of New Mexico is now
so the man the state of New
Mexico as mandated that we will
adopt that we've adopted the
energy transition we've already
decided that that is low and so
the state of New Mexico right
now has are you public utilities
moving towards clean renewable
energy that that has already
become let's uh lawyers Mexico
and a lot of that continues year
after year to be determined
I don't know I'm not aware of
any federal mandates out there
is right now but we are for a
lot of rhetoric out of the end
of this administration about
ways of cleaning up the
environment and they're trying
to they're trying to ****
approach some items are going to
be really good for helping in
that regard some items they they
may have a more make an impact
and and they understand so but
at this time there are no
mandates to eliminate gas
engine auto so are.
Those types of
Products.
Madam chair from introduction so
so there isn't.
And with this bill what would we
what we would preempt is at the
local level for the cities and
the counties not to make at a
rash decision.
It would it would come to the
state then for we could more
better
hopefully make a better decision
as a state as a whole.
And not hurt the poorest of the
poor the ones that can't afford
to transition to electric car
the one.
You know that that just can't
afford that transition being
forced upon the.
Sure thank you committee
members.
Chair of the past I have a
motion for to pass a
Representative along.
Also at the
and I have a second by
Representative green please take
world.
Representative auditorium.
Representative Lafayette.
Representative Chasey no.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Well.
Representative little no.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Zamora yes.
Vice chair Figueroa no.
Madam chair Johnson yes.
Votive five to three
Your two passed motion has.
Local move to table just scared
us status within chin okay so
now we have a motion to table.
Representative will you yes just
a moment to say that I'm glad
thank you I'm glad to that this
will be tabled instead because
As we're talking about timelines
and about things not happening
yet.
I was wondering it in my head
after conversation would this be
the time for this bill to come.
And maybe not does it mean not
do it because I can see
empathize with rural communities
who are going to be
feel the impact and so
I.
I see the vision that you have
and so I just wanted to let you
all know thank you very much
okay Representative.
Maybe a maybe I don't know if we
would do this committee later on
but.
Possibly madam chair we can put
a sunset on this bill twenty
thirty five to be in line with
the VA.
So that we could alleviate any
concerns regarding not meeting
those benchmarks just just a
thought could happen madam
chair.
Thank you we have a motion to
table.
To have a second by
Representative little please
call Rowe.
Representative Bonner nor do yes
to table Representative lock no
to table Representative Chasey
yes Representative Hochman Vigil
yes the table.
Representative little yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Zamora yes nope
no.
Thank you.
no to table.
Vice chair.
Yes it will thanks to explain
the.
Madam chair said no to table.
And to explain yes
Representative by chair okay.
The the municipality in the
county shall not those are.
Anyone here that.
Thanks to line to some dot
faced.
With fire is creating or
preemption of local county
municipality decisions and I'm
comfortable with that thank you
thank you Representative
and representatives I
you know I agree.
All there discussion discussions
and concerns but as you know I
represent New Mexico's economic
just concerned about our pre
existing infrastructure and
where we're going and just
walking with caution at this
point that I I am visionary I am
hopeful for a peaceful I do
believe in you know economic
development and you know moving
along with everyone and to the
future that I I'm also caution
so thank you for bringing this
bill forward and will here four
three one thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
House bill four three one
relating to local governments
restricting local governments
authority of the Philippines
senator restrictions.
That was of the questions.
Okay let's go to the audience do
we have any common sense for the
bills.
Any
posing the bill ma'am.
Committee and the LESC
presenting this year the chapter
thirty five thousand.
Members and supporters we
respectfully oppose this for.
Senator consumers of energy and
have the right to access these
services provide energy Jeff.
If they would like Albuquerque
has seven levels targets for
work with PNM food methods
required.
This bill is also listed but.
Our buildings come more energy
efficient that's reduces our
utility bills and making it
healthier for the occupants are
leaders officers local code
change communities with other
professionals who are committed
to making local policy the
legislature's.
To the service for the more
renewable energy the.
Thank you madam chair jurors are
in speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico this bill the of we
respect they pose this bill for
similar reasons.
we the Los Angeles.
Municipalities across.
Eight.
Hello
Sir.
Madam chair representative could
possibly on the verge of this
for the City of Albuquerque I
listen to the debate and
discussion of the prior bills
and certainly Albuquerque
understands the concerns.
All parts of our state however
we reiterate vice chair of the
gross said the language of the
preemptions is very harsh and
contrary to well established law
in the state of New Mexico that
yes this power with the locality
and of for good reason it's the
if you often hear parts of the
world stated they don't part of
the rural communities don't want
the state to impose certain
things.
Want to have the right the sales
of the album this is to do this.
Especially with something that
is new to us what what the state
space on renewables so on the
City of Albuquerque has to stand
with its local economy and we
expect the usual the state
protect the local economy as
well so for those reasons we
have to.
Thank you Charles this chair
members the committee Charles
with markers for natural
resources defense council
the arguments are very similar
was on the last.
See reviews you all in asked
questions and so on
I would just point out that
Sorry in most western
legislatures around education
issues in their the public and
members have ardently supported
local control.
and here we have session the
that is doing quite the opposite
this state making the state the
authority over local control
issues thank you very much thank
you for the field to the left.
Do we have any comments and
support.
Any comments in the office.
Well I will go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
again laid out to law and the
Santa Fe county resident and I
strongly oppose this bill
because it would block local
governments from taking action
to protect New Mexicans health
and improve energy affordability
burning fuels and buildings as
Martin source of air pollution
in New Mexico each year
pollution from burning fuels and
buildings costing Mexico for
more than fifty early deaths and
over five hundred fifty nine
million dollars and health
impacts and our over Vernon and
of the unaffordable healthcare
system cannot afford this and
further this bill would not
economically benefit New
Mexicans currently there are
over eighty seven million
dollars in federal rebate
allocated to New Mexico for home
energy improvements inflation
reduction act.
Local government action is
needed to help household
accesses funding but instead
this bill would leave federal
funding on the table well
burgeoning New Mexico ratepayers
with stranded fossil fuel
assets.
Would put us in the company of
states like Mississippi Alabama
and Texas that have blocked
local governments from
interview transition thank you
very much.
Alicia shock go ahead.
Good morning madam chair
committee members I'm Alicia
shut with our New Mexico where
grassroots statewide coalition
that's working to empower our
local communities to choose
their energy future and we
respectfully oppose H. B. four
thirty one because at for many
of the reasons already stated
this would severely limit local
control and local governments
ability to do their jobs and to
represent the interests of their
communities so we encourage you
to oppose it thank you thank
you.
Rick go ahead.
Hi my name is Rick last I live
in the members and I also oppose
this bill
And a lot of people have said
what I was safe just the one
thing that has maybe not stood
out so much is that all this
talk about the economy in the
market change changing things.
We've seen for decades now that
industry opposes every kind of
improvement for electric
vehicles as we're just talking
about and electric generation
going way back to the first
renewable portfolio standards
that if those have never been
put in we would be where we are
today so my opinion is we should
kill this bill you should kill
this bill thank you very much
thank you very.
Ten double arm go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on to anything
required Albuquerque city
councilor and for all the
reasons you've heard I do stand
in opposition that for thirty
one I thought I would just give
a few examples of the type of
things that local municipalities
would not be allowed to do if
this bill were to pass.
We would not be able to adopt
electric ready building codes
meaning that when new
construction is going in we
would not even be able to will
last to allow for those
buildings to be required to be
electric ready we would not be
able to offer incentives for all
electric infill.
And lastly but but certainly
most troublesome is we would not
be able to do incentives and
policies were affordable housing
that is all electric and that is
a very big concern for me as we
move towards the clean energy
transition of those will be
electric and we believe our low
income neighbors stuck with
those ever growing natural gas
bills for their V. for their
homes and so you know there's a
lot of examples of the type of
things that we are not going to
be able to be allowed to do with
this bill and so with that I ask
you please propose for thirty
one thank you.
Thank.
Committee members Representative
law thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and expert
so.
It's my understanding madam
chair and representatives and
many more this is regarding like
heating someone.
For instance madam chair
representative so this would not
let local governments banned
someone from staying alive in
the winter time.
All that correct Mr chair of the
nation with the sensor
Representative that's exactly
with respect legislation us much
like the last one this just
ensures that you have agency
over here our system.
You're good to the side where
your energy comes from
government already dictates and
mandates House clean energy has
to be that's already determined
by this body all we're making
sure is that that option remains
available on the right example
in the area where I live not
everyone has access to natural
gas right now however efforts
complains about the prices on
natural gas I think
appropriations bill it's much
higher so the so all we're
trying to ensure is that again
before we have natural gas lines
to our community there were not
many things like natural gas or
propane before we have that
infrastructure in place
additional effort distracted
from my from my local
local co op that they're gonna
have to do a lot of upgrades
within that system to ensure
that everybody to me that the
whole system can be electrified
everyone can have their first
they're still there every plans
they have in the household on
one lectures there's going to
have to be more upgrades and
more changes to in order to even
that requirement is our local.
Coop.
so yes we're just again trying
to ensure that we protect that
option for people and once in
rural New Mexico is caught up
with a conversation about what
electrification looks
the other part of that is that
right now electrification of
Force electrification on for for
clients is you're looking at
cost here and it's also about
twenty five thousand dollars I
would ask you one for families
that can afford twenty five
thousand dollar change system
solutions actually changes for
appliances out I would argue
that they can't so there's a lot
of New Mexico four percent of
our state lives out of the
poverty level to discount other
going to be able to pay for what
is of course lecture cation and
I heard a couple at least in the
committee here are the
opposition one let's all of the
market and then I also but we
want to be able to force people
to do this so one of our people
who want to fall the market that
seems contradictory.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative is a Mr more and
and I certainly agree with that
I think the.
At least in my district madam
chair representative so we have
a lot of people myself included
I have a gas stove I have gas do
my home and to leases in my area
thank god madam chair we don't
have people that would fit that
on however madam chair
representative I think this will
be a safeguard so that this does
not happen in the future.
Chair representative this year I
know people in rural New Mexico
eight they realize they live.
Right now they're alive because
they have access to these
different heating things that
keep their homes warm in the
winter time you know it gets
cold out there.
You know I don't know if the
people in.
More calls in areas may have
these concerns but at least we
do at least in rural New Mexico.
And I would also know.
We had concerns about the point
sound not.
By.
In this bill and I just want to.
Really quickly say last night we
passed the bill in our house
the head down.
Local governments doing from the
in house bill seven so if we
truly care about local control
we would not pass house bill
seven months me thank you madam
chair thank you madam chair and
I like to make a.
At a response to some of the
comments made madam chair.
The claim I heard I heard
something said about Republicans
of wanting funding for local
control all the time madam chair
members of the committee this
bill has bipartisan support you
can tell by.
My friend here said that.
And.
We have to get inventive and we
have proselytes sometimes.
To help support in this bill the
poorest of the poor and give
them some time to ensure that
they're not going to be forced.
In the financial instability.
With our families and their
homes.
Madam chair.
And members of the committee.
The clean energy act is one of
the biggest preemption acts that
has happened in the state.
And we're trying to be.
Incentive.
And trying to do bipartisan.
Legislating here by bringing a
pre emption bill forward to
protect.
The poorest of the poor.
In this state.
The what the when if the clean
energy act gets forced on a
positive.
They will suffer the most.
And that's why you see
legislation like news here today
a bipartisan bill to one that we
have already tabled and another
one is here.
Probably fixing to get tabled.
But how do we protect our
people.
That we represent and and not
only in our districts across the
state thank you madam chair and
then commission chair.
Although opposition leader today
madam chair.
The state that we are trying to
do.
Calabi from doing what they're
doing that the bill meet no way
shape or form see this bill the
decision of Albuquerque can not.
You know all opposition and
removed we're gonna stop
communities from one all that
Kristin all years that's not the
point the point is that we're
trying to prevent the people of
the Fairview fan of fossil
fuels.
Why all of their in my district
as to the Economic cat number
will sit again on most of the
people out there provided a
month.
On the field
working full thank you for
calling House waffle you know
that's a big.
You know and and we really need
to do this.
And if we get stable.
The it's going to happen open
doesn't but it does work with
the foot print
to make sure people are aware of
what's happening.
Mexico not just out of reach of
the food and the food is no we
we really need to look at the
whole picture of.
Thank you Mr chairman I may my
expert with the select
committee.
I guess I just like to point to
some I watched I was sitting in
the gallery with this one and
not this committee but this body
actually passed Representative
I'm sorry I think was a
proclamation or resolution in
support of to questions like
tricks energy independence day
arsenal exit is really kind of a
shining example of moving in
transition towards cleaner
renewable sources our point
something out of this is this is
the flaw and putting all your
eggs in one basket this past
summer we had one of the most
catastrophic wildfires anywhere
anywhere ever in our country's
history at that time our
electric in order to avoid
having more fires they come to
our offices residence more we in
advance of the fire getting to
that so for one week those
people without electricity not
been on for selection Education.
They have been out of the water
those families those communities
rely on generators a lot of them
have propane in their area so
they were able to keep cooking
or food warming their homes the
summer time so it wasn't bad to
the extent that it gets cold but
they were able to run things
like their conditions if they
needed to they have options when
you run out electricity or heat
and other simple during the
winter.
Time I I and I said I move
board I introduce before for
engine five engine fire has
averages levels on a weekly
basis because of snowfall it
sorry that brings our lines
another without their land would
be relying propane they don't
have natural gas and run about
they would love yet access more
car who's a Democrat ran for
lieutenant governor of the state
of New Mexico said Democrats
would love to have natural gas
pipelines in his community so
that is a state systems have one
more option this isn't a
partisan issue more Kerr who is
a Democrat and remixes
Republican both support the
natural gas industry coming into
their area so there services
have one more option available
to and sometimes it's hard to
that we live in a metropolitan
area and everything is on the
staff of the right you go over
sometimes on the same day it's
pretty neat in our is a table
because of where we live the
food options have cost more the
the gas that we pay at the gas
pump possible a lot of these
things already costs more
because of where we live we're
happy to live in love with the
we just ask that we not be have
more of the deck stacked states
thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative and
and Mr Merriman very good points
and I would also note that
natural gas is the the least
emissions of any any extractive
resource so it's clean and I
think it's something that people
rely on and also the steps you
take away of steps natural gas
stove he's not gonna be happy
got.
Thank you madam chair committee
members.
Representative thank you madam
chairman and representatives I
hear that it's not your intent
to take away the authority of
local communities but in fact
and I know I I see you're trying
to address a problem.
It would take away birth or even
if you don't intend to so that's
all I wanted to.
Thank you.
Committee members.
At his motion for to pass
associate motion to table.
we have a substitute motion at
for.
To take a tabling motion.
The second.
The please take role.
Representative wanted.
Yes table.
Representative walk no to table
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
to table.
Representative level is to table
to explain please.
Senator bring.
Representative noted.
By surveyor all yes to table
madam chair Johnson VS to table.
Six two.
Six two fields people Madam
chair representative.
Representative.
Thank you
would appreciate what you're.
Looking at for rural communities
but I will say to that if this
was acted as I understand it it
affects all local governments
including for the pollution is
actually great generated so
those that that's that's what I
would like to.
Do not have that happens thank
you thank you.
Need a.
Townsend.
Are you sure you want to be
Mexico my apologies I see at.
Resented McQueen.
Senate bill two zero six.
In cherry red yes.
Members of the committee sent
bill to assist.
Done in the process from.
Federal government through the
state forced to applicants who
have already completed the
procurement process at the
federal level so there are
federal programs people fought
for many the federal government
uses
state forestry is serviceable
agent but currently this bill
through a second procurement
process even though they've
already been approved for the
funds and it's really just the
past and sometimes that second
process.
There's enough that ladies the
implementation of the.
And even to the extent of using
the phone.
This result of course and the
and the server and the circulate
of this bill the four of
Representative Townsend from
former committee makes perfect
sense.
I'm doing today but C. Forster
of our currency in general so
that Services Department Joe
council on huge with the help in
answering questions thank you
six of of madam chair if I may
of course the.
Six and I just want to quickly
tell you why for bringing this
bill forward now and give you
one example of how it works why
no is that the federal.
Has the two point two billion
dollars worth of funding
available to states and to the
NGOs within states for wildfire
risk reduction in a variety of
programs through the bipartisan
defer structure law and the
inflation reduction act so right
now we're in a bad position to
be able to bring those dollars
into New Mexico this specific
example he's the community
wildfire Defense grants program
which you of itself has one
billion dollars available we've
already done the first round of
the quest for proposals people
from Mexico so it is twenty two
applications some of those
proposals fax up to three were
from some of the water Senator.
and the are those proposals for
ten million dollars a piece.
The federal competitive process
is already taken place the
awards will will be announced
any day now and the Senate bill
to all six does not pass and the
NGO proposals are selected
through competition that we're
gonna have to still conduct
procurement process even though
we will know who the feds have
already selected so duplicating
process and United self it's a
likely violation of the code
because again will already knows
the funds to go.
Thank you madam.
They're continuing to provide
comment no I the first sponsor
and that was embarassing thank
you let's go to the audience
those in support of the bill
please raise your hand I'll
start with my right thank you
madam chair members of the
committee of the second pair
representing your country
amending chapter thirty five
thousand supporters and members
are we support this bill we
think it's good policy and the
leveraging opportunities you
just heard about it would only
be for contacts or engine
selected by the USDA the a lot
through their application
process for certain programs
that specify.
These might include our sense.
Prevention or protection urban
forestry forest watershed
restoration protection
reforestation etcetera.
Thank you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The director of public policy at
the chamber of commerce we
support this proposal with a
streamlining measure loss for
new money to be left on the
table we must improve sources
flowing into the I sure we have
the systems in place to do so
on a normal year our members
that for funding for forest
restoration we have to as you
all know we have in store for
twenty twenty two fire season
and there's so many to be for
wildlife.
Well fire prevention and forest.
The
madam chair members of the the
juice fast as the rest of this
with the New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts and also
the Mexico forced industry
we stand in support of the
legislation this is help
workforce participation efforts
watershed restoration thank you.
Representative Townsend.
It is a good bills.
Work.
Representative McQueen the on
the second side of the it's
more.
Comments in support of the bill
syrup is Gerald go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce this
legislation contemplates what we
believe to be a narrow careful
exemption and our procurement
code allows us not to have to
redo a process already carried
out by the federal government
when we undertake forest
restoration and wildfire
protection projects time is of
the essence with this work and
the safety and security of our
forests and surrounding
communities are at stake for
everyone involved it makes sense
to avoid duplicative
bureaucratic process in the
interest of wildfire prevention
and your support thank you.
Thank you Sir so we Parker go
ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that we Parker and I'm the
water associate with
conservation voters New Mexico
we stand in support of SB two oh
six and for the sake of time for
all of the previously stated
reasons we encourage the
committee support this bill as
well thank you for the
opportunity to speak this
morning thank you so if thank
you will stay on the webcast do
we have any opposing comments.
And back to the audience any
comments in opposition.
Seeing none committee members
Representative Zamora madam
chairman would pass has reduced
pass by Representative Lawrence
second law the.
President of the formative we
have a physician.
Representative you have to pass.
Of the.
Thank you for Senate bill one
eighty two.
Your committee so we are at
Senator Diamond my co sponsor
might be.
we're here the staff at a
finance committee.
Senate bill one eighty two is a
bill that really kind of updates
to the grant.
Grant Fund in the state in other
and the second one is the litter
the case on the coast Department
tourism and we is that a million
dollars a year to communities
around the state of as an
affiliate of keep America
beautiful
includes people from all over
St Onge make those decisions the
best part of working for them
this makes some updates to do
they have a lot of so that we
were having more holistic
incident efforts to the public
lands and frontier communities
of NGOs that work in the face.
From and then the second part of
the bill.
Updates the respective legal
dumping Act grant program which
goes to the New Mexico
environment department and that
funding goes for to all of our
communities also someone about a
hundred thousand four million a
year full cycle infrastructure
for public.
And we update the language on
that the request of the
department of because yes ma'am
quite a language in there which
kind of.
Forced to the most of the money
on tires cycling rather than the
more personal care section.
And then finally
two other things that requires
collaboration we get money right
now that they're not to.
Like three or four different
state agencies who independently
work on their control and this
requires that they collaborate
together which would be good and
then it requires the department
of tourism to start a new
statewide anti let our marketing
efforts.
And if so whether marketing
campaign what we know madam
chair committee is that the best
thing we can do to control
letter in our state is a people
and
You gotta you gotta reach out
to.
No systems and committees that
stewardship affect.
So with that that's built up and
yeah center for those
sponsorship activator shortly
but happy answer any questions
thank you let's go to the
audience those in support of the
bill please raise your hand.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for another
opportunity yes in support of
this bill on behalf of Sierra
Club with thousands of members
and supporters of we support
returning imposition of
recycling and waste reduction
education coordinator and.
Literate has to see the beauty
of the state that are potentials
after recreation destination
using ravers stated purposes and
to expand recipients is ideally
support thank you.
Thank you madam chair Dan Jarvis
in the waste management of New
Mexico operating the state's
lands bills of the COVID
increasingly big challenges
we're trying to stretch out
their life right now there's too
many recyclable materials being
sent to Iraq last.
This bill for patients
laceration required.
All.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee marshes registered
lobbyists for south central
solid waste authority and that
the staff for the reasons stated
that we want to thank the
sponsors for keeping the
importance of recycling.
Or front end to collab proved
to.
Forty five we have a lab
iterations and education so
thank thank you let's go to the
webcast need logs to go ahead.
Yes hello this is Jean Loxton I
represent the league of women
voters of New Mexico the lead as
a Polish a of position in its
waste management area that we
support policies that reduce the
generation and promotion and
promote the reuse and recycling
of all waste materials this bill
is quite consistent with that
thrust and therefore we support
the bill thank you.
Thank you just stay on the
webcast for comments in
opposition to the bill.
See none.
Let's go back to the audience
and no comments in opposition
Representative Zamora thank you
madam chair of the presenters.
I see here it helps with tire
recycling can you count on to
that little bit I know we have
big problems.
Well Madam chair representative
is acceptable
The use of the funds is to
attack.
And the bill actually makes a
change in tire recycling and
that used to require one of the
things we're proposing is.
Used cars right now under a lot
of seventy five Fund global the
tire size.
The ability so what we're doing
is removing that seventy five
percent so that is flexible so
if you're counting also uses for
Baylor's and other equipment to
the I but it doesn't create
iterations so it just has on the
proposals that are stipends
definitely if you.
And madam chair and senator how
does the city of call was come
by this money to help recycle
tires so then chair
representative so this is a fund
for recycling and illegal
dumping affirmative programs run
by the New Mexico environment
department so if they're not
already aware of that it's
funding this probably explicitly
obtained by cities right now
from all over the state of
million a year so they should
just reach out to the solid
waste bureau of the New Mexico
environment department you see
what they have to do to put it
for that day thank you madam
chair and thank you that's all
this will make more funding
available by modernizing
language.
Representative block thank you
madam chair thank you senator
for being here I feel like I was
seeing my committee and they
always.
So madam chair Senator on page
six years a line five and six
this is.
Municipality county communities
which are.
And then it also has a federally
recognized nonprofit
organization madam chair and
there.
How do you get federally
recognized in who would be
eligible for the.
There is so what that means is
is up by the IRS
nonprofit organizations that
have fiber one C. staff whatever
it is that's under one condition
tax tax status that that the
okay thank you madam chair
Senator so would mean they need
to a middle from the president.
It's funny yeah I think are
residential
the act get the federally
recognized.
Probably we're okay I better go
find for one of those thousand
that remain the state on the
bills.
So the on page five you were
talking about the new position
we're creating madam chair.
So the position of recycling and
waste water right waste
reduction education coordinator
that is a lot of words for
someone.
Is it like a.
Recycling.
information that officers that
something like that there
Representative I mean it it's
kind of a comprehensive
physician and in a recycling
world waste reduction is another
work or recycling of but it's
yes so we have a problem right
now the state of New Mexico that
we used to have in the solid
waste bureau environment for me
we should have a group of
probably four or five weeks at
least work always
and our state and community what
happened before because of it
this will down for life one
person after that so what this
does is we're building that back
up by using the funds were not
using general fund reusing
actuals right fund which runs
Council about million a year
saying use that phone to hire
new physician who can help
administer this program and then
the assistant to all of our
communities on getting these
requests but also educating the
public back to that later.
All recycling it just have more
capacity as the state
governments to work on this
issue.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator and this this this
bill have anything regarding
what localities should do or
can't do regarding was.
Senator of New Madam chair
representative.
Okay got it thank you madam
chair thank you senator.
And then I see on page five we
mention the clean and beautiful
program coordinator does that
already this madam chair so it
does and and madam chair
representative is yes in the end
and that's funded through the
For that clean and beautiful
funding goes to tourism that I
talked about and that's kind of
what we model is with second
quarter from in law right now we
required they use later I sort
of tire coordinator so that's
what we're doing with the
disciples will dropping funds
were saying our coordinator at
that we got the idea from what
we were doing law with the
plentiful worded got it thank
you madam chair thank December
that that clears it up for me I
appreciate it thank you
Representative North Madam chair
of the best second because.
A question and then just.
The chances.
chair
I made that completion of the
recycling with action education
coordinator with endless duties
of those duties already
establishing rule or going to be
making.
Yeah you're right Madam chair
representative is not defined
here that I hope that the job
title is less that the Indian
guys what we intended to do.
Okay and madam chair Senators
basics the where lemonade
why.
This is on the provision if you
never use and it's really you
know it's not intended to be
Of the.
Restored I'm sorry talked about
ninety percent thank yes that
that after the floor staff in
the amendment yeah that was the.
Senator.
Thank you sorry for that sorry
no chance.
Request thank you we have a
motion for to cast their
presented Samara second by
Representative.
Lock in a little do we have any
opposition seeing them please
show offers.
And senator utilities pass thank
you have a great day good.
Sen.
To.
Under it's a committees bills
committees.
Thank.
You have a joke.
For
the last two days or I don't
sound like for this.
I guess it's.
The
will not be back.
Madam chair committee members.
Into the house bill five to.
Health I.
Is a.
Bills that would add a provision
increases the lobbyist at.
The bill quite frankly I think
with the I look around here.
More new faces of them
experience faces but I promise
if you stay around here you'll
understand this better for all.
What what this bill does is it.
As a provision that says.
The hello this is prohibited
from directly or indirectly for
rejecting for the Legislature
legislative committee public
officer government important
vote taken official action for
perform any government functions
benefit from this is a lobbyist
employers for.
Often in ninety.
Sexual favor or any other thing
of value or from.
Secretary of the Air or others
the of.
That.
A favorable to the lobbyist law
offices.
So what I.
I did not.
On the floor was at this
position on.
The old.
It was.
I had
something that happened earlier
in the year.
And
Act problems if I could get the
chance to fix that just so.
Speaker after yes is that is
is worth a
a bill to try to get through.
He said he thought it was an
a draft of Representative K. to
help me the bill together
Representative Castellano.
Order there's others are
supported I think it's something
happened and what benefit every
one of the state of South.
Question we'll go to so many
ideas.
Yes Representative ang and
argues.
Thank you madam chair
representative I do remember
that discussion in the said that
wasn't.
Proprioceptive directions
statute so my only question is
where will discount eight of
this act yes.
Kind of answered already it has
often wealthy thank.
Representative Representative
block and Representative Zamora
center.
Madam chair and.
Representative Zamora madam
chair I have a comment to make
it's not really a question or
anything we will make you use
your voice for much.
When I first came in.
About three days after I came in
as a legislator I was
threatened.
Because I refuse to carry a
bill.
And it turned into a shouting
match.
And that was a lot of.
Words chin a bit said said
there.
I believe this is a good bill it
happens we know what happens
I've personally know it happens.
And we need to stop.
And with that I and my comments
and questions yes
Representative little and
Representative vice chair yes
thank you Representative thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for following
this through
before I came into office is.
This the session I was in August
I was in early two thousand and
it does have can be subtle are
very over and the experience I
had.
working there I thought it was
great to have that particular
bill passed the other night this
makes it even as well it puts
everyone I just I just want to
say thank you for thank you
following it through.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
I'm just wondering if there's
language in section may that we
need to repeat in section.
Or if it's implied and clear and
you have more experience than I
do and that but section eighty
specifically names.
Can't prohibits coercing or
threatening a legislator
Committee public officer
government employee.
And then part B. says offering
these things but it doesn't
specify to do do you think we
need to repeat that list in part
be.
The role of care the
Representative would play with
that okay folkways that's
councils that it was not needed
because it is part of the and I
would tell committees that the
penalty.
Ride.
Five thousand dollar fine and
the loss of this license for
three years so is not
insignificant but it should be a
significant.
Tell us million questions
thank you committee members.
Senate doing
okay Senator we have to pass a
motion and a second to see no
opposition the show all of the
in the affirmative.
Yes okay so I'm committee set up
for discussion point two two six
zero nine zero point.
If somebody will second.
So we have a motion.
For K. two and the second and no
opposition that will send you
out that you know that some
well I might need to do pass on
government elections.
The.
