Joint session of the house and
Senate will come to order what
is the pleasure of the joint
session.
Senate pro tem the chair
recognizes Representative
Chasey.
On a macro to ask unanimous
consent that we resolve
ourselves into a committee of
the whole house and Senate for
the purpose of hearing speakers
and presentations in honor of
African American day.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
The committee of the whole of
the house and the Senate will
come to order.
In recognition of African
American day here in the New
Mexico state legislature the
speaker and I have the honor of
recognizing honorable
Representative Pamela Herndon's
to preside over today's joint
session.
To get the speaker were.
On behalf of the New Mexico
state legislature welcome
everyone welcome to today's
joint session please rise for
the presentation of colors by
the Sandia high school ROTC
followed by a performance of the
national anthem and the black
national anthem by ray and
a baby her husband Vince Beatty
and their daughter and the baby.
Schools the and you see we.
On.
The
What so.
We
do this is why it's and school
me and whose broad stripes and
bright stars.
I
really.
We.
Because we're so.
The string.
Those two.
Holes say those that saw state
dollars.
When
I one of the.
We.
We use
we.
Committee.
Burned CD.
He's seeing.
Just need.
As.
Owned.
Moving see we Senator of song
full of the faith that the dark
past as tall as.
Senator
song full of the hope that the
president has brought.
We saw.
We.
That US March.
To.
One.
Them.
Members and guests please remain
standing while Representative
Charlotte little leads the
pledge of the allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
Please remain standing while
representatives of pants he
believes the salute to the New
Mexico flag.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico is yes symbol of
perfect friendship United
cultures.
Next the chair recognizes
Representative and David E.
Walker of Antioch Baptist church
Albuquerque for today's
invocation.
Let us pray.
A father not god.
Jordan have an.
Hello would be the holy.
I just nine.
Masses again we come this
morning.
Can you for this day.
Thank goodness you for this
gathering which individual
statewide.
I've been joined together here
at the state capitol of the
great state of New Mexico.
To celebrate new with this this
black legislative day
legislative legislature masses
we come we pray.
Of those that we have elected to
make decisions on behalf of all
the people of the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you for the governor we
thank you for these legislators
that have been elected and
appointed to govern the affairs
of the state.
And as we come all god we
realize that there appears to be
a division not only on the state
level but the national national
level when it comes to
government law we just the to
touch the state up setting here
in the halls of the State
Capitol.
That they would understand oh
god it is not about being a
Republican it's not about being
a Democrat what is about us as
Americans as a says New Mexicans
that represent this state and
somehow we just as they come
together to govern the state
that they will be impartial work
together based on honesty and do
what's best for this whole state
of New Mexico we just so god did
to touch the hearts and minds so
that they could realize how
important it is that they work
together hand in hand
encouraging sometimes lead and
sometimes being in the we just
ask that you have them
exemplified duty sacrifice and
commitment as well as patriotism
we know god this this state is
not I try culture but this is a
mall to culture state so we pray
for the African Americans we
pray for the native Americans we
pray for Hispanics as well as
other nationalities that make
presence throughout the state we
just ask that you would allow
coach adversity to be recognized
and appreciated so that we can
understand that all lives matter
in their we the people must live
in peace and harmony with one
another a man.
You may be seated.
Good afternoon everyone and
welcome to the house chambers
with the joint session of the
house and Senate of the New
Mexico legislature it is a
pleasure to have you joining us
to hear your voices and most of
all today to raise the voices of
the African American community
as part of African American day
at the legislature and now I'd
like to.
Ask you to please help me
welcome some of the guests who
are stated in our chamber.
We are proud to have the judges
with us we have judge of the
show meta Estrada from
metropolitan court in
Albuquerque.
Judge Tamara Henderson of the
New Mexico court of appeals.
Every year every other year in
an odd numbered year we have the
African American date council
who helps to make sure that
African American in the
legislature is that success
please me the council now Lampi
of miles president.
Maxine Jones vice president.
Carol been dial treasurer.
Celestina secretary.
The other members Tim Johnson.
Patrick Barrett.
Selma's price.
Evelyn rising.
Beverly white gains.
Joseph cotton.
I've been in the Smith.
Also here is the dilemma Walton
you'll hear more about him
later.
Floor seating will be glad to
welcome Reverend David Walker
you just heard from.
Revenue James Russell.
Elizabeth Russell.
Representative and B. J. toys
senior.
Revenue window been for the
second.
This is David Keith Jones.
It said David Siegel we're.
Dr nine a Cooper.
Revenue **** Russell's senior.
Representative and W. in brown.
Reverend Donald with the senior.
Revenue done Cobbs.
Representative and Arthur
Williams.
David Bruce deficit.
Evan Bob Lewis Reverend Dennis
Hubbard pastor no games Ralph.
Tested in the whites.
Randy stone the director of the
African American student
services you and them.
Nicole Rogers with the City of
Albuquerque.
Limited weights the executive
director of the New Mexico
Martin Luther king junior state
commission.
All right acting executive
director Office of African
American affairs.
Kate Stetson president in A. A.
C. P. northwest mesa brands.
The call Bedfordview NM
community engagement liaison.
To live areas strain of the
office of African American
affairs.
Other members of the African
Office of African American
affairs guy a Harris.
Joshua Brad saw.
Philippine savings Turner this
is the wrong the Czecho.
On the hearts of the.
Albuquerque alumni chapter of
the delta sigma theta sorority.
Diane morning brown New Mexico
department of Veterans Services.
Jeremy in New Mexico department
of Veterans Services.
And tell about the stalwarts
from visit Albuquerque
Nefertiti Moses.
Events coordinator for the C. M.
M..
Dot didn't agree those seals
leadership by president at C.
and M..
Danielle improving African
American student services.
More two million legislative
liaison for central New Mexico
state in M. these bottoms from
biz and saying Copa.
Hey them bad saw MLK state
commission.
Cecilia wide head the voice of
K. U. N. M. straight and the
glory.
Gregory saw community engagement
director of concerned veterans
of America.
Swasey hard school president of
C. N. M..
Maryland hill community leaders.
Nellie ward community leader
divine today Watson.
And soon my goal.
We have some special guests
sitting down in front they are
the from the black student union
of the Albuquerque academy.
Yet to be introduced
individually.
Yeah.
This model with
whether it's handler kini dnia
may Parker mostly logged nori
little Clinton Ellison to grant
to Richard syndicated Kelly so
many then he.
And Jason Jackson so subject to
a and they brought with them the
faculty so we want to welcome
you to apply the director of
diversity culture and belonging.
Comment was sought the dean of
students for grades eight and
nine division.
Kellen billion the history
department chair.
And noble would be complete
without the parent volunteered
Christie bundas the chair of the
African American vote in
council.
So thank you all for being here
thank you for meeting our guest.
And now the chair recognizes
today's first speaker.
That would be Dimitris.
Sampson.
From the alpha Kappa alpha
sorority southwest region.
Please come forth.
I am Dimitris Sampson I am the
international connection.
And social action committee
representative to the south
central region five alpha Kappa
alpha sorority incorporated.
We are glad today to be
celebrating a K. a day at the
capitol.
The state of New Mexico is part
of the south central region you
have a great state and you're
doing great the.
We know that a hundred fifteen
years ago.
Alpha Kappa alpha sorority
incorporated.
Created the social advocacy
agenda because that's when we
began.
The first black letter.
Greek organization organized by
black women's.
And today we come here to tell
you that we have two points of
emphasis for act advocacy.
One is black maternal mental
health.
And the second one is mental
health dealing with suicide
among you.
And I stand here today to tell
you.
To tell you that we bear
witness.
To what you are doing.
When you advocate for.
House bill one twelve.
yes public school wellness room
pilot project and your house
bill nine suicide prevention in
protecting black features we
advocate for those.
We stand with you for this.
And we are pushing for the
passage of those please do what
you can to be sure that they
pass because if not us then who.
If not.
Then we.
Thank you.
Thank you.
And now the chair recognizes
limits the listings secretary of
the African American day council
to introduce our keynote speaker
Dr Lin L. Walton.
Good afternoon.
First given all praises to the
lord and savior Jesus Christ.
I am Lisa am Celestine secretary
for the African American
legislative day council and the
on behalf of our president this
land the a miles and the members
of the African American
legislative day council I bring
greetings to the speaker of the
house have a year Martinez to
the president pro tem minis Mimi
Stewart and all the members of
the house and Senate we would
like to thank all of you for
your support throughout the
years.
It is my honor and privilege to
introduce to you today our
keynote speaker.
She was born in Gallup New
Mexico.
But raised in Albuquerque she
graduated from Manzano high
school and it is a U. S. United
States Army veteran.
She began her teaching career.
With Albuquerque public schools
in two thousand and seven and
she's taught in the special
education setting.
She has an associate's degree in
agricultural drafting from New
Mexico community college she
received her bachelors of arts
degree in psychology with a
minor in communications are
masters of arts in special
education and her doctor of
philosophy in edges and special
education with a concentration
in disability studies and
critical race theory from the
university of New Mexico.
She has a graduate certificate
in autism spectrum disorders and
she is currently pursuing her
second masters of arts in social
work from Rutgers University.
She is married to none other
than Mr general Chris I don't
know.
Sanford senior and she is the
proud mother of four and one
dollar.
I introduce to some and present
to others Dr Linnell D. Walton.
All.
I graduated from ones on a high
school in Albuquerque New Mexico
with that the money is average
what I earned a PhD in special
education from the university of
New Mexico.
And currently working on my
second masters in social work at
records university this story is
about once being discouraging
afraid to learn to now having an
ongoing love affair with reading
and learning.
And it continues to grow this is
a story about Dr Linda Walton
but this is also a story about
the power of black studies the
importance of black intellectual
tradition and the relevance of
black experience when I was
younger reading was a form of
punishment and I could not find
books that interested me too
often when black students must
learn it's like a form of
punishment or reprimand how can
you extract all the personal
joys one had bothered to connect
to the larger black world that I
was a product no one explained
the relationship between reading
and my black identity
development it wasn't until I
read the book stand from the
beginning many years later that
my desire to understand my
surroundings was triggered.
I was fascinated by black
history tribes and all its
injustices such as the code wide
system of racial apartheid
restricted the economic and
civil rights of African
Americans and affected almost
every aspect of everyday life
mandating the segregation of
schools I want to understand why
so many African American
children are retained suspended
expelled and sent to prison.
We for black books help me find
the Ph.D ebony and jet magazines
would be avenues to learning and
understanding the black
experience I found the answers
to the state of black America in
black books I found the
predicament of Africa in black
books but it wasn't only the
Miseducation of the Negro by W.
E. B. double A.'s also Booker T.
Washington's up from slavery
James Baldwin's James Baldwin
and the American school house
I'd be wells Kirk uh crusade for
justice and Michelle Alexander's
the new Jim crow mass
incarceration in the age of
color blindness the destruction
of black civilization
demonstrated that the continent
of Africa had a rich history and
culture that stood on its own.
The desire to learn my black
identity didn't begin until I
was in the military and I was
introduced to black authors and
their works such as Booker T.
Washington who argued the
African Americans must
concentrate on educating
themselves learning useful
trades and investing in their
own businesses hard work
economic progress in Mary he
believes would prove to whites
the values of blacks to the
American economy W. E. B. to
boys understood higher education
to be one of the most effective
tools of emancipation for the
black community a way to
alleviate the dreadful economic
political and social conditions
James Baldwin asserted the
purpose of education is to
create in a person the ability
to look at the world for himself
to make his own decision the
state is it sorry to say to
himself this is black or this is
why to decide for himself
whether there was a god in
heaven or not Marcus Garvey
stated that it is by education
that we become prepared for our
duties and responsibilities in
life one is badly educated he
must naturally fail in the
proper assumption and current
practice of his duties and
responsibilities because the
Negro has been badly educated
reading black books changed the
way I saw the world and saved my
life they kept me academically
focused the provided a sense of
direction and they made me
believe one day that I could be
anything I wanted to be which
eventually led me to become an
educator more importantly black
folks gave me the desire to
finally want to learn I learned
how to learn the discovery of
reading but I discovered reading
because of my own black
experience I believe we can use
the black experience as a
vehicle to transform urban
education and Blackstone
performance in the classrooms
many of us know the number of
problems black students face
especially here in New Mexico
which have life and death
implications and now represents
a.
Major public health issue in
school districts across the
country the graduation rates of
black students helpers at about
sixty seven percent in some
individual school the completion
rate for blacks students as
around eighty percent reading
proficiency thirty four percent
math proficiency is twenty one
percent and I proficiency is
forty percent and in some
schools even much less than that
all of this contributes to the
school to prison pipeline
pushing frustrated black
students into the streets as
stated by Dr Keith Mason two
thousand and seventeen he stated
after languishing these
educational graveyards too many
now languish in prisons across
the United States why do we fail
to see the life and death
implications of not educating
every black student Dr Mays
provided the best example we do
not have a problem understanding
the relationship between a
doctor and his patient the
doctor knows what is at stake
the cut and laceration must be
disinfected and bandaged the
modem as we reset the artery
must be by passed the tumor must
be removed and the doctor
doesn't judge the incoming
condition he or she administers
the care if if it is the
doctor's responsibility to reset
the body than it is the
educators responsibility to
reset the mind by reestablishing
the desire to learn.
In the medical context we get it
but we fail to translate the
same sense of urgency to
importance of and importance to
the classroom for from teacher
to student especially from white
teacher to black students this
is not to indict and this is not
an indictment of white teachers
because there are some good
white teachers and there's some
bad black ones.
What are classroom caretakers
must pay attention to those
scars those lacerations those
loans those broken wines and
spirits that are trapped inside
of failing schools it is not the
students fault it's the systems
and educational system.
An education system that likes
to focus on numerical gaps like
graduation rates and test scores
with bills to see more important
gaps the black students bring
which are the administration gap
the motivation gap the gauge
meant gap the believe gap and
the relationship gap.
Withstanding the deficits that
black students bring to the
school it is still the job of
those who work inside the system
to inspire and motivate to
understand the racial reality to
engage black students with the
intellectual content and
instructional styles that will
foster stronger and trusting
relationship between student and
teacher and for ever called the
believe gap that says with so
much ferocity that the American
dream is not for young black
people.
As a young black student in New
Mexico these gaps Moores circle
scripted and definitive in my
everyday life the numerical
what's.
So why would we just give the
very things that can inspire
motivate and engage black
students in the classroom why
would we want to preclude the
possibility of creating a better
relationship with black students
and instilling within them I
believe that they can to can
achieve anything in this world
currently our classrooms are not
built to bring in the black
experience not at the level of
black curriculum not at the
level of pedagogical practice
and not at the level of
administrative will the reason
that this is the case is that
there is nothing in the toolbox
what is in the toolbox toolbox
of classroom teachers and
administrators that could be
transformative in the lives of
young black boys and girls some
good things currently exist but
if we were to open up the
toolbox too often we would find
a saw the difference the ridge
of low expectations the clamp of
mediocrity the nail of white
racism the sledge hammer
approach of oppression and the
tape measure of failure.
We would not find in the
creative use of the black
experience that not only
teachers but is also
transforming the lives of young
black students how Schardin see
Bernie Mason and Elton Maddox we
must never castigate blacks of
movie blacks of black movements
for change but recognize how
they are part of the rich
tapestry of intergenerational
protest and that they to have
the power to educate talking to
friends that knew the history of
black experience reading
suggestions provided by Africano
studies.
From various universities and
documentaries continue to be the
black experience to me we
providing the historical context
to the modern day blackstrap
bill occurring in the streets I
took courses and sat in on
lectures by Dr Jamal Martin and
Dr try for the appeal Edea P.
peel ET and as well as white
professors who also gave a great
impact was Elizabeth Keith and
Emily box not only have I spent
financial aid buying every black
book that I confine it was with
these individuals the groundwork
was laid to applied to majoring
programs and graduate programs
in history what I'm describing
to you is a twenty year process
that took just to put myself in
the position to apply to a
doctoral program sections of
much less earn a PhD.
Academically disengaged black
students don't have twenty years
after they turned eighteen to
recover low sense of self it is
usually too late intellectual
and personal transformation is
not from the mind of people we
have been long decided that
education is not for them they
have to come and now exist at
the at the margins of our
society so what does the power
of the black experience means
for five year old girl what is
me twenty year old black what
what does it mean to a sixteen
year old black students.
What does the black experience
need white teacher that lives in
the suburbs of Albuquerque and
teaches a black child is there
anything in the lives of the
students that could be a source
of knowledge for you as a
teacher.
What about the background of the
students that could be a source
of knowledge for them and their
education and their personal
transformation.
If it is not a given that I know
what about the black experience
just because I'm black.
Chances chances are I know very
little what I do know is that
there that is the key to my
liberation exist in the very
fiber of my being within the
innermost corners of my soul W.
E. B. du bois book called the
souls of black folk and his
follow up book the give the
black folks explaining how black
people's greatest get to
American society it was the
black experience that
contributed to the economic
social and cultural development
of the United States as a black
student this is what I needed to
know what I need to hear from
you as the teachers and the
parents as you know the centre
all the representatives is that
we need to educate ourselves we
need to contribute to the
economy the social and cultural
development and that bye hello
is this a teacher to teach
something that he does not know
how does the teacher going to do
something that his or her
principal does not support how
does the principal give support
to teachers who want to teach
about the black experience when
white parents are hostile to it.
I have just underscore much of
the problem today lack of
knowledge about the black
experience lack of will to teach
the black experience lack of
administrative support and
vision by the district and for
site leisure and why can't back
last in overall fear of the
blacks experience inside school
buildings and classrooms the
longer we wait to transform our
curriculum especially social
studies and English the stronger
the messages sent the message
being sent is we might we may
not mind having black bodies in
the classroom we just don't want
your experience being taught in
the classroom.
What resistance must understand
that this train has long left
the station you cannot separate
the experiences of black people
from the intellectual movements
that represent them the ethnic
studies movement is here to stay
and it's not going anywhere.
It's a movie that has multiple
points of entry dating back to
the nineteenth century but it's
later embodiments have been at
Howard University in nineteen
sixty seven San Francisco state
in nineteen sixty eight and the
explosion of black and ethnic
studies programs and departments
across the country in nineteen
sixty nine and beyond we see
today in places like Florida
that there are people like
governor Rhonda sciences we're
trying to put the ethnic studies
genie back in the bottle.
The resisters may not fully be
aware of how broad log a deep
this intellectual uprising is
but it only feels like an
intellectual uprising because
your intent to resist it.
So the people who oppose black
studies or ethnic studies
yesterday and today we're all on
the wrong side of history.
Just like the people opposing
queer and trans movements today
we'll see that they were on the
wrong side of history tomorrow
so I want to state to state
education commissioners district
leaders principles and classroom
teachers don't find yourself on
the wrong side of history.
Don't allow the good work that
you are that you're already
doing to wither away from lack
of administrative support and
teacher resistance the most
important Rahman in education is
what students say about their
learning experience listen to
any black student that has sat
inside a class related to his or
her experience poor has ready
book about their experience and
typically they will say that it
was the most exhilarating and
transformative experience in
their college for in their high
school career.
Think about the academically
marginal students looking for
inspiration hope and personal
validation there isn't any other
place the student can go to
begin resetting the mind what
the student cannot do it alone
once the student is in his or
her way yes there is some level
of self education but the
marginal black student needs a
curriculum that speaks to his or
her experience black books that
speak to his or her history and
culture and instructional style
from the teacher that can
inspire intellectual curiosity
and transform behavior education
is a service mission which means
the student is on the receiving
end and my MRI bill ability and
other teachers ability to
rehabilitate us all and bring us
together rather than the fear of
the black experience that may
assume will keep us divided and
part so the first Education Act
passed to help black students
was in nineteen fifty four with
brown versus the board of
education the black Education
Act the New Mexico house bill
forty three was passed
unanimously unanimously in New
Mexico in twenty twenty one
house bill forty three was
introduced by Sheryl Williams
Stapleton and helpful junior
during New Mexico's fifty fifth
legislature the first session in
twenty twenty one thank you.
So what does the black Education
Act benefit black people in
public and higher education
which is the black Education Act
as defined by so the twenty
twenty one it is a law aimed at
improving educational outcomes
for black students in New Mexico
it is to address the educational
gap for those black students.
We should the black experience
be taught black history should
not be confined to one month to
one day it should be taught year
round all day every day.
What does the black Education
Act do it creates and develops
programs and curricula teaching
black culture and history that
requires anti racism policies in
place in every district and
state charter school.
K..
What can parents do parents I'm
talking to you.
What can parents do to promote
black studies in school first
and foremost be engaged in your
child's education.
They need to educate themselves
of the educational system
sometimes the parents need to be
the squeaky wheel and let
administrators educators and
other related services and push
for students studies to be to be
discussed in classrooms parents
should try to build a supportive
community with their child's
school parents need to be the
players advocates for their
children and their education
parents need to stay proactively
informed and when something is
not right they need to voice
their concerns or concerns.
Also we need to encourage our
children to advocate for
themselves.
And students are saying well how
do I do that.
Organize petitions write letters
and respects respectfully ask
questions when they feel that
something is not right if your
child tells you here she has a
negative experience validate and
affirm their claim and talk to
your child's teacher teachers Dr
Jon Paul Higgins Ph.D suggested
that Paris know what the list of
what the less impact plan looks
like and what kind of engagement
and curriculum is to be talked.
What should educators do to
promote black studies educators
education leaders can partner
with black communities to grade
school environments that center
black voices recognizes
community and student assets and
nurture those strings and to
achieve success equip leaders
and school staff to build a
climate that promotes racial
justice.
What should the black community
due to help ensure school
professor calls find black
studies for the students each
one teach one creating a domino
effect of learning create groups
of support being gauged with
schools in your community
collaborate with other community
leaders and internal collaborate
with the schools on the best way
to find black studies in the
classroom school and community.
And so what is the black
Education Act needed in New
Mexico it is needed to improve
the graduation rates of African
American students graduating
from high school and
post secondary institutions
thank you.
That was such an inspiring
speech I'm just asking you just
one more round of applause I
speak as.
We have with us today the song
bird of the southwest and we
want to recognize her and asked
her to come and sing a solo for
us before we leave for the day.
Is.
I'm a little closer.
It's gonna be a great.
We
need to hang.
This is.
Shin news gonna be.
Need an we go home that's going
to be.
All were.
Hops.
Hi.
No school all one.
It's gonna be.
And we
need
to do is
to.
One of the.
Mmhm it's gonna be.
The.
No swara home.
But the.
All
Hi the.
Nobody to you.
When I was in.
You.
But the.
The.
You know I need to you.
I am not was
in.
The.
No
but the.
Thank you song bird of the
southwest for keeping this and
have a great rendition of your
wonderful talent I want to thank
the C. N. M. a black studies of
students a black student union
for joining us today in the
gallery and I want I would be
remiss without if I would allow
you to leave without knowing
about the black history that is
right in this room today so I
want to to know that we have the
first black senator in the state
of New Mexico on in this right
here is that Senator Hemphill
junior.
We also have the first black
dean of the UNM School of Law
Alfred Mathewson joining us.
Well the players have been ended
we have the first black
counselor for in Rio Rancho city
council councilwoman COVID drive
this call but.
And finally we have the first
black treasurer of the state of
New Mexico right here with this
administration James was.
They told me to tell you we have
the first black judge sitting on
the court of appeals judge
Tamara Henderson.
Send me a text and they told me
to say we may not be the we may
be the first but I guarantee you
will not be the last so thank
you all.
Thank you for joining us in this
African American day at the
legislature thank you for
learning about the history the
challenges and the successes of
the African American community
it was a pleasure to shared with
you and I was particularly want
to thank Senator Mimi Stewart
for allowing me to set the gavel
with her today.
No please help me thanking the
honorable Pamela Herndon's for
presiding today.
Chair chair recognizes
Representative Chasey.
Madam chair I ask unanimous
consent that the whole house and
Senate rise and report progress
the joint session of the house
and Senate will come to order.
Madam chair chair recognizes
Representative Chasey madam
chair I ask unanimous consent
that the joint session of the
house and Senate being now
dissolved if there's no
objection it is so ordered let
me just think the house from the
Senate for such a wonderful day
especially Representative heard
thank you.
The house.
We are.
This.
