Here Representative Zamora here.
By Senator here madam chair
Johnson here.
The other one all right thank
you again welcome and good
morning so we have some
housekeeping issue on our agenda
we are going to roll
by the request of the Sanchez H.
chair twelfth.
She also house bill four one
nine at the request of Sanchez
said we will not be hearing
those two bills we will begin
with house bill three one five.
Representative.
Thank you very much.
Chair good morning madam chair.
Representative I am reaching for
Representative Romero today the
purpose of this bill.
House Bill three one side it's
pretty straight for
and to.
Twenty twenty the original
cannabis bill appropriations for
behavioral behavioral mental and
public health programs as well
as equity in access those
appropriations and that the
strict of the original bill.
They were made on topics from
Canada sales and because this is
not yet generated any money
restrict the appropriations out
that now that we've had a very
successful run and the sales we
can make good on the original
promise to fund this program so
essentially this bill that at
this point I will let my experts
miss Emily Kaltenbach but leases
available soon introduce
yourself and take it away.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
Michael not for the drug policy
alliance I'm pleased to be here
today just to read the three
iterations new funds that are
created will go back directly to
the community for Health based
programs for research and for
substance use and prevention and
so there to funds one that would
be managed by the Human Services
department and the other by the
department of health and these
funds are after
the the amounts go to out to the
the counties and the local
jurisdictions currently we have
a twelve percent excise tax and
as it's about twenty nine
million in revenue that's going
to the general fund right now
based on monthly Revenue the
sales of cannabis and this is
just for adult uses is not for
medical just adult use sales
thirty three percent goes back
to the local jurisdiction where
the sale took place and that
means that based on this year's
revenue estimates these new
funds would get approximately
forty five million dollars
annually each annually we
anticipate that there be an
increase in future years as
revenue increases but not so I
thank you so much as I mentioned
last weekend many states
reinvest their dollars back into
health and behavioral health
services so New Mexico will be
you make of this is important to
support our communities that are
struggling with addiction and
overdose and also that have been
harmed by a prohibition of
marijuana so thank you so much.
Thank you madam chair
representative with that
extension west okay thank you so
at one of our previous meetings
the health of public comment so
we're going to go straight into
committee Representative Zamora
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and present
bringing this bill forward so
In our in our community we have
sales.
But then we were hearing that
they weren't seeing any of the.
Money's coming back to the
community can you kind of go
through the process and and let
us know kind of the amount of
time it takes.
Thank you madam chair
representative that question I
will defer to.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Zamora yeah that
way that the current activities
the the current statute is that
a sale takes place in let's say
the city or county those dollars
get collected through this
twelve percent excise tax and
it's not unlike what happens
currently with G. R. T. where
that it goes back to the state
that then distributes a certain
percentage back to the local
jurisdiction in which the sale
took place and so I do I'm not a
tax expert however I do know
that there can be a lag is
leased in a month for those
revenue to be collected and then
dispersed back to community so
the community gets thirty three
percent of that twelve percent
tax on adult use cannabis.
Okay thank you for that answered
thank you madam chair and then
on the.
We're talking about requests
here can you kind of go into the
requests part of a little bit
and are they going to be any
requests writers to help with
this the department.
Madam chair and representative
yes there are two different
funds created so the department
of health would oversee a grant
that are given back into
community and I just want to
note in the language it it
states who's eligible for those
requests so it actually could be
a city or county that applies
directly for those funds and
there is no mention of grant
supporting a grant writers but I
would hope that that would be
part of the program to get set
up both at part of health and
Human Services department to
assess assisting communities
writing for that because you
bring up a really important
point that these are communities
that have been harmed
and off of that that they're the
ones that should be supported in
getting these funds back into
their community.
And and madam chair presenters
one one of the problems we run
to into in and roll smaller
towns is is we don't have
accounted with our lawyers have
grant writers and the the cops
are trying to help in that but
it's just a big issue and and
small communities and and they
don't know how to access these
funds and they just fall further
further behind as we go just a
comment just of so we can better
maybe try to better the system
and madam chair presenters thank
you that's all my questions.
Thank you.
Senator little.
this will of course so I just
want to make sure that I'm
standing this madam chair.
Senator Hughes
I understand and I understand
this correctly that these funds
for set up initially and now
that they've been collected.
Are available will be with
disabilities that at this.
To go out to the communities.
And Madam chair representative
I'm I understand your question
correctly the answer is yes but
to be on the safe side within
differs yes okay thank you.
Madam chair representative
little absolutely yes the idea
is that these now that we know
how much is been collected in
the year we have a better sense
of what they could fund going
into the future so yes the HSD
is that goes directly back to
community for that portion
that's.
Explicit in that in that bill.
Madam chair representative.
For.
Three of chair representative
if you paid for your line five
six legal service.
Respirator face I formally
incarcerated.
What is that what we can do.
Representative Rehm and madam
chair representative.
I think this question well the.
Madam chair representative Rehm
great question we know that
there are folks who when they
get released from incarceration
there are a lot of collateral
consequences that occur with
having I charge on their record
and so not unlike legal services
that exist in our state the lady
maybe that's around housing
that's around employment that
might be around expungement of
records because we do have an
expungement lost so those are
the types of services that could
be provided for legal services
thank you.
Madam chair and employee if we
go for go toward one we're
talking about you know miss this
spell of the State counties why
don't we include state in their.
Madam chair representative the
idea was that the funding would
go directly back to the
community because those are
right now you know we I think
what we heard when we pass the
cannabis regulation act is that
the impact is felt at a
community level and that intent
of this bill was really to
support communities in
prevention maybe if cannabis use
for young people they could use
it for preventing
driving while you know
intoxicated or things like that
we know that the community feels
the impact and that's why it was
written this way.
Madam chair of expert you you
read my mind because that's the
next question what of
Representative I think I paid
for Year data section and I
don't have the language but if
you talk with the Sanchez I
think that you need to see to
address of the drug pricing
issues.
So just I do you know if they
can do that amendment before
they get to the next committee.
I don't I don't have the
language so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your.
I will make it.
Okay.
Committee chair representative
last year
Madam chair of doing to
reiterate something I think said
before but not here.
The.
I want chair representative on
page one two sections a and B.
of talk about the distribution
that's current law but the talk
about the distribution back to
this house.
and counties and we have seen
the the new language and what's
not in here but I think it needs
to be made clear yes money that
has madam chair is that see in
the distribution should be.
After the distributions pursuant
a and B. we're not taking this
care of that regional thirty
three percent
of the state portion.
If I understood their expert
witness correctly I don't think
that's clear in this language as
it's written they just need to
add that he's.
No Madam thank you madam chair
members here and lead there's
anything left to comment on our
ad regarding that please do so
but I will make a note of it for
the Sanchez.
Madam chair representative I I I
agree that that clarification
needs to occur in the current in
the bill thank you.
Representative walk thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative this bill so I
have a question for.
At the top of the line one.
This provides medical cannabis
therapeutic option Madam chair
representative you know I I have
friends that own cannabis shops
that are not selling.
Through this excise tax and they
just self relating to small
purposes chair representative
so.
You know I know there's a lot of
affecting a lot of good benefits
to cannabis when it comes to
like.
Thank you for your cancer
patient you need.
Some kind of a pain relief and
stuff but I know that that kind
of stuff that's just purely
medicals not under this access
tax Madam chair representative
so I'm just wonder
Are we also including those
individuals on this now are or
will they be excluded Madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair representative and
only you have anything to offer.
Thank you madam chair
representative block currently
under our our statute medical
cannabis is not taxed and taxed
just like any other medication
would be in our state and so we
want to make sure that medical
patients are also supported by
Revenue that gets collected from
the adult use side so even
though
no tax gets generated from the
sale of medical cannabis those
patients should should also
benefit and that's why it's
included thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
miss Emily so.
You know I I have a problem I
just had a problem in the past
this bill chair representative
of I thought that the number of
taxes just waiting on my because
I think by twenty twenty five it
goes to sixteen percent or
something and I just don't want
that to increase the black
market of cannabis so that the
state is getting decrease
revenues when it comes to twenty
twenty five do you see that
there would be any decrease in
revenues when the taxes begin to
go higher from twelve percent
sixty percent madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative and we go ahead.
Madam chair representative of
what.
Yeah another really important
point that when states started
legalizing cannabis some of the
early states have really high
cannabis taxes and what ends up
happening is that doesn't help
to quell the illicit market in
but New Mexico's actually is
much lower than other states so
I just want to note that
Colorado had their excise taxes
I think their total taxes ended
up being like thirty percent
were as ours currently are total
taxes are about eighteen percent
that includes the G. R. T. on
top of that and so we also got
good guidance from the tax
policy center that the amount
that was included in the
cannabis regulation Act was the
perfect balance for to protect
from a public health perspective
because if you make the tax too
low then you might have public
health implications if you make
it too high that the illicit
market can
Of the fuel so that right now
the best information we have is
that this New Mexico has a the
rate of tax distribution amount
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative that's all the
questions I have thank you very
much chair very thank you
committee member.
Senator
hi would you do pass.
Or we have a motion for you
Representative.
Representative Chasey
well Representative bill three
one five.
Representative on your yes.
Representative walked pass.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative walked yes.
But the girl yes.
Madam chair yes eight two not to
participate all right you have
to pass on house bill I think.
All right I see Representative
Kate we will finish House report
seven and house bill I.
Comments so we'll go to the
committee.
Session house bill four section.
Thank you we've recaptured.
Thank you very much stands Care
and senses Committee
Representative Kate's
I is the pleasure of prison
scene House Bill three four
seven on Saturday.
The income of public comment
feats in this bill is being
closed Representative Parker and
as we all.
So all over the place right now
otherwise you'd be doing.
that is so our intent of the
bill is that.
Representative Harper high far
from larger parties but we
believe that New Mexico
has very strong independence and
declined to state voice and
especially in the area in which
we live in we want to make sure
that we are giving them of a
utilities put forth candidates
so currently our signature
requirements is one and a half
percent of the signatures of
your party who had in the
previous governor's election so
give a
If a candidate's of let's see a
district had a sixty percent
Democrat and forty percent
Republicans a Democrat may have
to get.
A hundred signatures and
Republican would have to get
seventy five signatures but
independent non declined to
state would have to get two
hundred and fifty three hundred
signatures because they have to
do it the one and a half percent
of all registered voters so we
want to change the signature
requirement has nothing to do
with Party but to have the
office to see so we're proposing
a thousand signatures for in the
state office governor's state
auditor treasurer on five
hundred signatures for Congress
and a hundred signatures for
state Senate and fifty
signatures four of the house of
representatives as you know most
local offices such as city
council and mayor's usually
don't require signatures at all.
And we feel like this will be
able to find of more of an
opportunity in a voice for our
independent state that there's.
Thank you and I are thank you
madam chair and committee and I
just.
The.
To committee.
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative.
I don't disagree with the
concept but what I find somewhat
problematic.
And I usually call people when
they don't numbers in statute
because if you can find some
kind of an index for the statute
like a well the one percent the
half a percentage point to
percent.
As opposed to a number of and
you don't have to come back and
change it just to population
changes so that would be my only
comment.
Madam chair and committee I'm so
sorry for got to mention that I
do have two expert witnesses on
soon above Carrillo and so on I
I and and I would like to
respond to Representative Chasey
city I I agree Representative I
leader Chasey I often that's
exactly how I approach the sort
of things.
But we wanted to have a very
understandable
signature requirement in one
which everyone knows that
impaired disease we still
today's how signatures LFC sh so
having a flat achievable
understandable well
communicated requirements was
important so that's why I go for
the flight number but you're
absolutely right when in in the
past for other deals we do try
to following the stacks.
Representative Rehm.
One of the two one of
Representative walk approve the
minutes.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative thank you madam
chair thank you very so I just
have one concern about.
The number of signatures.
Thanks for statewide offices
that would include governor is
that correct Madam chair
representative but Madam chair
representative yes currently
your the way the signature
requirement is it's
state offices.
I have to do one half percent
more parties state.
Registered owners who voted in
the previous governor's race and
that's the same whether you're
state auditor or.
Thank you Representative so I
have to figure from you do you
know how many signatures around
for Republican and Democrat.
How much did they need the last
general election to get on the
ballot each park manager so
madam chair representative is I
will defer to my expert witness
but I will say that in the in at
least in the state offices in
the last election was about
thirty five hundred for
Democrats and lead round twenty
two hundred for Republicans but
I will defer to my expert
witness they're sitting in front
action data.
Hello madam chair representative
so I have the data pulled up in
front of me in our last most
recent election.
Candidates running for statewide
office in the Democratic Party
had to collect three thousand
five hundred signatures
for Republican candidates had to
collect one thousand five
hundred signatures minor party
candidates have to collect six
thousand nine hundred signatures
and independent candidates have
to collect thirteen thousand
nine hundred signatures.
Thank you madam.
And the you know I think that
you know I see the point your
bill I really do we want more
independence around thirty
thousand signatures that.
I was agree with you but I also
think lowering it to such a
threshold that.
You know the Democrats that that
Thompson and third for the
Democratic Party and then for
the Republican Party it's
chopped in half Senator
Representative I just don't see
that as necessarily fair because
already in twenty eighteen and
twenty twenty two the terms are
usually very low out of the
chair representative so.
I was thinking maybe raising
that to make two thousand or
something that could be
reasonable where folks in the
independent don't have to go
for thirteen thousand signatures
are focusing libertarian madam
chair representative have to go
for six that.
So do you have a comment on that
chair thank thank you madam
chair at and committee I in the
certainly will would invites
used to be able to.
Go through this process we had I
have several bills in my desk
for the this specific bill
Anne's actually the ours that I
went to this was the compromise
in which they felt the most
comfortable with we look to
actually no signature
requirement many states don't do
any signature requirements of
all
we didn't want to have an
adverse because where I was
concerned about rural areas you
know if you're an urban area he
said you could be in the parking
lot of a grocery store and get
your you know two hundred
signatures but if you're in a
rural area and if you are not
party affiliated if you don't
have for the county fair tend to
go to to get signatures on going
door to door is you know
individuals and rural areas are
sitting at home a lot they're
usually you know out working and
so we were trying to make it so
that it would be as much as
inclusive as possible and so
these are the numbers that were
arrived at.
Thank you madam chair
representative so you know I get
that I think it's good to have
compromises you know we don't
have a lot of.
Fortunately but a so I'm looking
at page three.
nine eight and this is for
County officer elected committee
district or division the needs
fifty signature so currently
chair representative I note a
bunch of candidates and Otero
County where I'm from and they
are currently not required to
get signatures from for county
commission chair representative
with this now for some to get
fifty signatures to run for
county commission center at
Madam chair representative the
committee thank you so much for
your question I'm going to defer
to my experts witness.
Madam chair representative I'm
so sorry could you please repeat
your question course madam chair
representative so currently I
don't believe that county
commission candidates have to
get signatures for ballot access
with this bill currently with
well I don't know about my
County here earlier or wherever
but with this currently in this
bill at a requirement for fifty
signatures for every single
person from district or division
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative so
according to the bill as it is
right in right now it would
require individuals who are
candidates for county
commissions to collect fifty
signatures
we are open to discussing that
particular section as you
mentioned it would add something
that isn't required currently
but we wanted to make the
signature requirements fifty an
equal for all
offices that are on the same
level of that including state
representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative well I guess I
would.
I don't know if I can adhoc
amendment but I would suggest on
page three.
Line nine distracted tired Madam
presented with.
And madam chair committee a man
for my expert witness I I I.
Would this be a friendly at
admin minutes striking lines
eight nine on page three.
I would agree so yes.
When we get to that and you'd
have to do it on state agency
at.
Yeah.
All right complete fix.
Seventeen eighteen and then on
page nine.
This.
The end to being able to working
as an.
Woods yes working his men into
yeah I can do that
Representative Chasey has a
question.
So from Madam chair
representative.
Is your point is making this
ammendment.
To.
Senate offices such as firmly on
your.
Sierra County.
You prove to collect signatures
and one little confused about
the difference between six and
seven subsection.
The.
There are many offices that are
from district.
I think we bought for all our
New London explained that I I
guess I didn't realize that
there's like this subdivisions
within the county county offices
I don't know.
Madam chair representative of a
committee I will see that as a
section six is that there is a
county office that is the entire
county for section seven is it
there's a district often as in
county commissioners are in
their own individual district
this intent was just to make a
flat fee in because we received
information from
the Republicans from Mr Harper's
consider that that the wanted
some skin in the game they
wanted some signatures but we
really want Alexion's and
participation from all so
removing it with the
friendliness.
Hello so madam chair and
Representative K.
Representative documents to the
press because it's.
Hi.
It seems like we're going to
letting somebody office.
Where is the sheriff has to get.
signatures under subsection six
but the insurers just going to
go side.
And I I guess I don't think
that's a good idea.
I always thought it was kind of
strange that they did not get
the signatures anyway so I'm
like that you included in the
first place so that.
The Senators the chair
representative of I.
I agree with you in theory I
just think currently.
It's different they don't have
to get signatures so I guess if
we wanted to add these the
signature requirement instead of
the fifty dollar filing fee.
You know I guess that would be.
Good but it also would depend on
the county commission district
and some of them are very tiny
and it may be difficult for
folks in the really tiny
districts that have very rural
areas to get fifty signatures
Madam chair representative so I
I'm not sure.
But all for the Representative
review like to add that.
Thanks.
You want to.
Is.
Yeah let's do this let's
students separately okay so next
I will go Representative
Thank you madam chair
representative I apologize if
this was addressed earlier and I
missed it but if we're setting
firm signature requirements for
non affiliated candidates
significantly lowering the
current threshold are we also
doing that for candidates in the
major parties as well to firm to
lower.
From numbers thank you madam
chair and committee a yes
Representative said this will be
a flat signature requirement no
matter what your party is the
intent of the bill is not to
create signature requirements
based on party on the office in
which C. thank you for the
answer madam chair
Representative I ask because.
Non affiliated candidates.
I guess for me I felt like the
higher signature threshold was
fair given that non affiliated
candidates don't have to run the
primary so since they are
essentially skipping an entire
election cycle in itself the
higher signature requirements
was not an issue for me because
if they had.
To meet whatever the.
The seemingly very high
signature requirement was they
got the benefit of kind of just
appearing on a general ballot
and not having to go through a
debate process just all the
things that go along with
In a primary election and then
there for winning a primary
election essentially they've won
the right to be on a general
valid fiber to of these higher
signature requirements so I was
just wondering if we.
Are making it easier for the non
affiliated to get onto a general
ballot in the first place if we
are also making it easier for
candidates and parties to.
I guess get on their primary
doctor I mean they still have to
go through the primary process
so as we're making it easier
provided for making it easier
for everybody is essential asset
question sorry I've been off on
a bit of attention decide to
explain my thought process out
loud for you and for myself as
well so thank you very much
Madam chair representative for
that answer.
Thank you Representative three
thank you madam chair and
representative I want to go to
page six and I want to.
X..
Actually one through eight so we
start looking at all these other
offices they don't have to get.
Jurors I guess they just put
their name on the ballot from
they're going and that's kind of
where I have a problem of.
You know when you look at the
representatives of I just have
to get this
wealth I usually have to get
more and I actually enjoy going
door to door and talking of my
constituents and you know
finding out what the issues are.
As a so I'm not I'm not happy
with this scheme right
with Representative Chasey the
we have a percentage and there's
a reason for the percentage but
I guess my question is why you
want to a women eight these
people from getting any
signatures on page six.
And then chair and and committee
they already don't require
signatures so we're just
reflected I mean I I I can't
speak for every bill is council
and city council that most city
council village council mayors
do not need to get signatures I
to agree with you Representative
bring I enjoyed being able to.
It we talked about one of the
versions this bill was no
signatures all and if I may be
so bold as to actually.
Let you know what Representative
Parker felt was as co sponsor is
that he too wants only
individuals who are willing on
the stores and get to know that
constituents and so we agreed on
this flat rate rather than a new
signatures at all but these
particular no signatures it's
just that they already existed
signatures.
Madam chair.
Representative I thought the
judges had to do that.
So.
I am I do apologize I'm sorry
madam chair you you're
absolutely right judges do have
to get signatures.
And madam chair representative.
Thank the.
One of the important things of
the signature signature
requirement is to.
We have people who are if you
were dedicated to to really
running a campaign and
communicating with their
constituents and
I think that's an important
aspect of it
I first see the these minimum
requirements would make it easy
to have half of those ten people
wanted governor on each part of.
And the I don't I don't think
that's a good idea either.
Madam chair representative first
as I would like my expert
witness to answer the judge's
questions but just to address
Representative remand
Representative on our new I need
to I I not a career politician
this is I am a freshman but I
will tell you the signatures was
the easiest part of my campaign.
And and I didn't have the.
I love I enjoyed the signatures
I've helped other canids
signatures but there are many
others staffs of dating.
Campaign process I believe and
and now I'd like to further my
expert witness regarding the
judges will be more
knowledgeable than I on this
thank you.
Madam chair representative so
the bill as it's written right
now does not directly address
any candidates running for judge
directly so therefore I will
just have to defer back to
Representative cases comments on
you know yes the judges do you
have to click save insurers
right now but we're not directly
addressing that in the bill.
So just to clarify.
Madam chair in the is that this
of the portent of the bill that
we're not addressing the flat
rate of signatures or the judges
the judges are.
Their signature required choir
meant that is current will serve
remain current we were only
looking at these other offices.
Okay well.
Madam chair and representative I
think on page six where you to
lead out the signature
requirements.
All we have to do now is files.
You know I think that that's
problematic
Unanswered Committee memory for
math for my expert witness.
Madam chair representative the
section that is crossed out says
that
metropolitan court and
magistrate courts they must
collected signatures from voters
so.
I mean it would be a friendly
amendment if you'd like to costs
that section but that was not
the main focus of the bill
So we don't know if it would
make a massive difference from
having to collect ten signatures
to none.
Madam chair and.
Representative Kate so what
about district attorneys were
they.
Addressed in here what are they
have to do.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I will defer to my
experts witness.
Madam chair representative just
like we did we are not directly
addressing the judges were also
not directly addressing
attorney.
Yeah
I'm so sorry Madam chair
representative I just want
clarified we're not addressing
the district attorneys obviously
the AG is a state office thank
you.
Madam chair and
Representative all passes to you
in a moment but I'm not proposes
amendment I I've given the chair
this I don't give this to you
but I need to read it on page
two why what was approved for
the.
Have.
File file and.
Strike the remainder of the
line.
Strike all of one twelve.
And strikes were Alexion's
online thirteen.
Representative.
Is the two years our online
lessons through thirteen.
What's the purpose of this
amendment is to make everyone
file at the same time right now
you have the Republicans and
Democrat filing and then the
okay you can see who's on the
ballot and filed at a later
date.
So if we're gonna make everybody
files we have to make
everybody's files one day.
It's
going.
Chasey.
Madam chair I guess.
I was just not tracking with
your words because did you say
at one thirteen.
It seems like.
Page two thanks to.
Is shows here okay we know that
they got a.
We just.
These are.
Start over.
Here's the court.
That's right.
Those.
You know for the savings
and sorry he asked me and for
the other fields.
Like.
Our our.
And the purpose of this
amendment is to make that filing
date the same for everyone.
The representatives I'll go
ahead and do that.
Two five fourteen point one for
discussion.
Thank you.
And so on page two one eleven
after file strike them remainder
of the line strike wine world.
In its entirety in stride one
thirteen through Alexion.
And served in Lujan there are
four on the second Tuesday of
March and each even numbered
year.
When the hours of nine AM and
five PM.
Then on page two.
Between the lines fourteen and
fifteen and Sir a new section
this would be section report
section one dash eight dash one
fifty two.
Never just New Mexico state
inspection seventeen and I can
set.
Building wall nineteen seventy
seven chapter three twenty two
section eight.
As amended by law twenty
fourteen chapter forty section
eight and laws.
I was twenty four date chapter
eighteen section eight the
method to read.
Close one dash eight dash fifty
two independent candidates for
general election for United
state representative special
election nominating petitions
circulation data I.
Section eight the clearing
declarations of independent
candidates and a nominating.
Shall be filed with the proper
officer tween nine AM and five
PM on the and we're supporting
the current language second
Tuesday of March of each even
numbered year and between nine
and five on the house of fifty
six that a percentage that is
states Representative
Representative special watches.
The.
Decorations of independent
candidacies and nominating
petitions for the office of
president of the United States
shall be filed with the proper
filing officer between nine AM
and five PM on the will start
the current one and insert
second Tuesday March in the
number.
Madam chair stand for questions
years just on top.
Committee members.
Discussion on the amendment.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative reading.
So what you're doing right now
the section you're amending is
what those who are a minor
political party in the state
they don't file until after the
crisis.
Madam chair you're saying no
those people are going to file.
The same day as all of the
other.
Candidates for the majority.
It it's a major change from what
the sponsors are proposing in
their experts and I have a
feeling there experts may want
to weigh in on that.
I think that you might want to
give them some time to be
honest.
To look this over and see if
they're willing to listen to our
discussion see if they wanted it
right in the of our discussion
into possibly committees up for
something but I and I don't know
if this is what I don't.
This is what they had in mind
and I guess we're allowed to do
that would have to say what we
do here but
Thank you.
His approach always involved in
these issues.
Like to give them a chance to
look it over.
I'm still not crazy about the
idea of the statute.
It's like we're assuming that
we're always going to be the
size and you know maybe that's
about The Simpsons.
Because we don't have a lot of
water but maybe not.
Hey we will we'll do something
smart one of these days and have
more water from.
That that's all it was a very.
Thanks committee maintenance Y.
expert witness to to plan your.
And one Representative ring that
they might get him to sign ups
is them being of these
interested in.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative yes
definitely
We will definitely need to
reconsider the the changes.
To the filing days and times we
may or may not think that this
would limit the opportunities of
people to be able to file
and then just to briefly address
Representative she sees concerns
about a flat number as we've
been mentioning we we originally
wanted to consider having zero
signature requirements because
there are many state to do that
who still have quality
candidates running for office
the main goal is to have more
representation and more options
because New Mexico elections
have been.
Increasingly uncompetitive over
the the last decade
and our neighbors in Utah and
Colorado have passed a similar
bill with similar flat rate
members who have been working
pretty well for that and yes is
there any waivers in our
politics are somewhat similar we
believe that you know then
making their legislation on this
was our best move and as
Representative Kate's
highlighted you know there has
we offered both versions of the
bill too many representatives to
sign on and discuss and so far
and this one was the one that
got the most attention and most
support.
All right thank you okay
committee members I'm gonna take
the privilege to
a few words before called
Representative onion or you I
am.
I truly believe that hi I'm
requested to collect ninety
seven signatures and I represent
a large district.
And I drive miles to the with my
constituents hi I go to
neighborhoods I get to see parks
icy roads and bridges this is
where children go to school this
is the senior center.
this is how we live in this is
who we are and this is going to
present us and
Since it shows responsibility it
shows accountability the show
state you're in this for the
long haul and
you know we can meet our
constituents and then after that
we see them again for service
restored the post office so
That is why I am not going to be
able to support your bills I
thank you for bringing your bill
forward I think we need to find
some more.
You know.
That caller presented of million
or in the chair always wrong and
then the but I think the whole
purpose of the bills make
everything.
And we're gonna make everything
all.
But would drop the amendment and
of we go to the Representative.
Thank you chair representative
to echo with the chair said some
of my life and some the biggest
supporters I have in my district
of the supporters that that what
was out gathering signatures
there my number ones from day
one.
Because they they have been
they've been with me since.
I was just asking them to let me
be on
a primary ballot so I think that
the signature gathering is a
very important process in the
elect it's an election process
to echo what Representative
Chasey said earlier no that the
amendment has been withdrawn
but.
The on the fly amendments that
we came up with in this
committee I think we're a very.
Or the beginnings of a very good
discussion about changes that I
would think would be necessary
in this bill to move forward
however.
It doesn't really apply anymore
because the minutes were
withdrawn but making such
sweeping changes to the bill in
the on the fly amendments made
me very uncomfortable and now
that they're no longer on the
table I am also not prepared to
support this bill in its current
state
I maybe would have as a
committee substitute had the
amendment not been withdrawn but
at this time madam chair
given everything that's happened
in discussions with amendment
being at home with Ron I I move
to table so it's present state.
The coach's.
Questions that I think this
question so I I so I have.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative Representative on
your news
Comments you know when I was
doing on TV it was a great
experience like a movie a lot of
the neighbors I have met before
and I got to meet from the
supporters that are close to my
campaign now and I think we do
need to keep these requirements
you know I I do see the point
regarding statewide candidates
getting thirteen thousand
signatures or something madam
chair but I also see the since
they don't run primary like all
of us to they also should have a
higher standard so thank you
madam chair representative and I
I appreciate the discussion
today.
Representative main.
Madam chair I move to table.
Session four tabling a motion
and second.
Do we have any opposition to
this motion please take all
Representative on in order yes
the table.
Representative walked yes
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes.
Representative rings yes.
Representative Zamora yes budget
Figaro no.
And madam chair.
Yes and Representative based
here okay sixty seconds.
This bill
we still have one more vote come
in right no no I got all of our
country C. pass.
All I'm sorry.
The.
Felons in the value of your.
That the video is not limited
only to sit through.
but then it also opens the door
to my under Hurley and
independent voters to the heart
of our independent candidates to
be part of this.
Process the amendments were
excellent that we're discussing
thanks very.
As well that that could be
pursued.
The discussion on page six of
the.
Minimum signature requirements
for certain offices were
stricken fifty we considered.
Because of the door knocking I'm
just sorry that this
conversation was cut short thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam vice chair
Thank you Representative
We stated motion.
That passed the house bill three
four seven.
Representative Representative.
It's not necessarily not is here
to committee work that's what
the deal is with bills on the
table.
Thank you madam chair thank you
will lose health so I.
Thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair and
committee trying to.
Representative students present
house bill applied toward.
Still I is improvements is
updates on the current
government contract.
this bill follows in New Mexico
Supreme Court recent decision
and state versus Guterres that
the case the Supreme Court
health which The New Mexico's
main anti corruption provisions
were not specific enough
criminally enforceable as a
consequence the Supreme Court
vacated anti corruption charges
that the twenty general had
brought across the state in the
bill makes it very clear that in
New Mexico.
Is it is the use of government
office.
this bill of I have two expert
witnesses on soon one is the
deputy AG James Grayson and the
other is a former Representative
Daymon Ely.
And I will look for them to make
a statement please.
The new jeans please.
James once it start with.
Sir Jeremy is on deck is going
to public comment let's have a
state room with that demon.
Representative.
The lighting in.
Welcome back.
Where are you.
I'm right here.
All I'm I'm getting I think the.
How are you guys.
I first of all it thank you for
having me back I it's a
privilege to be back in the
committee but it's a
particularly fun thing for me to
watch my representatives who is
doing a fantastic job so I just
had to say that I watched the
last bill and Monday's hearing
so I'm very proud of my
representatives Representative
Kate so I just want to start
that way I as the representative
shall be very brief we as the
Legislature fought that we were
making
certain acts both subject to the
ethics commission and to the our
criminal code and all of the AG
talk about the criminal code
it's really the same issue we
are trying to address what the
reported back in September of
twenty twenty two in state
versus with yes
and.
Back into the statutes what we
think is conduct that should be
either unlawful or unethical
subject to either civil
penalties for to criminal
penalties and I will just
briefly go through it I know you
have a full calendar that I'm
happy to answer any questions I
if you go through the sections
are you start with section one
which is the operational section
it literally is the purpose of
the government conduct act and
particularly this portion of it
the second is absolue anguish
that really creates kind of a
mini hatch act I do want to be
clear with all of you that.
talks about public employee
officer or employee.
That does not include
legislators why definition the
government conduct actor can
sixteen to apply specifically
excludes from the definition of
a public officer and employee
legislators so section two
doesn't involve legislators up
and you'll see if you look at
section see why it doesn't cause
section C. impart describes the
roundhouse where we do use a
public building for political
purposes you wouldn't want that
but then section three does
involve legislators and public
officials this is the quid pro
quo for language that we thought
was already actionable and it
does two things makes it to
where people can't trade
financial interests
four about four or action by the
government in some way some
favor of the government for
personal financial benefit and
it adds in there specifically
obtaining sexual favors that is
new to the statute and create
something that I think is
important in the context of
what we think is wrong you
should be trading sexual favors
for our either revoked or some
kind of a favor from the
government section for them
this is basically a cleanup
because it's taking section a
and C. out and put it back in in
an earlier section section I use
the quid pro yes I'm sorry I
think with local programming
ridge ammunition while
this is the vicarious liability
I suggested to the sponsor in
reading that that as it leaves
this committee that section.
I do amended not going to do it
today because we gonna take a
little bit of work.
I would make employers.
Someone who has left the
government office kind of with
walloping doorstep that we don't
want to see the ticket like
government agencies right now
the way that draft is written it
makes the employer responsible
even if you're she is an
innocent actor doesn't out what
I would like to do before it
hits Judiciary is making clear
that there has to be and and
can't what lawyers call a
mandatory a component so you're
really getting at the bad actors
section six them this gonna come
out and the reason section six
comes out it's because you've
already addressed at all I think
it's three sixty four that was
the whole stationary thing and
fill that out that does need to
be corrected and that should
come out before his Judiciary
and then section seven is the
civil penalties discussed
increase the civil penalties
kicks away this notion of two
hundred fifty dollars not all
bad actually the same under kind
of bribery shouldn't just be
limited to two hundred fifty
dollars on and there should be a
larger penalty sometimes and so
that's why we're talking about
an increase of ten thousand
dollars the whole idea of this
change and why this is so
necessary is because what you're
trying to do with the government
conduct act is put to do that
again and the Supreme Court they
were not wrong to do this the
language was to emphasize as
Representative Kate stat
that they they struck basically
and so we're trying to do is
restore the enforcement
abilities and making the rules
of the road clear for public
employees and officers and
legislators as to what they can
and cannot do so there isn't any
kind of ambiguity and there's
real remedies civil and criminal
if somebody does something wrong
thank you madam chair vice chair
major leaguer representative and
my representatives.
Thank you Representative.
I know about it.
Committee members.
We did hear public comment.
Right to committee members met
madam chair respectively we have
not heard this is express.
Yeah.
I have another one we for.
For public comment those in
support of this bill please
raise your hand.
Those in opposition please raise
your hand.
Let's go to the webcast of those
in support of the bill Jeremy.
Those in opposition.
Jeremy Ferris.
Okay.
Thank you lord is here okay is
he is he has directed the okay
alright there's one person in
the.
Once talk okay.
Okay so I'm just on.
He's
is he is he witness.
Please.
Ask questions me.
You know he would be for public
comment okay so let's.
Jerry Ferris.
Public comment.
You madam chair can you hear me
yes right of Madam committee
members good morning my name's
Jeremy Ferris I'm the director
of the state ethics commission
in its twenty twenty two annual
report the ethics commission
endorsed the ideas in this bill
to improve the government
conduct acts following state
verses cootie Harris and
other other cases that the
ethics commission has seen in
its its three years of work I
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill and and
sixteen other Sanchez and and
the house of representatives for
for sponsoring this bill I just
like to also thank the the
former Attorney General and the
current Attorney General and
their respective staffs for the
the work and thought that they
put into this bill as well thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative little
yes madam chair and like to.
I move that we do pass okay some
House Bill five.
And we have a second.
Representative bring.
Madam chairman former
representative of on page two.
Line eleven and twelve you're
talking about public officer
that Madam chair representative
of that is not that is a person
who works for the state not over
it not elected official.
Madam chair.
Yes if I could I think I can
directly answer Representative
reams question Madam chair
representative Rehm I'll read it
to you the identity of the
definition of
Public officer and employee
means an elected or appointed
official or employee of a state
agency or local government
agency who received compensation
in the form of salary or is
eligible for for per diem or
mileage but excludes
legislators.
That's why I said public
officers employees is to provide
but does not include years so
for example section to does
having to of legislators does
have to do with elected or
appointed officials.
Out and I without madam chair
discover the hazard of doing
zoom in my office.
Of madam chair and
data and I think that on not a
page nine of one I said see I
think you need to maybe think
about legislators who do
represent their constituents but
for.
Of state agencies.
And
thank you to
all that you're you're taking
that out transaction
is removed okay Madam chair
representative or the reason for
the confusion as we haven't done
it yet but but it gets a and so
I appreciate the confusion
section six is going to come out
so just so you know I mean it
has to you you you've now passed
and sent to the governor Senate
bill three sixty four that is a
huge impact to be inconsistent
application.
Over the madam chair and
David you're saying the Senate
bill three twenty four is
already moving and we're just.
This is the bills member the
whole stationary controversy
this is that bill okay so that
bill has passed both chambers I
think and is now going to the
governor's office last time I
checked that's weird that okay
it's going.
Yeah that's correct
Okay what madam chair and Damon
what I'm gonna do is save the
questions for your gesture
itself like you're gonna have a
big is up so the only other
thing that and all all do this
all of get a copy of this too
Representative Kate's I think
she ought to be aware of the
extortion and bribery statute I
have that here with me so this
call later on thank you Mr
Chairman said we are planning to
do an amendment before us
before Judiciary there are
several things in one.
Tweet in this bill.
Thank you for.
Thank you I have a quick
question on page ten.
It's.
But I wanted to hear from you so
the.
Penalty from two fifty to ten
thousand that serve a range for
what they're.
for what it whatever area it
right in just over two hundred
fifty to ten thousand thank you
very much madam chair and and
committee the current statutes
is two hundred and fifty dollars
per incident up to five thousand
dollars so if there was a minor
infraction we felt it two
hundred fifty dollars is too
much it is a major fraction five
thousand dollars is too little
so we just need half of ten
thousand dollars and then
whether or not the the penalties
to dollars supports up to ten
thousand dollars it it it
doesn't of course and all of
with the minimum
Story I.
Okay.
Rating thank you back to
committee members.
Representative level past.
The second Chasey.
And that is there any opposition
to this motion.
Seeing them we have to pass on
house bill five.
The show all
For that Representative.
Thank you for.
Representative Alcon yes.
One moment please.
The numbers are.
Okay.
Thank.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative helpful for I is
a very short very street bill
that simply requires
municipalities that have
security camera systems are at
thirty five cameras were more
that they keep the recordings
for up to two
days.
Pursuant to
I period of less than make those
audio and video recordings of
the.
And I have no expert witnesses
other than myself.
Let's go to the audience those
in support of this bill please
raise your hand those in
opposition.
Seeing that fan
madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza press
this with the New Mexico
foundation for open government
stand stand strong support of
legislation increase this bill
really increases transparency
allows.
Public records of these videos
for longer periods thank you.
Thank you let's go to the west.
Do we have any anyone who'd like
to come in support or opposition
to house bill I.
Seeing none Representative Rehm.
There.
Representative of the school
page one.
Twenty four dashboard cameras I
think that might need to go down
there with the help that the.
Get out of I have to look at
that statute
go ahead and do that but you may
want to consider moving that
down there so that the policy is
the same both help video a
hundred twenty days but I like
your bill yes ma'am COVID in the
I don't I don't know the answer
to that right now thank you
madam chair representative yes
if we're talking about dashboard
cameras specific to law
enforcement officers that would
them certainly I would be
willing to clarify that language
but a dashboard camera
associated with like a city
vehicle or something that might
be available to be I carried
that.
I want that to happen the same
recording storage requirements
yes madam chair I think you can
do that for Judiciary I don't
have the language on the so
thanks thank you Representative
Chasey thank you madam chair
thank you representative on the
line
it seems like this would be
helpful in in private
destinations right yes thank you
madam chair and representative
if you'll allow me three very
well make it is responsible
stories house bill came about
In August of twenty twenty one.
I was driving as well as leading
a full fires concert with my
partner we're driving and
Broadway.
But through the downtown area
and we were involved in a.
At road rage incident that
resulted in our call the shots
at and my partner being shot
through the cardboard the bullet
struck him in the elbow only
because he had his arm.
on the door all right and it was
I think the doctor said it was a
half second I'm not sure what
that means the medical terms
with both a half second way
through his heart has are not
been resting in the window their
workers city cameras municipal
cameras along the street where
the incident occurred my partner
with the hospital for two nights
his attorney requested IPRA the
footage because we have
reported that incident and we
were told that the footage had
been deleted after twenty four
hours which is.
No time at all and so that's
really the.
The purpose of this bill is
because it does help solve prime
the cameras were put in place to
combat crime to fight crime but
they are not at.
Doing that to their full
capability and I don't believe
that for I think six months
storage on that fee to seventy
disability.
Thank you for that question
madam chair representative and
so thank you for that story
that's just absolutely
frightening glad that.
The everything was a lie.
Or that
Survival and here partner but
it could be I don't think it
would apply here because it
happened I had one of probably
the only vality I ever had.
K. on his office.
Mmhm my client be.
We.
I charged with fourth degree
felony for batteries public
health worker and it occurred
emergency room.
And the footage was just gone
like that and.
FY I said is correct the footage
would exonerated him completely
and in fact other members of the
staff had told him to call
report that years for the way
he's treating her daughter and
all you know you like I said all
he did was the king of the
supervisor's office you just
kind of pushed it away
and but anyway but it was gone
no I don't.
And we are inside but the whole
idea we've got these you're
doing this and then it's gone.
And it just doesn't seem that
it's helpful to the community.
For not not having some kind of
storage capacity so this I think
was a good start thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Right madam chair I move that
D. pass to second we have to
pass in the second thanks.
Before we take a vote one of the
things that's going forward I
think it's going to really help
this city and the county
detention centers and then I
think it's a protection and
accountability for both sides.
That.
Tax and second to have any
opposition to the motion.
Seeing that you have to pass on
house bill four zero five we
show office and voting in.
So we will go out to.
Gentleman that's in order
captain for the for the.
Okay and.
So where's your seven.
Is for the most part it is just
cleaning up existing statute
that had not been looked at in
quite some regarding indigent
burials and how they handle
things methodology for some of
this language is not been
modified since the thirties or
forties and other parts of it
has not been modified since
nineteen eighty four or
something like that and.
One of the things it does is it
raises money that in
municipality can spend on
indigent burial which has been
meeting for some time I will let
my expert witnesses go ahead and
introduce himself thank you very
much Madam chair representative.
Good morning and thank you for.
This morning my name is the
sense of your life and I am one
of the deputy county managers
for the county and my chin is
general service
on the claim to interject
permission program is a program
that is mandated to every county
in New Mexico and the unclaimed
indigent cremation program
happens to be in my division so
I oversee the program so.
Good morning.
Chair members of the committee
my name is heather General on
the chief medical examiner the
state of New Mexico I run the
office of that last year and
we're agency a state agency that
is significantly impacted.
By.
And some of the proposed changes
in this bill will address that
issue.
And I believe we also have
another expert witness on the
soon Robert.
You are here.
Good morning everyone I'm Robert
not land on the other non
funeral service and director's
choice mortuary service
somewhere current funeral
provider Bernalillo county
indigent unclaimed program.
Thank you very much madam chair
representatives that we stand
for questions all right thank
you let's go to the audience
those in support of the bill
your hand.
Okay as an opposition raise
your.
CNN.
Thank you madam chair members
committees we expects of this
for Lee County
I can vote for this process
after a law it already happened
in terms of.
Being with other counties with
the online to do an update to
this piece of legislation it is
really important update in terms
of Ariel's dad was not
sufficient to cover the relevant
costs as were right up we also
work with
Representative process we
subject matter experts to
Sharon's area was really this is
a public safety hello well
can you stand strong support
really thanks everybody was all
in this.
Grafting these legislation to
support.
The proof.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee and
raise the loss general counsel
for New Mexico counties of this
bill is the result of a lot of
work collaboration among the
counties that health department
in the offices that are our
board supports and.
Thank you for the comments from
the audience.
Support or opposition let's goes
webcast.
The COVID.
So.
We the art of pay gap.
You know professional in New
Mexico in support.
All right thank you Chris.
Kristin Elkins I am a funeral
director New Mexico and I am in
support of this bill.
Thank you have any comment.
On the left.
No committee members
Representative.
I'm sorry chair for a move on
there is an amendment to this
bill the other some clarifying
language that I.
All right.
Minutes please Representative
right I move the amendment Hey
we have the option to move the
amendment for discussion.
Requirements explanation it's
just taking out a term that we
have eliminated the.
Four years in at the other place
bill.
Also it is changing.
The cap from up to one thousand
dollars to a for that one
thousand dollars after this is
how the system is.
And that's really the only thing
that.
Thank you call already so I as
well as making motions I will
always stand out.
And I have a second so we have a
off and opted to stay in the
question.
Representative striking amounts
of two and just to the black one
thousand to me it seems
inconceivable that this process
can be done the thousand dollars
but if there is a certain cases
if there's money left over to
go.
Thank you madam chair
representative that question
election of those who.
The.
The counties contract with the
you know.
And the cost of services there
are certain budgets that are set
aside.
Some counties use I think health
Fund Bernalillo county uses
General Fund so has the expenses
are coming through the hospital
the nation's we're just we just
have a budget that we drop down
from so it's not that we have a
thousand dollars and there's any
money left over it's just what's
what's expected right now it's
six hundred dollars which isn't
enough for our funeral homes to
be able to provide the service.
Thank you madam chair
representative so the money goes
into a fund that comes out of
the general fund.
We cross our fingers and hope
it's enough.
Yes chairman of that committee
thank you to our the budget
for the amendment Madam chair
representative on in order to
and I I've said this we were
talking about with the voters.
If there's a way to.
Get to a thousand dollars.
Without putting a thousand
dollars and here but allowing
that figure to increase.
As time goes by we're going to
wait another thirty years to
amend the statute says.
You want to try to find a way to
index the cost and of it does go
to Judiciary so you can think
about that the
In the meantime I I guess I
would just
I mean I think you can actually
put index.
The cost of living.
So that would be nice yes thank
you to agree with by Senator.
It's hard to believe that it
could only be about.
Yes thank you very much chair
of.
Very minimal to doing as well
after they think we just moved
it from six hundred to a
thousand I have no idea how
we're operating at six hundred
but I I do agree that if we're
only going to be rich three
visiting fill every forty years
or so that and indexing rather
than a flat fee.
Thank you very much sensitive
present little is that on the
amendment yes to adopt okay so
we have a promotion to adaptive
equipment discussion before we
take a second no opposition
Representative.
Representative right Madam chair
of the do passes amended have
second.
Hey passes amended I just have a
question and I couldn't find it
It was about the cremation and
burial and.
Chairman Lee that's on page
four.
Six two eight four six two
eight.
Involved I.
Needing just fifty two seats
having jurisdiction.
So I just wanna make sure there
is communication is due process
cause us some native American
tribes hallucinations do not
creation is not an option.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee for
that question because we
certainly want to be respectful
to every person of faith respect
As it said there's a section of
the state agency having
jurisdiction in that matter that
would be.
The unity agency
that would be familiar aware of
the customs and cultures and
maintain effective that if
either one of them anyone of my
expert witnesses would like to
speak to thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Using I can tell you that the on
the medical investigator we we
do consider
of cultural sensitivities and
religious
considerations for to scenes we
do take quite longer in seems to
be no word if needed American
hand trying to identify where
they're from and identify their
legal next of kin.
I can tell you that took us
months to find a family member
in South Dakota and because the
name is so common and so we do
take those considerations and
and white which is why we felt
that it was important to the
burial as an option here okay
and madam chair
Bernalillo county also takes the
religion and never more than two
weeks into consideration asked
Dr Joe Manchin that's why we
have very and not just.
Okay is is also Jewish that that
have.
Well
we have a table for passing
Representative green a second by
Representative Romero do we have
any opposition to this motion.
Seeing none Representative
we show all.
In attendance voting in the
affirmative you have to pass on
the.
Your there.
At.
Representative K..
Good morning Sir how are you we
are thank.
Share our committed three.
House Bill for ten.
All of the county elected
official salaries.
Bill passed out in the twenty
twenty two session.
And made it from a from house
government to the Senate floor
of past.
Six hours.
With known of of and the
difference between this bill and
what I did and twenty twenty
two.
This I have a little bit more
for another year with no
increase.
On top of that at the CPI so
that this is something.
Deal with the last time this
legislation was passed.
Run by Representative very in
two thousand eighteen so no
county elected official has had
the opportunity for a pay raise
from the county commissions.
Since two thousand.
That.
To be.
Part of this is this has no
fiscal impact on the state of
New Mexico this is determined
completely by whether county
have the ability to and the
fiscal ability to make those
very racist so with that
expectation.
Thank you Representative.
The audience do we have audience
in support of the bill okay
please.
Morning madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
Doris Parsons executive director
New Mexico counties we are
extremely grateful to the
sponsor and the co sponsors
bring this forward this is
something that over the last
several decades we've had three
back to the legislature from
regular basis roughly between
four years to ask for the cap to
be increased and as the sponsor
mentioned is also up to the
county commission to decide
whether or not their budget can
handle that increase we have
about thirty four counties are
currently has not been increases
twenty eighteen it did pass
unanimously was pocket vetoed we
have our work cut out for us to
speaking for floor but we would
really appreciate seeing this
thank you thank you let's go to
the webcast we're taking
comments in support of house
bill one of the.
Okay we'll stay on the webcast
will take on an opposition.
Seeing that the audience any
opposition.
Committee members Representative
Rehm Madam chair of the do have
some House Bill.
Is.
Session.
By.
Thank you madam chair
representative which is only
about.
And you.
Non seasonally adjusted CPI.
That.
That season right.
Hello I think you want the
seasonally adjusted the fact
that I.
Let me figure that out between
here and.
Madam chair of the conversation
separate yes so I'm deaf in one
ear and can't hear.
All of these question managers
only of whether you choose very
seasonally adjusted I think what
you want but we can discuss that
house of money later thanks
madam chair I will to have that
conversation the the whole
purpose of the CPI was specific
fact that we don't have to
continue to deal with
legislation.
Should be determined at the
county level in you know I will
with respect to that her
comments back and forth we don't
want to sedition be able to give
themselves are on race and I
guess maybe there are out of
thirty three county for
commissioners would give
themselves an race and not give
the rest of the.
Of the to the special right not
sure how that works from a
leadership standpoint but
it's it's there's a better way
to look at the C. P. I've and
one was just from the bill
writers and I would love to have
that conversation.
For me Madam okay already half
of Representative Chasey thank
you madam chair we were for the
last film we were both.
We are here for the last bill I
have heard parts of the New.
I love this Madam chair
representative because I'm
always saying don't put don't
put something in statute that
doesn't automatically pull up
with the consumer price index
because then you have to come
back every well in that case
every forty years.
Chests but we paid forty years
ago to current standards so
thank.
So will of the and I think a
vice chair they have a good
suggestion is to date with your
account
they can advise you thank.
That's great.
you
to that this is already I have a
motion for a new path
Representative Ferrary seconded
by Representative Chasey.
Have any opposition to the
motion.
CNN.
We show all present voting in
the affirmative you have passed
on house bill four one zero.
