That and by the gentleman from
San Juan Representative Montoya.
The father.
We thank you for your grace
mercy and kindness.
the sacrifice of your son for
our sins.
In the precious name of Jesus we
pray amen.
Able to deliver Sandoval
Representative is this in the
Able.
Really from Bernalillo Mr
speaker and we go to that order
business announcements and
did not know but I think I just
found out who it is.
Anonymous source.
speaker I have some special
guests on the rostrum this
morning and I'd like to
explain a little bit to the body
first before I introduce them
the headline in the Santa Fe New
since this beautiful country was
invaded.
By Russia the
we had house memorial fifty five
this morning and of the.
Indian Affairs and the first
speaker said.
Crime is a relatively new
country a young country but it
has a thousand year history and
of the twelve people so I do
want to say the house memorial
fifty five pass the state
to introduce the folks when I
call your name if you would
stand up and please forgive me
because I know I'm not going to
get all of these things
Representative Castiel.
Vera.
London single.
Soon to send over a.
The rules of Scott.
Soon please.
We also have revenues of a local
indigenous actor was helped
organize people and provide
supplies to Ukraine he's a very
Knowing Robert is the way we got
connected with all of these
individuals and Mr speaker.
ancestors every mission is like
a novel about life nature people
and traditions it is invited
resembles and cryptograms of
Passed down from generation to
generation the main color vision
it can readily is red the symbol
of life cell infertility.
represent happiness life and
power in the ordinance the
symbol of well being S. and
and know that our our prayers
are with you thank you for being
here today.
Good morning Mr speaker and to
all my colleagues here in the
house.
This morning on your desks you
have a special gift it's from
This gift is very meaningful I
heard one repartee say this is
one of the nicest gifts we've
ever received it's designed to
spark interest in science
Shannon has been instrumental in
getting forty four stem centers
set up in the state of New
Mexico there in M. elementary
organization and in addition to
promoting stem subjects in
education it also teaches
healthy life skills the focus Mr
lives so in addition to
establishing forty four centers
in New Mexico the foundation has
put in two hundred and seventy
would like to add to of what
we're saying this morning early
thank you generated the
generated from an answer
representative maybe about a
stem centers so with the help of
a cal Ripken foundation and
Exxon Mobil we did get to one in
the bill in schools and one in
Los in the schools and and I am
so excited especially being a
gonna go play with them with
that with their with their cool
stuff that they do that they're
getting but to have these kiddos
at starting at pre K. to start
dealing with of learning
so many people so many students
when they get to to my level up
in the high school they're so
intimidated by science so when
we get to reach them in them and
center so it is definitely my
goal to get them in all of the
elementary schools in New Mexico
and bill and believe me I will
be working with cal Ripken in
have had the privilege of going
to the ribbon cuttings for
several stem centers in our
Carlsbad elementary's and it is
absolutely
magical to see how the children
it almost a without effort so
thank you to Shannon Johnson
thank you to the foundation
thank you for the gifts thank
you Mr speaker thank you and
thank you for all that you do
Folks site before you go to
usually do I do want to make an
announcement today's the last
day and the job for Dr David
Scrase who is speaking more in
the state government and for
keeping us all safe during a
very difficult time of Godspeed
Sir thank you for your services
at expo.
To some beach front property you
probably have patients in about
an hour.
Thank you.
And it's.
I am modeling so.
This is from the New Mexico
cattle growers association in
the wool growers as well.
appreciation for what these
people do for us Mr speaker if I
can.
Certainly delayed
wonderful for your nails stop
the cuticles that helps those
sore fingers it is wonderful
stuff thank you have a.
we are based on the ground and
to help us get the those late at
night hours that we're fixing to
spend there's also some Turkey
there so at this time I would
like to acknowledge the New
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
lady the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker I have a
reading the paper we had two
solid waste workers who went to
the best western by the sun port
they were all over there to do
them they disarmed even from the
gun and then he pulled a knife
they were able to disarming from
that it turned out he had just
gone to the waffle house and
Yesterday about eight AM in the
morning a state police officer
was driving near twelfth and
Griego city found a man stabbed
There was a two year old girl in
New house locked in a room.
They don't have any suspects in
that right now but I think we
thank you Mr speaker good
morning rise on a point of
personal privilege state your
point Sir.
because of the day
Mr speaker
The hundred million dollars that
every.
Member of this body and about
eight hundred thousand dollars
to the Senate.
Mr speaker.
Your tell me what she thought
that that was done in a
bipartisan fashion and Mr
speaker that just wasn't what
happened.
not invited to the meetings and
so.
This caucus was not
representative and was not
represented by an by the had the
authority Mr speaker to
body.
A list of capital projects in
their prioritized from the
governor and then we take those
we look at we manipulate on we
that and I will tell you that
I've talked to sit a couple of
members of the tribal.
Community that's representative
here who are my friends and I
no problem what so ever she has
every right to do that she does
not have the right to take a
hundred million dollars off the
top taking five hundred thousand
dollars from each of our
districts.
I would the other thing that I
have realized is it's a little
It's been amazing to me that we
passed a bill the other night
legislative.
Stationary to contact a one of
the state agencies so we passed
smell test for the lack of a
better world that we have a
member of in the house.
and the Senate both representing
send money to the municipal poll
leader gentleman I'm.
Respectfully in a stop you right
there I think we are questioning
the motives and potential the
all be aware of if the county
the manager.
Allocated money in that manner
to the to the association of
counties.
that position so with all due
respect I am not at all in in
the way accusing or impugning in
that I believe has precedent or
has ruled to.
To support some Mr speaker I
continue to have an issue with
that and I I just will not be
members the pie if you will was
grown.
In order to accommodate
additional investments in tribal
communities no member involved
in the capital outlay
In a way that we can even.
Begin to question.
The process has been bipartisan
I have taken it upon myself to
involve.
gentleman.
But I will not.
Allow.
For misstatements of fact to be
made here on this for the
Let me see my point and I I just
want to repeat thank you Sir I
want to be able to respond to
this bill ultimately both in
committee and on this floor to
talk about and give history
pertaining to the evolution of
of the capital bill and and how
that it is and it was in fact
done in a in a bipartisan way
that follows every single point
of of of policy and every single
administrative support already
on house memorial twenty four.
Mr speaker I am.
objection it is so ordered.
professions of audiology and
speech language pathology for
which I am a member.
This dedicated association aims
to promote the interests of and
The lady my mistake when we get
to that point a direct affect
the election to serve placing
House Bill House one of twenty
four of final passage has been
gallery that want to be
recognized.
Originally we have.
Would you like to memorial read
yes please.
Thompson and how to meal a
memorial proclaiming February
twenty four twenty twenty three
as New Mexico speech language
and hearing association day in
the house of representatives.
adjustment and career achieved a
career advancement and we're as
audiology and speech language
pathology services help empower
individuals with communication
isolating effects of
communication disorders on
affected families and we're as
audiologists and speech language
pathologists offer quality
education and health care
speech language pathologists and
audiologists with the mission to
provide the highest quality of
support services.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
that recognition be extended to
the professional audiologists
and speech language pathologists
in the state for their valuable
service and be it further
resolved that a copy of this
memorial be transmitted to the
C. the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative our meal and
thank you to the SLPs an
lifesavers for us and so I just
want us all to realize how much
they do for folks in New Mexico
so thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady.
Would you like to ask unanimous
consent that all members present
voting in the affirmative I
would like to do that excellent.
There's been a motion that all
One of seven in the affirmative
zero negative house memorial
twenty four has duly passed this
house.
Gentlelady.
in the made the next order of
business.
Okay generated.
Can you do that again we're in
the middle of a plus we're
sorry.
and be made the next order of
business.
It is so ordered the director
for the election Sir for placing
Senate Joint Memorial twelve
final passage has been taken and
a vortex of cyber we world so
give us one second Hey you are
now we could see you.
In.
Just bear with us while we
Gentlelady as we work through
these technical difficulties I
know you're so lonesome I can
see you on a computer screen
from the floor we can still hear
your voice so proceed.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of that body and today I am so
humbled to present Senate Joint
long standing house member a
leader Chasey Senate Joint
Memorial well a celebrate the
life of J. Paul Taylor
And I received by that as
J. calls funeral mass is being
held in our Mexico behind the.
Well to me.
And know that their speak that I
get to step into as such storied
Mr Bachicha was born in Germany
know how a farming community a
little bit south of Mexico here.
And I always imagined that Dave
As I began to shine in his
leadership our kids for working
families for educators for
bilingual education he became
part of the history of our
kindness and infectious laughter
that so many in Santa Fe so many
across the state will remember
and have been touched by
infinitely and so many times
over.
Taylor family through their
generosity and kindness the
cited to leave their home on the
misty of by the the state so
that so many
pristine thank you very ways as
what's left behind in their.
If that's.
Has been something you'll be
And what will soon be one of our
state historical centers here on
the are in what used to be the
Taylor hall.
and remember in your spirit and
your belief and your values what
called the siege to this work
every day just like you did Mr
speaker body I imagine that
Thank you very much Mr speaker I
I spoke at right after we heard
of the passing of John Paul
Taylor
Romero family in Las Vegas and a
things to get into really VA.
Legendary apparently political
speaker I I really think that if
the court concluded the memorial
that would be the best tribute
we can have the this is probably
just concluded and all the staff
We there's nobody at home J.
Paul Taylor who didn't love him
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady the clerk to read.
Senate Joint Memorial twelve
introduced by senators of on
Whereas John Paul Taylor E.
Romero was born in somebody all
on August twenty fourth nineteen
twenty and departed from this
world on February twelfth twenty
and two it is one hundred two
years J. Paul Taylor lived
through some of the most
significant and pivotal times in
modern American history
including the Great Depression
walk on the moon the
assassinations of John and Bobby
Kennedy and Martin Luther king
junior.
The enactment of the federal
civil rights acts of nineteen
It is tricky a streak of sorry
both the building and the
destruction of the blur Berlin
Wall.
thousand one when the world
changed.
And whereas descended on his
mother's side from one that
covers of aka a soldier who came
And whereas he was quoted in a
newspaper articles fencing I was
always interested in history
from the fifth grade I knew I
wanted to be a history teacher.
district as a teacher principal
and administrator for more than
thirty years.
And we're as J. Paul Taylor J.
Paul as he was affectionately
health and Human Services in
gentleman standing committees
during his eighteen year career
as well as education voters in
elections in twelve years and
house appropriations and finance
Roosevelt in democratic ideals
it was a tireless advocate for
those less fortunate
particularly children and
seniors.
whereas another of his passions
was The New Mexico's cultural
history in two thousand four as
chair of the two thousand three
re organisation Committee he
shepherded through the
other departments aging a long
term services Veterans Services
an Indian Affairs and whereas as
a man who dedicated his long
life to public service to the
similar awards in nineteen
eighty nine ninety one ninety
two ninety six ninety eight and
two thousand two.
He received an honorary
conservationist antiquity
antiquarian and builder of
libraries in his native New
Mexico every is unselfish and
visionary leadership to
passed at least four memorials
recognizing and praising him.
And we're us like his awards his
service on myriad boards and
commissions is also too lengthy
center in the.
Vargas center in Los keep crucis
plus crucis he served on
numerous other historical arts
charitable and civic
organizations.
symposium and the charter school
J. Paul Taylor academy have been
named in his honor.
And we're as.
The generous generosity of J.
the people of the state they
loved the Taylors donated their
national historic home and
property in Misia and there's
Spanish colonial Mexican and new
Mexican art collections.
in the New Mexico legislature as
a statement statesman and a
gracious an honorable gentleman
Gronk of a at all and it is the
extraordinary citizens served
can state with unparalleled
dedication and distinction.
Now therefore be it resolved
that the legislature of the
heartfelt sympathy and sincere
condolences to the family
members of representative J.
Paul Taylor on the passing of
the father grandfather and great
Misia who have lost not just a
loved and honored citizen but
someone who has been a presence
throughout most if not all of
their lives and be it further
Is there debate on Senate Joint
Memorial twelve the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
Garcia.
This is the most speaker
Indiana homes on zoom.
Thank you Mr speaker and
Thank you gentleman from missing
a for being in this
serving with the need to.
For eight years
And that is the most Baker in
The wood said right.
And you know as soon seated
right now.
mouth to what I come a standing
because of has Parkinson's
disease.
So even with that disease he's
still kinda.
the most speaker.
And
is the most speaker and
gentleman from a C.
Bilingual education in our
state.
Is experiences and educational
field is a testimony
I always a some of the speaker
always enjoyed the when I was in
the Los crucis area funding
committee.
In on our sewing done actually
never met meaning without.
But the potato did have roots in
some you get County to that are
metal family.
And we never got to share
estimates speaker of family
the less than this land grant in
that area is the most Baker
Mr speaker when I came here for
Taylor's
in this chamber that I really
admired and that I the look of a
financially run was a.
Taylor
You know this this chamber was.
Where is.
The beneficiary of these two
giants estimates speaker in
terms of how they conducted
Different concerns is the most
but
the level of the Holy Spirit.
That only radiated.
Those of us that kind of saw
that power in the gentleman that
To slow does the most eager when
I first heard of the passing.
And I think the lady from the
sea and bringing this forward.
And also the our chief clerk for
reading the.
Iota of the greatness of this
gentleman is the most speaker
thank you Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo generated from the
Thank you Mr speaker will the.
I'm imagining the gentle lady is
still on from acea if not the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please feel.
For a few minutes.
Because
A little bit emotional.
J. Paul Taylor.
Mr speaker the social butterfly
of the family.
And she made sure that every
time.
After the course and after my
dad service.
That every time they made a
visit to Los crucis to the
family they would make it stop.
laugh for hours.
About their visit and they would
share their visit with us.
And since I was the family
member Mr speaker that was
The one that stayed in that area
But what I thought was really
cool.
About the two gentlemen.
For how they would set.
And they had the same.
Sitting style and they would
face each other.
We're a little bit tall thin and
kinda lanky so they were able to
sit Mr speaker and cross their
legs.
picture from the side for the
back cover way they looked all I
can say is really cool with
their legs crossed and their
Quite often because as I said
here in this chamber my father
grew up very poor.
Very very poor.
And
That he grew up.
Instead of ready.
And my father would share his
But
They would get really emotional
and.
The most loving thing.
That my mother shared was that
he was my dad.
I'm so sorry.
He would tell on my dad's
nickname was beetle he was known
as fairly people also beat those
And then he would go on and an
honor my father by saying that
you know you have one on all of
us.
We went to war.
being heroes in their own.
Worlds and professions.
I share this because.
It was a very special special
moment for me.
when it.
And so I am
The police that the police are
And that we can only follow.
And just.
A few of their footsteps because
this is the greatest generation.
Before we close the chairs
provocative to
Join my voice in.
served honorably.
I did have the great honor of
meeting him a couple of times
before he retired from the
chamber.
Over time could disagree with
you without being disagreeable
and that is a lesson for each
and everyone of us to take.
We don't have to agree.
You know for the debate the
gentle lady from doing in
articles.
Mr speaker thank you I move that
present voted in the
affirmative.
Motion to show all members of
the house present and voting in
the affirmative seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
We are on final passage of
seven in the affirmative zero
negative Senate Joint Memorial
twelve has duly passed this
house.
This comes imposter Paul Taylor.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative a half thank you
native of Las Vegas she's
currently pursuing a bachelors
degree in business
administration with a
concentration in general
business and also is going to
native New Mexicans to the
house.
The other gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker I ask
action necessary for placing.
House memorial sixty seven on
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the
created at the national level
that the purpose was to promote
equitable education educational
opportunities for all students
regardless of race ethnic
In New Mexico a trio programs
provide academic tutoring
personal counseling mentoring
financial guidance and other
support necessary for
programs in New Mexico have
served almost ten thousand
students the first trio program
to be established New Mexico was
at New Mexico highlands
services in nineteen seventy
one.
Some of the programs here in New
Mexico of the thirty nine
programs are educational
bound math and science and
veterans upward bound Mr speaker
I have three guests that are on
the rostrum could you introduce
them for me.
Mr speaker these three
Representative three of the end
College Mr speaker at this time
can we have the clerk read the
memorial click to read.
New Mexico trio programs stay in
the house of representatives.
Whereas on February twenty
fourth nineteen eighty six the
first congressional
programs and more than ten
million Americans from low
income and working families who
have benefited benefited from
the services of trio pre college
and adults as firing to improve
their lives the necessary
investment in these young people
and adults.
If these young people and adults
are to become contributing
of nationwide federal trio
student support programs and New
Mexico was one of the first
states to implement these
programs.
gender national origin
disability status the families
economic resources or
educational background.
And we're at seven trio programs
veterans upward bound student
support services educational
opportunity centers and the
Ronald E. McNair post
baccalaureate achievement
program.
dollars in federal funding and
serve nearly nine thousand
students.
And we're of the successful
federal programs work to help
low income first generation
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that the
trio programs the recognize for
the important role they continue
month and that February twenty
four twenty twenty three be
declared New Mexico trio
programs stay in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
I
see none the gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker these
programs across New Mexico are
very important in helping our
today so Mister speaker this
time I move that house memorial
sixty seven do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent that the
house.
affirmative the record reflect
and show that all members
present voted in the affirmative
I just want to make sure Mr
speaker very well there's no
question shows a house present
voting in the affirmative seeing
We were sent in from seven in
the affirmative during the
negative house memorial Texas
Announcements I've had
discussions with the sponsor
Mr speaker we go to that order
of Business third reading of
legislation junction of this
order is a gentleman from.
Only two counties I'm going to
get this one of the state Senate
once on the phone Representative
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
bill.
Mr speaker members of the by the
hospital twenty four.
the state game commission first
needs and need to know is it's
not an advisory body it actually
runs the game department they
years but really the past
decade.
Thirteen commission is seven
members they're currently at
three.
So they currently lack
So under this bill three members
of the commission would be
appointed by the governor one
from each congressional district
no more than two from anyone
party no more than one from any
farmer a conservationist hunter
or angler in the scientist in
again there are there
restrictions no more than one
instability is that when we get
a new governor we get a new
commission and so this would
provide some continuity there.
Mr speaker members of by there
If you look at the bill and you
look at the existing statute
that's actually not accurate so
the existing statute has I
could have three members from
Albuquerque or Santa Fe
so there aren't good the
geographic distribution
requirements in the existing law
In.
Again if you need to look at the
existing law which has a total
of zero reserves so the hearing
will position is called out
because we felt it was important
seven member commission you
would only have one hunter or
angler because of the nature of
the game and fish department.
on it Mr speaker thank you for
that
I move house floor amendment
number one to house bill one
eighty four.
But he has it on that side thank
you but has it on the side it's
on the website German explained
how the amendment Mr speaker the
amendment came up in discussion
of the bill there's a provision
past there have been some some
source and then again for people
in order to get appointed
recently changed their party so
you can't have change your party
for same day registration for
surgeon
citizens to change party and
participate in the primary that
you can do that and it doesn't
count as a change in party as
and you would still be eligible
to be appointed to the
commission.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Enter ready for questions yes Mr
there's the general but folks
going hunting question then you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker does
seats just as under my bill the
the seeds or there I.
there to members at large there
is some language in the bill
about having
The member with demonstrated
history of involvement in
bit fuzzy and hasn't been
closely adhered to.
So Mister speaker German how
many positions are open today.
Mr speaker gentleman there are
positions can't find anybody
wants to run for these positions
why do we have for open
positions.
resigned during the session and
has not been replaced so there's
there's just been some lag there
and we're down to three there is
So Mister speaker gentleman
would you say that this bill is
more complicated or less
complicated than the current
system.
Mr chairman that's an
interesting question I I would
So Mr speaker gentleman can you
tell me.
What it is that you're trying to
achieve with this bill over and
above the system that we have
professionalism to the
commission.
So Mister speaker gentleman is
the commission that ServiceNow
unprofessional.
Mr speaker and gentleman we have
the commissioners are sorry
getting their education on game
and fish matters wall they serve
on the commission and our hope
get people with more experience
on those issues.
So Mister speaker those folks
appointed by the governor were.
Qualified.
concerns about what people's
backgrounds have brought to the
or what the what background they
bring to the commission the
governor I think has made some
some excellent appointments
And so that's that's another
factor one of things this bill
does Mr chairman is it's only
removal for costs the idea there
is that once you're on
commission you can do what you
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
we as legislators and as
citizens of New Mexico have an
So Mister speaker gentleman this
bill provides for a six year
term so conceivably that means
So that your.
Mr Chairman said not all the
commissions would get six year
terms if you look at the last
page of the bill it lays out
which positions get what terms
the commission is going to bring
stability to to it as opposed to
having a new governor.
Of whatever party coming in and
Mr speaker and gentleman also
good question I know the we we
took the language the removal
for cause language out of I
believe that you members in New
as far as the the the the the
rolling terms and we often have
committees that we see or we're
gonna stagger the terms the
trick was staggering the terms
years but for two they finish
out your term and then they're
eligible for their own six year
term so the the goal of this is
that we can't that staggers so
we don't have a situation where
that stagger in the rolling
nature the commission.
Yes Sir I understand that of.
So Legislative Council Service I
what why the Legislative Council
Service why would the
Legislative Council Service be
involved in this appointment.
The gentleman at the clarify
So Russian if councils largely
made up of of leadership of both
parties it's a bipartisan group
and they're the ones who would
would make the appointment.
So Mr speaker gentleman who are
the.
imagine it's the speaker I
imagine it's the leaders it
might be the websites it's
probably the chair of probation
and maybe chairs of other
committees I'm not on it if
Both parties and chambers in
both chambers right it's it's
bipartisan and bicameral.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman I was looking at the
at the way these things are
one from each county.
In the you know the old saying
that we always say things tend
to gravitate towards the Rio
Grande quarter towards the of
relates to County.
The contain.
Within just a few miles.
All the other.
Commissioners is that true.
my covered to more than one
congressional district could
cover the same County you know
and it's it's possible that one
point all three for commercial
Again Mr chairman I would I
would if you look at this the
language has been stricken
that's the existing language try
and it's got these these five
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Los
Alamos so that's the current
status that hasn't happened you
know I think the people who are
interested in the commission and
commission so we we've built in
protections here that no one for
each congressional district no
more than one from each county
yes service best we can it's
still to some extent is still up
to who makes the appointments.
consolidation of the of the
positions they could all come
right will from a very small
area
Mr speaker gentleman I don't
shot at it but.
probably support the bill thank
you Mr speaker.
There's a debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
German we heard this.
Legislation come across the
energy committee.
And I
political accountability and
it's CenturyLink.
Of.
Program J..
The commissioners to the.
Mr chairman the this is so.
J. on page six of the bill is
the what what I refer to as the
removal for cause provision as I
noted we we borrowed this from
no removal shall be made without
notice of hearing opportunity to
be heard in the streets from
court New Mexico Supreme Court
is given exclusive personal
I I asked that question to list
of council service and their
answer was anyone was standing
so anyone who had suffered.
so just how the Supreme Court
would would handle this is is a
little unclear but the fact that
it's.
if there was.
incompetence and neglect or
malfeasance they could still be
removed they would be locked in
for a six year term.
at the pleasure of the governor
is that accurate.
Mr speaker German test so Mister
speaker and gentleman.
Initiated consideration of
removal from one of these
positions would that be
accurate.
The Mr speaker and gentleman I
it's really up to the governor.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
exactly the point it wouldn't
The charges are levied by anyone
with stand.
With that the.
Hello conservation groups for
example or.
Trying to do.
One there was standing.
Have to.
File formal charges.
A complete.
expanding probably probably
wouldn't be one those
conservation organizations in
their own right it would
probably be on behalf of one of
river for what for some reason
and they feel aggrieved by that
potentially the that is enough
to create standing
have to demonstrate that there's
been some sort of
you know malfeasance such as
that you're unhappy with the
decision or that you can't go
malfeasance and and that could
involve a variety of things but.
you would still have to make
that showing.
The petition to bring them would
involve clerical help and
significant experience making
things positions Merrill
some extent I would but I I
would also we also emphasize
that's that's kind of the goal
because it it's certainly been
my perception in recent history
you know a commission that's
that that focus on the the task
at hand of managing the game
department in guiding the games
Fund could and talk about the
qualifications to be a
commissioner.
And.
Well.
And if we all know that per diem
Mr speaker.
So Mr speaker and gentleman.
Would be unlikely to have.
If you will.
is the way they wanted to make
their living is that Packer.
Mr speaker and gentleman
imagine.
it's important I think members
of professions the the hunter
guides
in Turner you know I think there
the past the you know the the
governor appoints many people
the many different boards and
committees.
In my understanding is that the
Interposition paid.
For six years.
Focal to remove from office.
Can envision circumstances
where.
If you will.
rather than hunting and fishing
and owns payrolls.
To.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
would not agree with this
statement most often applying
for the job as I said I believe
it's a very popular position and
there are lots of applications
there are probably some people
who are professional guides we
we've had previously the number
of attorneys have served on the
commission I I don't think
number of applicants so I think
there there are plenty to pick
from and I think of the for the
purpose of this bill is that you
expertise required for the
governor's appointments.
Mr chairman the under this bill
the governor would have three
appointments one from each
congressional district you know
certainly could be you know they
could be avid hunters they could
be avid bird watchers you know
it's it's it's been really up to
the governor.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Santa and Santa
Fe please yield Mister speaker
gentleman yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
bill has a lot of merit to Mr
speaker gentleman and so I have
a question here so.
How many hunters or anglers are
currently on the commission Mr
speaker.
I don't know a lot about them
individually I believe from what
I do though I I know one is
definitely a hunter one is a
former Republican senator I
gentlemen and so.
Do you think this would bring
more representation to rural New
Mexico with this legislation
since folks cannot be from the
appointments were spread out I I
do think the commission has
historically had Kerr could roll
representation I have every
extra expectation that would
statutes in it it really just
comes down to people making
appointments being conscious of
that the rural diversity.
gentlemen and isn't it true that
we need a quorum to conduct
business such as supporting or
locating different
that commission Mr speaker.
Mr speaker German the recent
resignation of those only like
two three weeks ago the ticket
number down the three but before
a need for for form some get six
months traveling they've had
some difficulty even while they
had for members achieving a
quorum.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and so does this.
appointments we go to
Legislative Council and Mr
speaker dumb if I may let me
explain why I did that one was.
You know I thought it'd be a
bit of job description language
built into the current session
it's it's mostly being ignored
in my hope was the Legislative
Council building a bipartisan
actually met the qualifications
would be fleshed out as part of
that process and so I I feel to
the Legislative Council was a
better body than just one person
legislature I think it belongs
and the leaders that a point to
the Legislative Council Service
I would also make sure that we
have accountability and corns we
gentle lady from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentleman from Santa Fe
Fe Santa Fe healed please Mr
representatives that a party
ask.
I guess I'm going to start out.
Right here on page
the same political party.
So that would be subject to
change in your amendment does
spell that out of my
understanding that correctly.
provision in the bill because it
says.
We have one point for the
governor from each congressional
district this bill needed out of
the house phones for one over to
And so I thought about that and
what this what this bill does is
if we did not congressional
district.
Then the economic different
So if we cannot lose a
congressional district the
governor gets an extra
appointment and I was just so we
could keep the distribution
language intact okay thank you
very much for that response
will it's been you stating that
is they shall be appointed by
the Legislative Council Mr
chairman and representative this
is.
good at it but they may not
really be interested in serving
because of prior commitments
with their job or whatever the
case may be so how will
Legislative Council.
interested in this.
The lady I've I think you could
be a number of different paths I
would certainly hope and expect
that there would be with the
important and I also think you
know we in this body and and
then the other chamber it's
under twelve of us were you know
obviously spurs spread
throughout the state we might
formal process we would generate
names was the the Legislative
Council could could pick.
opinion for they don't want to
serve on a bit yet they have
been named to serve on the
commission on any commission not
just this one in the commission
Mr speaker I'm going on down the
manages the New Mexico farm
ranch.
two species of animals for which
game hunting is licensed.
Mexico ranch or farm.
But does this just me Mr
speaker.
But you only have one farmer or
that are out there with that
there.
Seventy five sections or seventy
five acres we have different
problems from the northern part
of the state down to the
As opposed to somebody that owns
massive amounts of acreage.
And the reason I'm saying that
is I get calls quite often.
From.
the big problem with
Representative Herrera is
districts she has voiced her
concern over the equity as far
case may be so that one does
concern me because there's a big
difference Mr chair Mr speaker
and gentleman whenever we're
talking about.
But there's no gerrymandering
going on that Mr speaker let me
continue with this whenever I
say that Chavis county the
district I live in wraps all the
So that is a huge district right
there open district right there
where there is lots of game
animals out there and Mister
speaker.
Just for the.
Mr speaker to only the I I can't
off the top of my head that's
something I would look at the
next in our statutes okay Mister
speaker that's fine Mr speaker
And then also going over to page
four line I think it's too
because of written on there both
of those positions the first
affiliation affiliated with
either one of those positions
can you tell me why.
Mr speaker gentle lady
party we did I think chart out
the scientists and the reason I
did so it so it does apply to
the conservation is because of
the sciences is configurable
think I think they're the the
pursue the science field I think
they're sciences I think that's
the expertise we're looking for
in I didn't want to take a
Mr speaker.
Gentleman I'm also noticing
though.
Just now.
It is not to speak that's not
specific and either is a
scientist as far as being.
A citizen of the state of New
Mexico and residing in the state
shall be New Mexico residents
and and it lists the four okay
thank you for pointing that out
I was just reading because it is
very specific they're on the the
met on the farmer or the rancher
four position six is a hunter or
angler he was hailed in New
Mexico and fishing license blah
question we we didn't list
trapper.
I'm sorry.
Mr delay in it's certainly did
occur to me that could mean the
is authorized by the New Mexico
game commission or the game
rules rules and regulations that
there is trapping on that so
Mister speaker maybe we need to
of the state of New Mexico as
far as our lives our wildlife
goes would you agree with that.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
not.
Mr speaker you there's not a
wildlife that is being omitted
here Mr speaker.
I'm going to continue on on page
four of your bill and this is
where.
all commissioners appointed by
the governor shall be appointed
blah blah blah.
Mr speaker there in lies the
problem for me because we have.
Or a lack of experience or both.
And it happens time and time
again throughout commissions.
And.
And I have seen a commission
that was appointed.
And commissioners automatically
if there was something that the
Can you talk to me about the
removal of the commissioner by
the governor is in in this
particular bill I have read it
twice.
someplace Mr speaker only here
correct that the governor
neither the government nor the
Legislative Council could simply
choose to remove a commissioner
if there
would have to follow highs said
file we have to follow the
process.
Mr speaker gentleman is that
strictly through the judicial
judicial process of the for the
removal of the commissioner.
Will the the Supreme Court or
any courts have the authority to
made promulgate and this is the
New Mexico Supreme Court
I went in Najin those rules
isn't it won't be like it
explanation and Mr speaker
gentleman of.
The governor under this
particular bill.
Said the governor appoints let
it starts on actually on page
one.
I'm seeing that now of no on
we have seen commissions that
have been appointed in its.
Generally.
A more heavily populated area
for these commissioners are
appointed from in my concern
I get that.
But my concern there is are we
going to have good
representatives representation
for more more rural areas of the
this bill are more thorough than
in current statutes but I do but
I also believe that the US is
that there's some sort of
clustering of that and if you
still do have to rely on the
appointing person or the
pointing body into exercise that
on up there no I'm not we have
for one more I know that there
you've covered a lot of area for
me you've answered a lot of
questions
I do.
I do have a problem with
The trappers not being included
because that is important and I
will drive that pulled point
home because that is a necessary
side I don't know but I think
it's important to at the.
Gentleman thank you very much
for your responses Mr speaker I
yield occasionally there's
further debate the gentleman
Membuatkan movie the going will
you able to Santa Fe excuse me
Mr speaker down in Santa and
Remains that those appointments
will be.
With the advice and consent of
the Senate.
Mr Chairman it does the history
of that is and that's that's the
current process advise and
consent and the Senate
we have many many different
process the
It exists in statute I I.
I I can't make promises about
how robust this.
Thank you Mr speaker.
More than.
Then consent.
The Senate has to approve.
The appointees.
for consistency we we've used
that same phrase.
Thank you Mr speaker.
One more one more quick
Which locker all from different
districts all legal residents of
New Mexico.
But I do feel that.
her appointees to come from
those sections one hundred one
fisherman one trapper to get
more of the people actually use
the bill I I do certainly think
the.
Of the governor's appointments
in in you really even the
Legislative Council appointments
you're gonna get serving in more
So you know it's not going to
the bill I think it's gonna
happen at the anyway the other
reason which I mentioned before
attending the what I consider
the positions in the Legislative
Council is that I thought there
I suppose it transitions in the
current statutes about the and
one's former ones
conservation is that they
haven't really been.
conservations because no one
actually told us so this is just
sort of try statement up and
make it more explicit I would
certainly expect to your point
Mr chairman that the governor we
I would hope that that is true
but as it's been spoken before a
lot of times in these conditions
we get people that.
Are getting political
A point is a little more.
To ensure that the people that
use the game and fish department
have a better voice in the game
and fish department thank you
that's all thank you Mr speaker
from some the wild and Santa Fe
yield Mister speaker gentleman
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker so and I
Mr speaker and gentleman so we
sort of shuffled things
in addition if you take there's
appointments so and you can see
no more than one from any given
district but you do have a
district out so we we sort of
did away with that structure the
more than one in any County you
know it's just a different
geographic approach to making
sure that we have a
distribution.
gives me a an impression of what
we did what with redistricting
on our in our districts and how
in excuse the the term
outdoors maybe different of the
could be on this game commission
could you see how that could
maybe get manipulated and your
bill Mr speaker gentle.
think you better assurance of
geographic distribution.
in you know the the I I know the
there's been some comments about
whether our congressional
because I was looking at so
district one in the current
statute reads as to come from
curry the bulk of Roosevelt
Chavez Lincoln with federal Eddy
so.
I just can see how if I compare
the the two of those going
through the districts Mr speaker
the first one is a very general
your in your position Mr speaker
following your question Mr
speaker gentleman.
It the way I read this all you
have to do is be a legal
resident living in district in
is that they my understanding
that I might write Mr speaker Mr
chairman for the three
appointments from the governor
that's correct there there
aren't other sort of job
descriptions and qualifications
statutes right there's there are
you know the.
Additional requirements that a
couple of the members had
mentioned the are something
maybe to consider but if this
bill doesn't pass they're
they're not there we don't go
get that capture that in my mind
how that would work because of
the different areas of our state
how that person would be
appointed to the second question
I have Mister speaker gentleman
languages of owns or manages
because I know their love the
good folks who worked Act land
that they might not own in
the current statute of the
current statute requires
a farmer rancher contains at
least two species of wildlife
the for the deeded land that
Mr speaker German I'm just
trying to I think wipe my intent
Mr speaker John the reason I'm
asking questions is I think
diversity is very very important
in in having these positions
simply because I mean.
gentleman I for instance enjoy
the outdoors I hunt I fish I
enjoy going out there on my ATV
were maybe someone else that
so although we both enjoy the
outdoors our perspectives of how
we enjoyed and how we want it
that's part of why I think we
need or department of game and
fish to to of all the you know
we're we're trying to develop
outdoor recreation in New Mexico
wildlife oriented activities
like bird watching the I I'm Mr
chairman another birdwatcher
those people are relentless I
mean that the they're they're
diversity we can really
capitalize on that and expand
that as as a tourist draw for
our state.
other areas and in Grant County
where we can also only walk in
it you can have a of a loaded
gun in in the those areas you
this person is an angler or
hunter I mean can I just go.
Pick up so you know what I'm
just gonna but fishing license
Mr speaker and gentleman in and
I believe we have records of
that is actually not just one
licenses actually the last four
years so you know I think that
shows a certain commitment like
be fair to us what a hunter
really be because I mean trying
to find the manipulation that
could be here Mister speaker
gentleman I buy a license five
but I have shown that I've
purchased these licenses.
How do we ensure that we're not
just artificially doing that to
someone's gonna be willing to go
to have a chance of being
appointed in the same could be
said of the the party
affiliation right you can't
change your party within the
wrong parties on a change in the
it was I guess you're hoping a
that you'll get picked and the
that the governor gets elected
to another term because the four
years is gonna be up I I mean it
elaborate people will plan and
scheme just literally for a
chance to get on the commission
because you still got to get
picked.
every single position on in this
bill.
Mr chairman that's a great
question the answer is no the
Senate only has to confirm the
the the combinatorial appointees
to then to have them you know
participate in selecting these
people and then also put that
through the process of
confirmation there with me Mr
speaker gentleman and how many
on this on this on this total
commissions chairman Mr chairman
yes and the other for a given by
the Legislative Council and so
Just pick that's why I'm I'm
assuming that's why you suicide
could be from one city or one
excuse me one County excuse me
one County more than one time is
that right Mr speaker.
distribution does not apply to
the Legislative Council
appointments but it does say the
no more than one in one county.
guess what I'm saying we have
seven positions here for are
down by Legislative Council
which would would then Mr
the the I I worry about the
checks and balances on the queue
can you help me understand how
we would have those checks and
balances one more time for those
other four point appointed
of the way we enjoy the the
environment or in all our our
that we have a good diversity.
Mr speaker German.
meeting someone who the been
selected you Valencia it's
described the person maybe they
would be there thirty
conversation thirteen
it's important to make sure
we're actually paying attention
to what we say in the statute
thank you Mr speaker German I
think what this some of the
Legislative Council what are the
I don't not sure you know this
but or maybe you can educate me
how many.
there are more Democrats than
Republicans because there are
more Democrats than Republicans
in both chambers Mr speaker
German how many like I can tell
you it's a two four is what I
has a look Legislative Council
been.
Imbalanced and and rightfully so
but imbalanced that long.
How many years I'm sorry Mr
you know they're done that but
that that was the you know
somewhat of an aberration it's
just that sort will read two
years so yeah that that balance
exists Mr speaker and gentleman
the memorial earlier earlier
today disagree without being
disagreeable that sort of thing.
There's no reason for the
Legislative Council to pick a
fight over an appointment to the
Widely unpopular let alone not
qualified is so that the
qualifications tried to be
fairly clear in in what it is so
that so there's a clear
Elective or look better passed
through a Legislative Council
it's kind of like those bills Mr
speaker gentleman that I love to
see when I see live in zero nine
whatever believes conservative
progressive values we're
definitely not going to get any
commissioners Mr speaker the may
see the same we that you know
This is German certainly that
years is in the bill I I would
be very hesitant to require
unanimity to the point it
because it is anyone member of
the to ride in one of things for
situation where you know someone
is and we see this occasionally
in Congress someone simply
blocking appointments is a yes
speaker gentleman Mr speaker
German that is here right now
that's just sort of be on the
the language of the bill I I saw
when your colleagues and and not
wear my glasses I can see how
again I know my my hope is that
this process is collaborative
and not controversial going
through the Legislative Council
because I think they have bigger
has been out of balance with our
the way we
our party affiliations or
conservative in part and and
though you working very hard on
this I don't you know it's hard
Mr speaker John and I'll be
honest with you all of our bills
we have our ideas on how we can
Torrance yield Mister chairman I
yield thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman I just rise to say
thank you Mr speaker gentleman
as a hunter you know I I
appreciate what you're trying to
Mexico is maybe the fifth most
biologically diverse state in
the entire nation is that right
Mr speaker gentleman Mr chairman
Merriam's Turkey or Rio Grande
Turkey Mr speaker gentleman as
I've been privileged to do
whether you're going down south
to look for the goats Turkey in
southwest New Mexico the array
so Mister speaker and our future
is is really important I just
want to say thank you there's a
gentleman from Lee
Representative Egolf.
Santa Fe yield Mister speaker
Joe in the U..
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
want to share a hunting story
that I have.
During the day by power.
We had a group of people.
Come through and several
With the stereo blaring going up
and down trials.
One vehicle with headers
uncapped.
On the purpose Mr speaker and
at certain things I think we
talked about having a license
for four years.
Came from start to the people
they all have their own lessons
done this on a fishing side as
well in the biggest.
On the biggest river of north of
bacon's and so Mr speaker and
gentleman I get concerned when
Sometimes I do sometimes I don't
but that didn't keep me from
brought a license.
And
Mr speaker and gentleman because
of the first sixty day session
when I look at how this board Mr
speaker and gentleman of broken
up.
And then I get concern was with
I do have an issue with the
respect of what the intent of
that person would be and do they
really have with us in mind for
the department of this bill
We only have one Representative
for ranch and farm.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think we can agree that we
For the.
For what they do and.
In discussions that we
continually hear it's imperative
for Mr speaker and gentleman but
I don't think we're given a fair
percentage to them just like
Representative trials was
talking about we have a.
actually represent the land.
In the use of that land Mr
speaker and gentleman for that
reason I cannot continue to
support your legislation thank
Diamond and
This is a co sponsor I I it is
the this legislation can I
conversation and I said you
should take a look at this bill
you might like it.
And she sent me a text later
that day and said I do like that
certainly a step and I think
it's a big step in the right
direction to fix the problem so
with that Mr speaker I move that
house bill one eighty four as
amended to the past we are on
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes votes yes representative
four as amended has duly passed
house gently from Santa Fe are
you ready item number item
number eighteen yes Mr speaker
would you get me to that point
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill to seventy four as
four creates Asian American
Pacific Islander native Hawaiian
day and if this bill is enacted
this celebration would be
observed the first Tuesday of
had a for a joint session the
members of the community that
participated in that were truly
moved it was a it was very
Mr speaker Senate majority
leader close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill two seventy four
do now pass we are on final
passage of house bill two
seventy four as amended the vote
is now open.
Close.
But those members of the
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana yes
Representative Sarinana votes
yes voters approval of six to
six in the affirmative in the
negative house bill two seventy
Mr speaker given given the point
of.
Could election is for placing
House Bill to seventy on final
motor vehicle amended section
sixty six that seven four one
and MSA nineteen seventy eight
begin involved in nineteen
seventy eight.
modifying the requirements of
equal size weight and low for
the duration of a national
emergency declared under federal
law for emergency declared by
department website Mr speaker
In two thousand twenty an
emergency there she was issued
to the COVID public health
emergencies department of
transportation increase vehicle
And reinvigoration was needed
and I was approved by August of
twenty twenty two to deliver the
delivers of housing for low
income more submitted counties
emergency twelve of do you need
to respond directly to federal
and state emergency what I'm
Mr speaker stand for questions
there is a gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya.
Does the I did not get a chance
to look at this looks like as
broad support Mr speaker and
gentleman but the question I
have is is there any
and Representative I know that's
one of the big issues whenever
there's national disaster is the
number of troops that have to be
taken and currently truck
drivers are are forced every ten
ladies of necessary supplies so
does your bill address this
issue Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think the question of.
Oversize and overweight the
vehicles to get to and from one
of the sure that are needed.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
I would imagine maybe that's a
miss rice also for your bill but
I suggest you take a look at the
other issue as well and maybe if
there's a temperament to deal
with this during this
Thank you Mr speaker seen over
the debate gentleman close Mr
speaker a.
I move that helped build two
The vote is about to close.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
those yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
The lady from Diana ready on
item twenty two I am Mr speaker
can you get me to that point
Representative election is
replacing house bill one ninety
free fishing days a year H. B.
one ninety seven would add two
additional days so we would have
two weekends a year these
fifteen days will not only
not have the means to buy a
license and with that Mr speaker
I stand for questions see no
debate the gentle lady to close
I just said house bill one
Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
both yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative removals yes
seven as we passes house.
Deleted from Santa Fe radian
item number sixteen.
thank you Mr speaker this is.
Statutory cleanup bill that is
that will reduce unnecessary
paperwork while still
With that Mr speaker I'll stand
for questions to no debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker I do now ask the
house bill two twenty nine do
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
house bill twenty nine as we
passed this house.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move and go to that
order of business committee
reports an objection is so
ordered.
and finance committee team has
been referred house bill two oh
one as amended has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation ado pasta
Yes I would come to point out
that.
Mr speaker you appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill two ninety
eight as amended has had it
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was named the as are committed
for doctor.
Mr speaker agriculture is a
gives the water resources
committee to is been referred
and Susan K. and at a chair Mr
speaker move adoption run
adoption referral committed for
the house before fifty two of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
mission to do pass and then see
for to the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted submitted
Susan K. in a chair for the
dancing for an adoption referral
committee report on house bill
Yes I'm a committee reported.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to is been referred house bill
two ninety nine has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it do not
to adopt three four we're not
given enough in rural community
for the house bill two ninety
nine but a favorable report on
house labor veterans of military
affairs committees of the super
house bill two ninety nine all
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill three
sixty six has had it under
consideration point investment
management to do pass and insert
for the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
favor signify by saying aye.
Couples may be as a committee
board up to Mr speaker later
veterans and military affairs
committee to is been referred
house bill three seventy one has
house with three seventy one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me the as a committee report
pass and is referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee respectfully submitted
and Sierra chair thanks for
going through the the route for.
Opposing the executive board Mr
speaker labor veterans of
military affairs committee to
it's been referred house bill
four zero three has had it under
consideration point things
the house bill four zero three
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Was me the as have a committee
report opted.
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
We're not optional Federal
commuter port house before forty
five all those and everything
about this and I.
consideration point it was
recommendation to do passed as
amended an answer for to the
health and Human Services
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair
reduction for adoption of
federal committee report on
Mr speaker consumer Public
Affairs Committee was been
referred house bill four seven
zero has had it under
consideration point things
recommendation that it do not
pass the house consumer Public
report on house bill four
seventy but a favorable
committee report on house
consumer public affairs
committee says to fragile for
seventy of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
as recommendation of do pass as
amended finance referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
for that option available
committee report on house bill
four one one has had it under
consideration point things would
manage the to to pass an answer
for the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
Was me is of a committee report
up to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
was been referred house memorial
fifty one has had it under
consideration persons
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Those goals may be a second
report opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee team is been
referred house bill five thirty
respectfully submitted over the
Townsend Here Mr speaker move
adoption for adoption no federal
committee report on house bill
five thirty nine but I have a
committee report on house health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill five
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
has been referred house bill
fourteen has had it under
consideration point same
recommendation added to pass and
then to for to the Judiciary
I.
Closing the eyes of a good
report up to.
Mr speaker government elections
Indian Affairs Committee was
been referred house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill to
for House Bill two twenty eight
all those and everything I just
and I.
Opposing the executive board
opted.
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption where
that option of federal committee
report on house bill four sixty
two of those in favor say if I
was and I.
consideration point seems
recommendation added to pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're not optional
fable Committee appointed house
memorial forty seven of those in
fifty five Senator consideration
point it was recommendation of
do pass respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're not
optional Federal community
portal house memorial fifty five
It's going to be a tough meeting
I think sorry.
Wow.
your desks from the New Mexico
child first network is
dedicating to a dedicated to
improving the lives of children
in foster care on the mug
unless someone like you cares a
whole awful lot nothing is going
to get better it's not thank you
Mr speaker thank you Julie
members take note stimulus was
will meet at today at two thirty
five in room three oh seven.
Members taking no gentle lady
Representative I all members of
the house are invited to lunch
and.
Rural through I just getting
just getting.
Gentleman from everybody thank
promised to us and to me by the
governor's chief of staff Denis
legal and I mentioned this by
watching by today close of
business so they should have
their numbers to us by close of
business today so that we can
extended till tomorrow through
to for us to submit our numbers
to council service but the
governor's list that we I think
some of the and partaking in
will be the due to us today and
rumor that there's a birthday in
the house.
Just got a dirty look from the
other side of the.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative little is it your
birthday.
To.
the the red in the middle.
Jennifer may resent bedroom
thank you Mr speaker
there is another birthday in the
house from a close friend of
mine from capturing Grant and
That one.
To you have bureau the.
Committee from the brothers of
the process deleted from
Bernalillo.
February twenty fourth okay
gentlelady members enjoyed lunch
and afternoon committees and the
