Mr speaker I move we go that
order of business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered click to read.
The what
Mr speaker your government
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption.
We're on adoption referral
committee report on house bill
four zero one of those
Representative has a line.
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair option reduction
of federal committee report
house before twenty four of
those in favor signify by saying
with recommendation that it do
not passed by the house of
militants in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill five thirty eight to pass
respect was omitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair production
those in favor say if I was a
not.
Propose may be as of a committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in in in Affairs Committee too
those in favor say if I was in
line propose maybe the S. of a
committee productive.
Just take a government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee was
six as amended all those in
favor say if I was a nine.
Propose may the S. seven point
four up to.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred Senate bill
three twenty four has had it
signify by saying aye.
Couples may yes of the committee
productive.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
to Senate bill three fifty one
has had it under consideration
Senate bill three fifty one of
those are the receivers and I.
Propose in a test of the
committee board up to.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill three eighty four to
pass respectfully submitted D.
demolitions Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
government elections in in the
Affairs Committee substitute for
House with three eighty four
referred house bill ten has had
it under consideration forcing
with recommendation that a do
not pass for that house health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill tend
to pass and is referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Representative Pamela
House Bill ten of those if you
receive this and I.
Was me the as of a committee
report up to Mr speaker health
and Human Services Committee too
is been referred house bill four
option welfare will come into
point house before seventy one
of those in favor say of this
and I.
Was me the is a good report up
to.
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair Mr
speaker move adoption.
was in a yes I would prefer not
to.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred to Senate tax business
and transportation committee
substitute for Senate health of
public affairs committees of
supercenter bill one thirty two
as amended has had it under
adoption we are in adoption of
federal committee for the Senate
bill one thirty two of those and
everything Representative.
Was me yes Committee productive.
Mr speaker health and Human
adoption we are on adoption will
a recruiter for a Senate bill
two twenty three of those in
favor say that was a nice.
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair Mr speaker move adoption.
bill two twenty four of those
embarrassing but was not.
Propose in a the as of a good
part opted.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred Senate bill seventy
seven as amended has had it
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal government
port on Senate bill seventy
seven as amended all those in
favor signify by saying aye
those opposed may the as of a
and finance committee substitute
for house bill four sixty one to
pass respectfully submitted that
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption printed option no
federal committed for the house
Propose may be as of a committee
board opted.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill five twenty seven
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation that
Committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty seven all those
in there is in this and I.
Couples may yes I agree report
opted.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of Business messages
seeing no objection it is so
ordered
to read.
submitted sherry do Lujan Senate
chief clerk.
Mrs reinterred.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill one forty
substitute for Senate bill three
sixty eight Senate bill four
sixty eight as amended and
requested concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
sure do Lujan Senate chief clerk
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty seven.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
thirty seven Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill three seventy three and
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill four as
amended by the house and further
amended by the Senate and
request the concurrence of the
house the Senate amendments
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order business introduction
of legislation in addition it is
so ordered.
Click to read.
teacher for being named Milken
educator award honoree House
memorial eighty entities by
Representative brown more AT and
then read twice by title is
a Joint Memorial requesting the
children youth and families
department to convene a child
protective services task force
to study and develop
recommendations to improve the
department's removal and
House room nine amid reports by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate bill two fifty one as
amended introduced by Senator
Hamblen.
receipts tax revenue and state
gross receipts tax revenue to
fund a metropolitan
redevelopment project
authorizing a local government
to issue bonds payable from
for a sealed bidding procedure
and approval of award of
contract by a local government
for certain rehabilitation
contracts between private
property owners and contractors.
acting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight Senate
bill two fifty one as amended
introduced by Senator Hamblen.
introduced by senator Maestas
and act relating to sports re
instituting the sports authority
division of the tourism
department changes in them
changing the membership of the
to the house commerce and
economic development committee.
Senate bill one forty three
introduced by Senator manuals an
act relating to gaming control
bill one forty three entities by
Senator manuals.
Senate bill one forty three have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
requirements for audits Senate
bill two forty introduced by
senator or Neil.
Two forty amendment twice by
title is ordered not printed for
to house taxation and revenue
updating statutory references
pertaining to dell developmental
and intellectual disabilities
revising the definition of
developmental disability and the
laws nineteen ninety seven
chapter two seventeen section to
Senate Bill to sixty as amended
introduced by Senator Lopez
Senate Bill to sixty as a minute
an act relating to real property
prohibiting the submission of
the deed or other instrument of
writing to the office of the
county clerk that has attached a
discriminatory restrictive
restrictions and conditions from
instruments affecting the
transfer of real property before
instruments can be recorded
providing that a deed or other
instrument of writing may
include a statement that a
Senator twenty six min read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
cameras Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill three sixty eight Senate
Judiciary Committee supposed to
present about three Sixtyeight
have been read twice by title is
affairs declaring April tenth as
Dolores with that day Senate
bill four sixty eight as amended
entities by Senator Lopez Senate
bill forty eight as amended
amended apologies have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed for to the house rural
development and land grants and
cultural affairs committee.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and we go to that
order of Business third reading
ready on item number twenty
four.
Thank you Mr speaker would you
give me to that point the record
reflect that election is set for
placing House Bill five as
amended on final passage has
bill five as amended this bill
is the improvements on the
government all contact act
Mexico's main anti corruption
statute.
corruption provisions were not
specific enough to be criminally
enforceable as a consequence
this Supreme Court vacated anti
former Representative Daymon Ely
attorney and my constituents.
And Mister speaker I'd like to
take a moment we have a
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chavis thank you
Mr speaker and does the
representative yield I gladly
you'll to Representative Chavis
thank you Mr speaker I just have
we must be examples of the
highest levels of ethical
behavior I believe this
legislation does just that and I
encourage everyone in this body
to vote in favor of this most
student support representative
how to me you.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for before asking me to co
sponsor this I stand under this
bill for a simple reason I
allowing me to sign on to this
and I hope that it goes
of fire on the floor thank you.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative little thank you
I am proud to because co sponsor
house bill five because the
legislation strengthens the
governor governmental conduct
act in ways that are long
overdue.
And creating an enforcement
mechanism against an employee
for their companies violation of
the revolving door restriction
will add more teeth to stopping
you and everyone co sponsoring
for Billy bringing this bill
forward.
And I'm proud to stand beside
you and my new colleagues thank
to my colleague thank you for
someone thank you for including
us phone sourcing these build us
a new member it's important to
build trust specially among my
but I think if you give us a
clear path to a better
understanding the yield our work
together here so thank you.
it.
We all serve here in the public
trust and we take an oath of
office we take that oath on
opening day and what this
serve that public trust so I am
very grateful to the gentle lady
gentle person from it Bernalillo
and Sandoval for bringing this
and some of our colleagues it.
Raise some issues that we have
composed an amendment to address
Mr speaker.
It is two two five nine five
eight point one.
Two two five nine five eight
point one.
It's been built out.
members are I will go through
this ammendment it seems it
appears lengthy however
that will go through it step by
step so wrote understands with
because we are replacing it with
language that better reflects
the intention of that amendment
at the very end of this.
discussion that was brought
forward
in large part the credit goes to
the gentleman from Chavis who
discussed the fact that
activity so you will see a new
definition of political activity
which means activity directed
toward the success or failure of
a political party candidate for
previous amendment that had been
done and House Judiciary we are
inserting at.
I an element of intent into this
subsection E. would read.
About a showing that a former
public officer or employee
violated any provision of this
section.
language we would be inserting
that the person is additionally
and separately liable for any
civil penalty that is assessed.
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe County
yield I yield to the gentleman
from Chavis thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
committee and I do appreciate
your addressing that with this
ammendment and I might to
explain a little bit to the body
appearing before us and
testifying in in committee.
And so we.
We raise that issue and now
political activity is the
giving us selected or getting
people active and so I really
appreciate the effort to to
narrow the focus and concentrate
on that activity not just simply
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady from making that
amendment.
These are for the debate on the
amendment.
Is your objection to adopting
the amendment.
co sponsor in addition to put on
the amendment C. is Mr speaker.
I assumed it was the Sanchez
amendment.
Therefore friendly.
the amendment Mr speaker I do
have a question for the
legislature's thank you Mr
speaker I would like to know who
her expert witnesses.
attorney and my constituents.
And he wants a cookie.
Thank you Mr speaker I am very
proud to be standing with us so
many of my colleagues on this
a a wonderful communication back
to our constituents the voters
in New Mexico that we.
We are standing and holding
ourselves accountable by.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
Of.
Having a body.
That is transparent.
Openly represent their
constituents I think it's
critical.
to this body's performance would
you agree.
your bill I liked it.
But I would like for you to
consider.
An amendment that I think will
We do gentleman I think I think
there might be here
Discipline speaking to the
committee of technical issue
with weights drafted in as well
to just pass right now with you
knowing that I have an amendment
we'll go back and straighten it
up and go on down the line and
if you would recognize me again
all of this so will we'll move
on to the next debater and if
you can do us a favor and work
with council to get this done in
the right way then we'll we'll
look at or percent block.
Thank you Mr speaker with my
friend from Bernalillo county
please yield I gladly you to of
the gentleman from a tear thank
think this is exactly what we
need to start fighting
corruption in the state Mr
speaker gentle lady so I'm
looking on page three here we
R. one rather use the power
resources of the legislator
public officers or employees
office so Mister speaker I
believe we spoke earlier.
constituent about some kind of
political kind of issue Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman it this particular
line is not a has nothing do
with stationary.
Driving.
Without their license plate and
they got a D. W. Y..
And then Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm so sorry Mr speaker
gentleman can you clarify are
you saying that on page three
items.
public office so it's just a
using your legislative title to
get out of a of a ticket or a D.
W. I. Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle person so I do believe
that that scenario is in our our
ethics conduct act but according
employees are individuals who
work for the state and thank you
Mr speaker gentle person from
Otero a legislators we are not
similar to that in the past and
I just wanna make crystal clear
that we are not.
Being vague when it comes to
misuse of office Mr speaker.
the conduct act and the whole it
is not in this particular bill.
Got it thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so I'm seeing it in
my analysis were increase
the have not changed the penalty
amount since I believe nineteen
ninety five.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so we would then van
gentle person from a terra know
currently it is two hundred and
fifty dollars per incident up to
a five thousand dollar cap the
the the bill in front of you is
then this would be ten thousand
dollars cap so a maximum penalty
of ten thousand dollars for is
it per penalty the to the two
Okay all right thank you Mr
speaker if there was one big
question I had regarding that I
just want to make sure we were
increasing penalties you know we
don't have any other scenarios
where we have legislators for
instance do fighting you know
where they work or getting D. W.
eyes and using their their their
you for bringing this forward
and I think it's a good good
start so thank you Mr speaker
there is for the gentle lady
from Bernalillo in Torrance
Representative Lord.
I'd gladly the lead I'd gladly
of.
The field yield thank you to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo in
comment I have to say is.
This is fresh in my mind about
ethics after having been
humiliated in a group chat today
and I hope that everybody's
cognizant of their ethical
I'm so sorry you guys wanted.
The gentleman from someone
reserve Duncan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentlelady yields.
if the citizens of the state
decide to pay us or think it's a
good idea to pass and then we
become a paid employee the state
will this bill cover us as well
May have to come back but we
will if we are teens employees
of the state's than most of them
most of this document will apply
to us but obviously it's a legal
it on the shelf that we make
sure that we know what what it's
covering thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker gently so
so that's that's something in
the next couple years if they
I thank you Mr speaker thank
gently.
The debate the gentleman from
Chavis representative Nibert.
Mr speaker and gentle lady could
I afford their your expert
witness to see what
qualifications you have.
took in the minority was doing
was here the gentle lady.
I am apologize minority whip
will be be able to do that on
the floor.
more minutes to given the member
prepares.
Yes until it goes back down I
guess we get to talk
The gentle lady.
With respect to the government
conduct that.
Guides us and requires us to.
conductor selves in a certain
fashion is that accurate.
Yes thank you Mr speaker thank
officials Mr speaker and gentle
lady the.
Ethics commission that's been
established its one of its
purposes is to reinforce this
And so looking at the provisions
in this we we did.
You you mentioned that there was
a court case that
us a exactly where we tightened
it up to meet the demands of the
New Mexico Supreme Court.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Chavis there are
statutes uses the word quid pro
quo that is not specific enough
according to the Supreme Court
basically it prevents us from
from securing
of any type of favor I recall
the act correctly those of not
yes thank you Mr speaker thank
before.
And.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
This portion of the actors
really
Thank you Mr speaker the thank
you General men from Chavis and
no it does not apply to
lobbyist.
the county and municipal level
those are not thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen yes
it is it applies to public
commissioner and.
In my service in that role I'm
not sure that we were ever
introduced to this act and the
you know one thing I think we
There is an act that you have to
conform to.
And it is the has some pretty
significant penalties if you
So thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen yes this
this bill clarifies that public
Indians at legislators cannot by
provides of votes and public
employees cannot find what ever
favors it can be penalties
involved yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
Yes Mr speaker.
Yes gentleman from Travis county
it does.
In civil penalties would would
be in the nature of monetary
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
amendment has arrived and I
will.
Could include my debate thank
Jennison at the reserve Townsend
thank you and thank you again Mr
speaker and gentle lady if you
would would you yield.
Yes I delightedly yield.
Mr speaker I thought maybe she
had been listening to our expert
in the amendment quite frankly
is to strengthen the bill.
There's not a trick in that
there's no catches in the.
quite frankly.
Who had had a
A.
A very tough conversation with a
like to move house floor
amendment one to house bill five
as amended.
point one that's what I have.
The gentleman seems of the
amendment has been passed out
And ladies this amendment is
pretty straightforward and what
it does is it adds lobbyist into
the equation.
Of.
Less prohibited activities in
the lobbyist is prohibited and
this let me say.
Speaker gentle lady this is not
intent is to prohibit all this
from a directly or indirectly
coercing or attempting to coerce
or perform any other
governmental function that
prohibits that benefits the
lobbyist or the lobbyist
employer for.
favorable favorable to the
lobbyists of the lobbyist's
employer.
gentlelady deaths.
Pretty straightforward and
saying in a lobbyist many of
lobbyists that come in here
Mister speaker and gentle lady
are very powerful as you well
know and they come bearing gifts
shouldn't be so gentle lady I
hope it's something that you
would consider friendly it's
offered in a friendly manner.
It'll person is a friendly
amendment
why yes I think that the the
amendments of the the.
What you're trying to do with
the minute is excellent and I
would love to work with you to
not part of the government and
so we can't put it in this bill
at this time.
The gentle lady I was trying to.
Quite frankly Mr speaker figure
that it is proper.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
that no legislator or no
You have a pretty good law here
I and I'm hate to blame
too good but I turned around and
this bill because it is the
government contacted Act but we
think it is an excellent idea
and would look forward to
working together with you I am
value for all of us and thank
you for bringing this to our
attention is there debate on the
amendment the gentleman from
Sunderland's and the families
McQueen.
the the answer that we're
dealing with the government
conduct acting in sticking this
in there is is probably
appropriate I was curious
however in your in your language
if a lobbyist told me that if I
didn't vote for the bill they
would support me our I didn't
vote for a bill stay with
it's a threat under certain
circumstances I think we just
have to be.
Common sense approach about this
vote for to not vote for to with
hold an opinion of them
certainly it's something that
I I think the ethics commission
has a has a place here and we
would allow them to operate.
Mr Chairman
I certainly believe we need.
on the bone of the repression
this is the gentleman I think if
a lobbyist told me that if I
didn't vote for a bill I would
be primary for example I think
that's a threat but I also think
find a better place to maybe
work on all more before to touch
to the thank you Mr speaker
thank you so much for the
anymore and the other from San
Juan Representative lane thank
just question on I heard the
explanation as to why this Memon
doesn't fit within this bill
when I read section seven.
What is a new section being
added to record of this
ammendment.
want above that section seven
what actor re adding to.
The gentleman from San Juan
presumably of.
Thank you speaker does the
gentleman from.
Our lobbyists currently
required to to register with the
So Mr speaker and gentleman
their their side of the
Campaign finance act.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
So
Mister speaker.
And gentleman we here
So Mister speaker and gentleman
when we're talking about pay to
play.
sometimes we're talking about
is.
potentially.
Mr speaker and gentleman my
point was when I introduce this
knowing.
That it was introducing this new
to the body it is conducive to
the I believe to the oil that
the lady is introducing to the
body and and quite frankly it's
field and I just I mean if we're
gonna be serious about ethics
and we're going to be serious
about.
Of.
No not allowed I'm I'm a little.
A little shocked that it's not
being viewed as being friendly
and the intent is to strengthen
every legislator in this round
Republican Democrat independent
ally if that if there are but it
sure everyone of us should not
of most of our pockets to be
here and we shouldn't have to do
it under a threat of some.
Lobbyist of anybody of any.
Find them in the whatever they
Of of law that I think that was
expressed by the the minority
leader themis speaker and
gentleman just a couple of
things and I'm not really a
question you can respond if you
The agency speaker there is that
it's been my experience
there should be another term
which is
Pay for play.
not coming from an an agreement
we all wash one hand for the
other Mr speaker
And and I and I know that I've
heard this when I've gone back
paycheck and they they say well
we we pay you have heard that
but I've also heard and this is
an awful term that that bought
and paid for by.
Bureaucrats control things the
Mr speaker and gentleman I
didn't realize how much lobbyist
control things and many times
just how much power they have.
whatever that is to wield it
however they can and sometimes
and you and I both know we've
seen at the handful of very very
very powerful lobbyists and that
is that are in around this
looking at all aspects of the
speaker I I do support your
amendment and and if you have a
response that I'd be happy to
hear.
drinks on a bill to give each
and every one of us
a lobbyist the favor of a
lobbyist or whatever it is so
I'm that's all I'm trying to do
is try and to make
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Motion to table house floor
amendment number two to house
bill I just twice amended a vote
The votes about to close.
The clerk to call those members
of the recorded vote.
Castellano.
Yes the table Representative
Rubio votes yes to table
Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes there are there may be a
Everybody gets devoted.
The vote is now closed.
Thank you Mr speaker
I think the body is spoken and I
I might go out and try to see if
it is important to the body
thank you thank you gentlemen
seen over the debate the gentle
person to close thank you Mr
speaker I move that house bill
But those members without a
recorded vote.
Yes Representative Rubio those
yes representative Thompson.
Yes representative Thompson both
yes.
Was one of sixty one in the
affirmative zero negative house
ready on item number thirty five
yes is here thank you will you
give me to that point that the
record reflect that election
necessary for placing House Bill
three one three as twice amended
of final passage has been taken
on many promises that we made
when legalizing recreational
cannabis this commitment really
looks at how it is that we can
expand our micro business
department to have more teeth in
the regulatory capacity word is
that they can go into
establishments who maybe about
or get rid of a permit for of
those who might be in that bad
actor category and it also looks
at how it is that we can
government and do that which is
within the parameters of of the
legal structure that we've
proposed here today offer the
body here we've learned a lot in
a very successful program we
just had a banner
here are better months at the
start of the year with forty
million in new revenue to the
state it's been incredibly
overall Mr speaker with that
will stand for questions let me
introduce my expert I have the
interim director of the cannabis
control division and avail hose
amendment Mr speaker.
Would you care to remove the
amendment and.
Get it done now so moved Mr
speaker.
There's a motion and house
Let's stand by Willie gets past
that has been built up.
licenses prior to the expiration
of Original Lysons providing the
fee program perforation with
that any questions on the
amendment.
The debate on the amendment.
gentle lady from Travis curry
and Roosevelt Representative
rebate Mr speaker gentle lady
from Santa Fe will you yield I
will yield to my friend in
Should it be passed out the lady
while it gets passed out can you
give me the two to six number
yes two two six zero six three
Skip past all right now.
Spinnin request to remove coats.
One request to remove codes.
Request granted.
Very important that it is
Mr speaker gentle lady just
briefly this amendment deals
with re packaging for Children
basically dealing with packaging
allowed me to present the
amendment deliverance of the
phases a friendly amendment Mr
speaker after conferencing with
the representative and looking
at our rules and those that we
statute so this is a friendly
amendment Mr speaker all right
this is a friendly amendment
is there debate on the
amendment.
I see none.
House floor amendment number two
to house bill three one three
just thrice amended has been
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan thank you
Mr speaker with the gentle lady
from Santa Fe yield I gladly
yield to my friend from Santa
Fe.
in New persisting and growing to
speak so couple quick questions
just quickly why is it in just
to bring some knowledge Mr
profits started out of prior to
the recreational cannabis
program so that all of those
companies started out in the
technical change that allows us
as government to move them
across from one to one division
or one department to another
thank you thank you Mr speaker
Jim Lehrer and I appreciate that
so I guess what I'm just trying
to wrap around what what
benefits them from moving from a
nonprofit to a for profit Mr
speaker.
these organizations started
these thirty four gonna ciation
started they were only allowed
to be in the medical program so
this budget amendment because
that conversion they basically
don't have what every other
entity has since we legalized
recreational cannabis.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
is the additional regulation
and.
I guess more and implementation
of administratively or.
authority I guess regulation
I'm just curious how does that
affect their budget and their
staffing of with those
regulations efforts that are
added in in this bill Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady there
would be no fiscal impact on the
current practices of regulation
some broader efforts in some of
these crackdowns that they're
looking at but that said Mr
speaker gentle lady no impacts
today thank you Mr generally.
Division where there's not the
the full FBI or FBI background
checks is going to affect their
ability to enforce some of these
currently they use works out how
to do this with the public
safety department there was an
attempt to do this in previous
years but because of the
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally I think it's an
important part of the aspect
it's not completed within our of
the right now under the
cannabis.
Division and I think it's it is
course meant please Mr speaker
generating as previously stated
Mr speaker gentle lady there's
no impact currently on the need
to staff anymore what's needed
enforce
The law the sensually thank you
Mr speaker thank you gently to
how many FTEs with that that
take to do that Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady so there
would there's fifteen
that's future again there's no
impact to the current
full time fifteen employees
working on that but in future
there's going to be more
general Uh gentle lady excuse
me.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
clarify what you mean by how.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady they're
growing their own resources
their own staffing ability
training all of the above as
a lot to the process here and
the the amount of things that
are needed to to grow the center
just to make sure that we are
addressing those
enforcement needs and I
addressing how we are
how this is a unique and and
wonderful industry and fully
supported I just wanted to drop
I just want to draw the
attention that there are some
Thank you Mr Wilson to send for
you yes Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman.
Journalist just a couple
Mr speaker gentle lady a
gentleman essentially this is
coming out of the cannabis
of folks participating in this
industry the equity office
building that it would be in our
old the would actually be able
to promulgate different rules
and allow allows for the public
to understand what they can
support this equity programs
ties together all of those
aspects of what we're trying to
Perhaps some of the parameters
will be used to value what is
where the shooters.
looking for is you know women
owned business woman owned
businesses minority owned
businesses veteran owned
businesses businesses to locate
industry or have a little bit
more support from small business
angle all the way up to being
able to to just look at the
broad aspects of of how to
Two ladies there would be no
objective criteria.
Mostly.
Women's discrimination
look at how we've been able to
define the in law whether begin
women owned businesses minority
owned businesses veteran owned
businesses we've looked at the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John lady from sensors.
The more cruel processors
we know what the number is in
plans Mr speaker gentleman so
the ones hands insurers that
this body doesn't have to come
twenty thousand plants so that
would give one tenth the micro
businesses to grow twenty two
sorry excuse me two thousand
plants.
Transaction tune.
graph.
Developing the scientific
evidence reference to paragraph.
Value waiting that scientific
This synthetic H. C. as being
safe for public consumption.
Mr speaker gentleman so we work
about this form of law that
we're putting in here this is
essentially what you've heard
possibly in the news delta eight
delta nine those are illegal
substances
laboratories would be able to
verify what it was and and if it
is safe then we would allow then
RLD would allow it into the
market place at this time and
why we have this in here to
ensure that we go through that
testing process.
You Mr.
developed from two forms of
legal hemp put together that
miners unfortunately might be
able to have access to because
of that loophole because it's a
that are not regulated in the
market properly would allow are
basically RLD to work with ages
the health department to ensure
for that additional testing and
precisely what the gentleman
brought up perhaps more research
and more ability to understand
on the safety of this product
thanks valuations.
here the state and have come to
us from out of state they have a
permanent position within the
health department to do this
type of research and so they're
the ones that are testing and
Incentive for teams folks
controls whether an officer's
extraneous material in the
synthesized product can will
peer reviewed study that you
invision probably not within
this capacity on the more so
what we need to do with this
product and why it's in the law
that this is not a threat to to
human health and so with this
provision gives us basically the
flexibility to do that until we
understand what is in this
product Mr speaker gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John lady last question was it
Mr speaker gentlemen so we're
taking it out of there to make
it more in line with the
Speaker thank you for your
answers there's a lady from
Travis Representative Ezzell.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
not how many people right now
are currently employed by
regulation and licensing.
RLD's expansive we don't have an
exact number on that but in the
cannabis control division
there's about twenty five people
working full time okay Mister
Mr speaker I appreciate your
response on the of.
And they do have the authority
Mr speaker and gentle lady
whenever there is allegations of
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady on page thirty of
your bill under the new material
it does give the investigative
Authority the powers and I'm
smoke there's fire you know
Pardon the pun there's only one
person got it Mr speaker gentle
lady of.
drugs being brought in from out
of state that is a federal
offense so what are the charges
against any dispensary that has
Mr speaker gentle lady what
you're what you bring up is
have in place for breaking the
law but certainly even criminal
criminal penalties for that acts
of for bringing this and what we
want this to be is very very
consequences for bad actions Mr
speaker gentle lady I agree with
you one hundred percent we have
given the authority through this
legislative body to have the
the dispensaries there and Mr
speaker it is disingenuous of us
to say well you know we don't
have anything to do with the so
yes that this if this bill
exam on page twenty eight of
your bill line twelve will it
actually starts on line seven.
Are you with me there yet do let
eight a debate team subject to.
Four hours evidence based drug
education legal rights program
now because I know what it does
take to again be able to pass
the bar.
What is the charge for minor in
possession of alcohol Forces the
For that said Mr speaker
gentlelady minors in possession
today of alcohol.
the alcohol program but I do not
know the answer to that question
gentle lady would you tell me
what the answers Mr speaker
that's for her to study and find
out Mr speaker I do appreciate
times amended do now pass final
passage of house bill three
thirteen as four times amended
the vote is now open.
Those.
Representative Castellano hello.
I'm sorry.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano votes
Yes Representative Thomson both
yes.
The vote is now closed but what
if we can informative twenty the
negative house bill three third
teen as four times amended has
order of Business concurrence
messages.
Mr speaker and
business messages in addition.
Representative members were
gonna turn your attention to
item number one of the
concurrence calendar
amendments to house bill nine as
price amended go to sponsor.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Hyundai in need
device amended the gentle lady
to explain the amendments Mr
speaker amendments were made to
house bill nine in the Senate
Judiciary Committee and on the
amendment to defy the term
Brandis on the Senate floor
amendment was made to clarify
winded terms of house bill nine
did not applaud.
Okay.
vote.
You've got a roll call vote Sir.
want to make sure okay I did get
a sorry got the one with the in
context.
So we added on this amendment
number six.
amount is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
I'm sorry I'm I'm not following
a question a dim lady Mr speaker
okay I want to make sure that I
want to make sure that this is
inserted into page three.
Section C. and I don't have
numbers on the side to having
contacts and this is one two
So I had some questions on this
I like to break it down Mr
speaker jelly it says with the
authorization of a minor's
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
parent will give the
authorization and that would be
up to the parent on how that
would be given.
that is correct okay I'm just
asking for clarification because
on this changes there's a lot of
stuff in one little sentence
okay so with the authorization
the could be verbal or in the
would happen in rural areas many
times we learn that miners to go
hunting and so we wanted to make
sure that that was an exclusion
and did not apply to the
to to what age this child could
go lawfully hunting Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
lady it's whenever the parent
gives the authorization.
so lawful hunting to the parent
says that the child could go
hunting can they go hunting by
themselves or do they need
supervision Mr speaker gentle
lady.
need supervision is what would
be the ages that they could go
out by themselves and when that
supervision include guardians
and parents Mr speaker delayed.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
Okay so what you're saying with
this ammendment Mr speaker
gentle lady for clarifications
that there can be a verbal
authorization for the minor's
parent or guardian who is a
person who's responsive reason
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's going to lawful
recreational use what would you
Recreational use their often
shooting competitions that are
occurring and that that would be
applicable in this instance.
applicable to that because that
is still recreational use for
example there's an area that we
have here my area or in my
district that we're allowed to
go shooting at that's out in the
Mr speaker gentle lady with the
authorization of the parent and
supervision.
Okay the reason masses may
questions Mr delight is a super
those of us that response we
teach our children and
grandchildren issue we often go
out to an area where we could be
outside negotiating to build
experiences and to teach them
parent is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady that is correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady just like
there was with the hunting that
adult supervision.
Okay so that that brings up
another question Mr speaker
gentle lady so what adult
supervision be applicable to the
understanding of the staff to.
That that opens up a whole
nother window said okay so so
that means that a person a child
a minor sorry could go.
somebody who is over eighteen so
that's what I understand is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do
older brother or cousin that's
eighteen if there are minor my
understanding of this is that
the eighteen year old could say
Hey let's go shooting they still
minority member in the Senate to
put this ammendment on the on
the legislation.
That's problematic Mr speaker
important so I need to know in
this wording.
If they need if the eighteen
year old brother cousin or
friend could say Hey let's go
don't have the answer how can we
find that out so I can explain
it to my constituents are vote
on this Mr speaker downline.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady can just the minority
Julie I I think your point is
well taken and as as is the
gentle lady from Bernalillo of
the amendment was put on by
Senator I believe senator
Neville and it'd be great to
think
as are the the generated from
various thank you Mr speaker
Bridget I'm actually trying to
get honest answers when I go
home and explain this I want to
make sure that none of our
parents are committing a crime I
about a minor accessing a
firearm and then causing harm or
death to someone.
extremely technical that our
parents need to know I just want
to make sure their parents
understand that when they're
doing this exception that they
don't mess it up I want to make
authorization for me based on
this ammendment and that's why
I'm trying to guess so often on
Oscar more questions Mr speaker
gentle lady to we get the
Senator over here to answer and
I believe they're still here
really sure what other lawful
purpose I mean we've got going
to the range to plank we've got
competition going to a shooting
range what would be examples of
minority member to come over and
explain what he was thinking.
Mr speaker do you recommend that
I just wait and come back to
this until he gets are just
saying this is questions or just
gentleman come over and help
clarify some of your questions
our goals are and when the body
that if the house were to concur
and this would to go up to the
governor it still needs to be
pager from the senator just to
just to the technical aspects of
his amendment thank you Mr
speaker and I agree with on that
I also want to make sure worse
far as like voting purposes to
answer for if I'm just trying to
think any of the use of a
lawful.
Any other lawful purpose would
that be if the mom was asleep
and she had a restraining order
let's say against her husband
can get a hold of the gun to
stop the threat would that be
part of the lawful purpose Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
if a minor obtains a fire on
item number six is under that
list of things yes.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
guess what what I'm going at
what of the lawful purposes
there would be
that this child would have a
verbal authorization and Mr
speaker delayed also before vote
on this and other people though
old friend or did they need the
verbal and your expert that's
with you Mr speaker gentle lady
does not have answers for that
is that correct.
we look at item six that you're
referring to for purposes of
discussion the authorization of
the minus parent or guardian is
given for the purpose of lawful
The lady what was part of the
constitution and where's that
can you point that to me Mr
speaker gentle lady.
section six of the New Mexico
constitution.
Okay gentle lady Mr speaker is I
we have a great
second amendment actually better
than some of the other ones
Mr speaker jelly I just wanted
some clarification because this
one sentence as a whole lot of
stuff in here and I still don't
You know the.
These people so this part of
both for staff and I couldn't go
home and say well there was an
amendment I don't know really
what it does I really don't know
into later but.
The problem that I have is I
don't have any examples.
Of what.
Other lawful purposes because
hunting without table him with
us this situation and on.
If.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
A parent.
Goes out for the night they're
Yes you can have access to it to
protect yourself if someone were
to break in and stop the threat
and to protect the animals I
guess would that be another
since the on page three and one
of the provisions for which a
person would not be charged
under under this
a hold of a Senator noble thank
you Mr speaker thank you Julie
gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
appreciate your recommendation
that we accept the the Senate
or concur with the Senate's.
amendments but I would like to
the committee over in the
Senate.
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
not it was not okay then.
this.
Our constitution certainly
includes lawful hunting generate
recreation and other law for
Security and defense and and
maybe I need to ask a Senator
but would.
Would you know why those two
things were may be amended from.
discuss that at all but it looks
like they had to be looking at
our our constitution so one when
I see the words other lawful
that would be omitted from the
constitution as being
encompassed within the.
So with that you know I I
certainly.
constitution and the language we
see there the words other lawful
purpose could be explained I
think by reference to a variety
of things including the
for that I certainly support
your recommendation of that we
concur with that amendment I'm
still hesitant to concur with
legislation Mr speaker gentle
lady thank you all right run a
motion to concur with the Senate
amendments to house bill nine is
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano votes
no Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
thirty four in the affirmative
twenty in the negative the house
has concurred with Senate
amendments to house bill nine
order business third reading of
legislation in objection it is
so ordered the gentleman from
Chavis ready on item number.
Twelve.
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill
Mr speaker this is just a sample
of amendment to an existing law
there is a Scribner's error and
what that will stand for
questions C. individual and
close thank you Mr speaker
I think this is a very simple
final passage of house bill two
fifty as amended the vote is now
open.
yes Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes
Representative Thomson.
Representative Thomson votes yes
am can you give me to that point
the record reflect that election
is safer place incentive three
anyone with an emergency clause
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
speaker I move that Senate bill
three eighty one with the
emergency clause do now pass we
are on final passage of Senate
bill three eighty one with an
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano is
yes Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
members to cast your vote here
in the chamber.
The vote is now closed we would
have sixty two in the from to in
negative Senate bill three
eighty one would emerge across
order of business committee
reports no objection it is so
ordered.
To read.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee term is been referred
house consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three oh six has had it
under consideration point same
as recommendation that it do not
Chandler chair Mister speaker
Or
should.
Optional Committee point has
come counts consumer public
the eyes are going to put up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too was referred house bill
three ninety has had it under
consideration point same as
with three ninety of those
representatives and I was in a.
The S. allocated for doctors.
government for the house bill
for ten of those if there was an
amazing line of those goals may
be a Senate committee
productive.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
was been referred house memorial
forty of the severity of this
and I suppose in a yes I'm a
committed productive.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house
memorial seventy four seventy
four has had it under
memorial seventy for all those
in favor of this and I.
As well as maintenance of
equipment up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
was been referred Senate bill
forty four has had it under
consideration point a with
yes I was going to adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
was been referred Senate bill
one sixty eight as amended has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
Was me yes I was going to put up
to.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Fe Representative McQueen.
This is the house energy
environment and natural
resources committee will not
meet tomorrow.
Mr speaker your house
agriculture sec is in water
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning eight thirty in
room three fifteen members
In room seventeen not needing
anywhere.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
similar McKinley supporters and
one ambulance have
gonna miss handle full if you
guys would help yourself to a
really appreciated thank you Mr
speaker thank you madam chair
making yourself.
Just write members thank you for
a productive day get some rest
and we will we will see you
stand recess until.
Ten thirty tomorrow morning.
When the state has to be
Thursday March the ninth day of
game tomorrow and so everybody
will get their jerseys and will
be suited up for the evening
assuming that we will not be on
the decision more morning.
The house and Senate races until
ten thirty tomorrow morning.
