Madam chair movie.
Madam chair is on her way she
will join us shortly.
So we have a quorum and I
believe this morning we will
begin with house joint
resolution nine.
You can't hear me.
Okay so Natalie are you ready.
Representative.
There are I'm sorry I did
meaning PI in Adelie.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative we are ready to
hear house joint resolution nine
and continue with that.
Thank you madam chair hopefully
you have in your share file the
committee sub that was created
with the thoughtful and
productive feedback of this
committee last Wednesday.
Let me know if you can find it
and you would like to move it
for discussion.
Madam chair of the move it for
discussion purposes.
Thank you we have a motion to
move the amendment for
discussion.
Do we have a discussion.
Would you like me to present the
for changes yes great yes
explained that then that please.
Okay we took your feedback and
made four changes if you go to
page three there was
conversation about tightening up
the prohibitions on who could
serve on the commission so lines
forward I say a commissioner
shall not be a former elected
official with the exception of
the retired judge and then all
other prohibited categories are
in the ten year appropriations
if you'll remember the original
was a split between five years
and ten years so this is
everybody intent also on page
three lines twenty to twenty two
trying to get that
The concerns around longtime
party activists well we had we
moved a line from section be to
see so my twenty now says and
committed to conducting the
redistricting process in an
honest independent and impartial
fashion that is to allow the
state ethics commission actually
late charge on them.
To try and get that
characteristic as they're
creating the pool.
Next on page four.
Winds five and six.
The majority and minority
leaders in the Senate and in the
house maybe strike up to three
applicants from the entire pool.
Not their own party not the
opposition party but the entire
pool.
At the bottom last line.
Total deviation to plus or minus
five percent.
The last changes on page eight.
Eighteen and nineteen.
And already the original said
commissioner shall disclose we
added at time frame to make sure
commissioners disclosed before
the process is entirely over
commissioner shall disclose by
the next public meeting.
Communication with the outside
person.
Okay so those are the changes
between the original bill you
saw Wednesday and this committee
stop thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative now do
we have discussion on the
amendment and I see
Representative Eli madam chair I
was gonna move to do pass of the
amendment and then follow that
with a do pass of the bill as
amended but I see that someone
else has their hand up and I can
wait for that motion okay
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair may need
some assistance I I did go on
share file.
I could not find the.
Our substitute bill
So somebody can direct that to
me
Somebody working directed to me
in a moment that be I I do have
one question based on what the
representative stated madam
chair and and Representative you
said that the
minority leaders the speaker and
the.
As a protest in stride three
from the entire pool is that
collectively three for each of
all have three strikes.
Which which is it.
Madam chair representative
excellent question they each
have three for a total of twelve
strikes out of the pool of
thirty eight okay.
Thank you for clarifying that
are.
Does anybody have any idea where
the
Many subgroups.
madam chair and Representative
night purchased so I'm getting
clarification on whether that
was included in the share drive
but Amanda also forwarded an
email that has the committee sub
to you.
Okay.
Your weight one secretary I will
look at the.
R. the doctor that I have is
our.
Proposed House government
elections and then the Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety.
Which is not what we're talking
about.
Okay we'll get the correct one
to.
Representative madam chair.
Sure is is that email gonna be
sent to all of us are just
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair and Representative
Figueroa so apparently we didn't
get the committee substitute to
the Alice is that correct can
the analyst confirm that.
Yes that's correct.
Okay so we're gonna have to roll
the bill.
My questions are over madam
chair thank you okay sorry about
that Representative.
Chair I do have an analysis from
at least one of your and that
analysts who sent it to me for
some feedback
Is there any major analysts
madam chair I I did receive it.
Okay what about the of the
Legislative website.
And that's the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute yes ma'am.
Okay but the other analyst we
don't have any to Senate L. I've
got it in my files that would be
great thank you.
J. P. did you get the the
Committee substitute.
I think right now let's just go
I'm I'm so sorry Representative
we're gonna have to roll it
because I don't think the
members received it and it
sounds like at least the
Committee analyst and receive
it.
Thanks chair I will
forwarded again to you and I'll
just forward it to all the
members as well and hopefully
it'll reach everyone thank you
great thank you.
So do we have Representative
Herndon.
Madam chair she is in the
audience okay.
We will promote you
representative.
Good morning.
Representative.
Yes I'm here great we're ready
for your memorial thank you I
also have to to.
Experts would you please bring
them up one is a Daymon
Martinez.
And also the Roger.
This in great and it's L. E. G.
E. N. D. R. E..
Roger will you please raise your
hand as Representative Tara
Lujan with you.
C. is this.
I don't know the answer to that.
Sponsor.
Not of eighteen thirty five okay
so.
This is me today.
Okay.
We are ready for you and your
experts are now panelists all
right thank you very much.
So.
Madam chair members members of
the committee I'm Representative
Pamela Harnden and we're here
today to of.
Present you with the memorial
that will allow a.
A group of individuals comprised
of police officers and community
individuals as well as those who
are involved in and can
pertaining to the police
officials to put together a task
force that will look at how we
go about retaining offices with
in the the state of New Mexico
so that we don't we don't lose
them and so what this task force
will do will come together to
talk about how we go about
retaining offices I have to
experts with me today who will
be further explaining the
importance of this task force
and asking for your approval of
this memorial so I'm asking the
two
I'm asking the two experts to
please introduce themselves
right now the first one is David
Martinez would you please
introduce yourself to the
committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee good morning and thank
you for this for allowing us to
speak today.
My name is Damond Martinez some
senior policy adviser.
At the Albuquerque police
department.
Last summer more killer convene
a group of law enforcement
partners across the community
here for example
Attorney General's office the
courts the DA's office members
of the legislature
Entities from the community such
as Ranidae may so we all got
together and over five different
sessions came up with forty
priorities that we believe can
make a difference in the
criminal justice system one of
the first priorities that we
have and this initiative is
called the Albuquerque metro
crime initiative MCI was to
create a task force to examine
offs retention and level
recruitment programs for all
please agencies in New Mexico
one of the things that's
important is right now you're
saying a lack of officers and we
need to deal with this issue so
we're very grateful to
Representative current and I am
putting this memorial together
putting it forward something
that's important going forward
is not only when officers reach
that high three what we would
like to see is.
Them continue to serve until
that twenty five years so that
we get the we get the strength
of their experience and we also
keep on the police force and
that would make the community
safer so again grateful for
being able to speak to you this
morning and I would turn it over
to interim commander Jennifer if
possible.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Roger
little gentry interim commander
with the Albuquerque police
department oversee the
operations review division which
the train all of its
responsibilities that contains
that recruiting as well as
staffing.
And one of the things that I
think is most important about
this task force is not only
bringing in new officers that
are going to be able to serve
New Mexico
at in law enforcement capacity
but also retaining those
officers beyond that twenty
years be on that twenty five
years there's a whole lot of
things that can be done in order
to do that I believe in putting
together a great thing thank
through this committee.
can actually get us there last
year alone looking at our
staffing numbers we lost as the
Albuquerque alone hundred and
sixty eight officers hundred of
those were due to retirement and
about thirty those were due to
resignation so we are having
trouble getting people on to the
Department we also have issues
keeping him on that part right
now I know that's going to be a
similar issue that statewide and
I've been talking to other
agencies they're experiencing
the same issues even other
states are experiencing those
issues so come together as a as
a group and do is problem
solving right definitely help us
or we can properly staff the
department and to do that school
safety thank you guys.
Madam chair members of the
committee we are ready to stand
for questions.
Great thank you Representative
we will open up the pole now for
those that would like to vote in
support of house memorial thirty
five.
or that would like to.
Mr Hannan opposition of it.
I will keep that open for about
twenty seconds and for the
public for those of you that are
here for house bill six we have
asked to be in by the sponsor to
roll that bill they are
Having some amendments to it so
it won't be ready today so we
are going to roll that bill
house bill six will not be heard
in this committee today.
And so now we've closed the
whole we have eleven in favor
and four in opposition if you
would like to speak in favor
please raise your hand.
If you would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Kathleen Burke.
I think Kathleen if you were in
wanting to speak in favor we can
still get you if you want to
raise your hand again.
You are now unmuted.
Yes madam chair good morning and
good morning to members of the
committee
I'm Kathleen Burke Miele county
and I am a former member of the
community placing councils in
Albuquerque and as a member of
the community who just worked in
police reform for a number of
years I just would like to land
by hearty support for this
memorial and I think Mr
leshondra and Mr Martinez
especially for supporting it and
for Representative
for having brought it forward so
thank you all and I I ask for
your to pass.
Thank you are there any your non
made it.
Hello.
Yes thank you for calling me
Yeah I'd like to have
Please stay twenty twenty five
years and beyond but I.
I think.
A memorial seems kind of
useless.
the best thing that could be
done was would be to repeal the
qualified immunity
You have bills that we can the
police department currently in
and session
You want to free prisoners from
jail I just think that.
It seems kind of meaningless
when when you could support law
enforcement on.
More ways.
Then a committee or some kind
of.
Investigation or whatever you're
calling it thank you.
Is there anyone else who would
like to speak.
Okay seeing none will go to the
committee Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
yesterday when I was reviewing
this R. E. noted a couple of
things that I'd like to add to
it.
Rather the.
How to do this on the fly asked
Legislative Council wrapped up
in amendment now unfortunately
we didn't get it to the
committee twenty four hours
before it.
And I've sent the amendment to
Representative heard and for her
to review as well.
And so the amendment is.
Two two two five five zero point
one and just in our shared file
but I can go through the
amendment with
with the bill right now if
you're ready.
We can move the amendment for
discussion purposes and you've
talked with Representative
Herndon.
Representative Rehm yes I did
these are some minor changes
just the ditions to us
our memorial.
Okay go ahead and explain to
your amendment Madam chair of
before we do that could you
please the allow Daymon Martinez
to have didio accents.
Video access.
Representative no this camera.
We can't turn on his camera on
his and he'll have to do that on
are we can't do it from our and
have to do it on his end.
Thank you madam chair
representative madam chair and
members if you'll go to page one
one twenty two AM right after PM
that make you see the word M.
strike the word a
Them on that same line after
least reforms insert statutory
changes in local.
in the force with the US
department of justice so we're
going to involve the PED really
need to look at the department
of justice agreement up for APD.
Madam chair and members on page
three.
Wanting to after police Madam
the fraternal order of police
New Mexico state lodge so that
they're Representative.
You know they represent all the
police agencies across the
state.
Which.
Yeah state H. three them on page
three at one seventeen after
association the executive
director of the fraternal order
of police New Mexico state law
which with that I'll stand for
questions on this.
Representative will go back to
you are these friendly
amendments.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee mystery
yes these appear to be a friend
and then that's what I would
like an explanation of the first
a change that was at that was
requested to remove the word and
and I'm not sure what you are
trying to accomplish because of
the way that it reads there
after would you please explain
madam chair representative to
bring.
Madam chair and Representative
permanent so the statutory
changes our current laws for
future laws that we need to
change your our new laws that
may need to come out or be
amended to go ahead and help
retrain the police and then of
course the DOJ
agreement that they have with
the PED I think needs to be part
of the discussion as well.
So madam chair representative of
rain I'm referring to like
twenty to where you're re asking
to strike the word and after the
word pandemic what is the
purpose of that madam chair
representative bring.
Madam chair and.
Representative heard and that
was that was done by Legislative
Council to make it flow better
read better is why they did
that.
Madam chair representative to
bring by it seems to me it makes
it more confusing and so with
respect to taken out the and
that's my I'm not quite sure
what.
The request was for that but let
me just go further with respect
to the
I do respect to page three a
line to a please explain why
you'd like to have that
amendment made Madam chair
representative bring.
Madam chair representative
Herndon the fraternal order of
police Representative swan
fortunate all across the state
so they would be able to comment
on
Not only large agencies but
small agencies and I think that
you did a good job of let's get
a large agency and get a small
agency in this task force to go
a discussed the needs of the
small warm Forsman agencies a
lot of times aren't heard in the
they have different needs than
many of the large agencies so
just bringing in the the
fraternal order of police I
think helps.
Bring a lot more
resources to the to the our task
force to go ahead and discuss
these.
Thank you madam chair
representative bring and Madam
chair representative to bring
would you please explain the for
the amendment.
Madam chair in Representative
heard and so on the bottom of
page three one seventeen that's
just.
Again adding the FOB and there's
being one of the members.
Madam chair representative Rehm
I have no objection to these
amendments the first one I ever
I I'm concerned that it doesnt
clarify it confuses and I don't
see the reason particularly word
and out so if you would agree to
a number of the number two three
and four but even that word and
the and support staff occasion I
think we have a friendly
amendment.
Madam chair representative
printed I think that so
Representative Nibert have some
concerns about leaving the and
then thank you what state
sporting that.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I think
it's not just a question of the
word and that's also the use of
the words the impact of and then
later in that same sentence you
have have impacted wall so my
suggestion to make the re better
would be to strike the words the
impact of the very beginning so
it just starts off with corona
virus disease that a doctor and
then it
National calls for police reform
combat and statutory I would put
the and before the word
statutory because yep three the
state our ideas there so you
have a pandemic you have
national calls for police reform
and then the statutory
changes.
In law enforcement agreements
with the department of justice
sorry out three things so I
think the word and should be
removed from the for national
but it should be inserted before
work statutory in the summer of.
That was the point
okay so you Madam chair
representative on that board
understand then you are asking
for the first whereas I mean the
where is that begins on line
twenty one on page one two read
as follows where as the corona
does the the Corona virus
disease twenty nineteen pandemic
Madam national calls for police
reform and statutory changes.
Sen statutory changes and local
law enforcement agreements with
the United States department of
justice have impacted.
Law enforcement officers adding
to staff shortages am I reading
that correctly Madam chair
representative Nibert.
R. I believe you did because you
put the and then before
statutory and you.
Words out and then the rest of
the changes in the.
Two oh two number what's
Representative I believe that
gets us where we need to go.
Madam chair representative
ring so just for concurrence we
compare with the out with two
three and four at the amendments
that a web been offered inviting
and with respect to the first
amendment the whereas would read
as follows just for
clarification for purposes of
this discussion where as the
Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen pandemic common
national calls for police reform
and the.
Statutory changes.
Local law enforcement agreements
with the United States
department of justice have
impacted law enforcement
officers at the staff started
this just for clarification so
madam chair with those
applications we accept these
amendments as been in them.
So maybe what we can do is
continue the discussion on this
if these are friendly amendments
to Representative her and then
instead of trying to figure out
you know correct punctuation and
and where words go if we can
continue the discussion and then
you and Representative neighbors
and Representative Rehm can work
on those amendments and then you
can come back on Wednesday and
we can get it out of committee
because it's a house memorial it
only has the one committee and
then it goes to the floor so if
you're agreeable to that that
way we're not
making amendments that are.
I'm that are unclear
getting that way we have a clean
bill.
claim amendments rather.
Thank you madam chair of.
Representative
ring then I Burt and we're
totally amenable to that.
Okay great I'm is there further
discussion on the memorial.
Representative.
I would just point out that the
Representative is also a
beautiful street for you a
little bit that the further
resolved graph on page three
line KM.
Of.
We can just simply state copies
of the memorial be transmitted
to the co chairs of the let
legislative interim committee
that addresses point fractions
of justice issues.
And the person's chosen by the
task force.
Without having to spell a mall
out is going to be appointed and
then also put the speaker about
president pro tem.
But.
That that just shorten it up
will.
It doesn't matter
One where the other substance.
So madam chair representative to
bring it it.
Representative Nibert we prefer
to dispel it out and just make
clear with someone if you don't
buy that's one that we.
We appreciate the working with
you Madam chair representative
Ramon Representative Nibert.
Okay is there any more
discussion on house memorial
thirty five.
And and Representative Nibert my
Rehm Representative Rehm you
still have your hand up.
I told you I was gonna do that.
Okay great.
so thank you Representative it
sounds like with those changes
you'll likely get a unanimous do
pass and I appreciate your
willingness to
work on it so that the
amendments are clean especially
if there's you know a little bit
more discussion on that and then
once you have that amendment we
can hear it first thing on
Wednesday morning.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative night
prevent and we.
Great thank you.
So moving along or those that
are just joining for the request
of the speaker the sponsor
excuse me.
Request of the sponsor they are
working on House Bill sexism
amendments there and those
aren't ready for discussion
today so we will not be hearing
house bill six today
We can move on to house joint
resolution eight.
Representative Eli yes thank you
madam chair members the
committee this but the New
Mexico called the speeches bills
but I want to give some
background of the committee is
going to take just a few but I
do think it's important given
the committee some background
and the public so I start with
something basic if I had a
consumer.
and I don't do consumer
litigation but if I had somebody
call my office today or come by
the office and identify a case
that I thought the company was
entering into a practice that
was ripping off the number of
consumers.
Ten years ago I would have said
to call the Attorney General
they're the public's lawyer they
will pursue that case if it has
merit and they will protect you
and other consumers in your
position and are they are
entitled under the statute to
trying get you restitution to
get you money and get you relief
if that consumer walked into my
office today I would tell them
they better not contact the
attorney general's office and
that is not something that I
would easily say because I do
think of the attorney general's
office.
let me see if I can explain the
reason for that and I'm gonna
give you a recent example that
has been in the paper a bunch
but it's important for the
committee to no the there was a
solar company are they haven't.
That was alleged to have
conducted a bunch of nefarious
acts against consumers
The about two thousand plus
people complained to the
attorney general's office after
your to litigation our help on
that went on of the case was
resolved.
And our the lawyers that pursued
the case went to court and the
court awarded them over five
hundred thousand dollars in
attorney's fees the Attorney
General received one point two
million dollars to fund their
operations money by the way we
we provided them and
appropriations as well that
could just asked us forward on
and the consumers that were
affected the over two thousand
consumers they complain to the
attorney general's office got
nothing and let me underline
that they got nothing and in
fact it was worse than nothing
because the attorney general's
office along with the company
agreed to seal one point two
million documents so that if
these consumers woke up and said
wait a minute the Attorney
General is not helping me and
now I gotta go spend money and
hire a lawyer on my own of the
attorney general's office is
just made it more difficult by
sealing a bunch of documents so
the question is why did that
happen and why is this happening
and why have on a proposed this
constitutional moment this house
joint resolution and the reason
it's happening is because around
the country there is wide I
would describe as a pay to play
scheme I it was described in
your materials in the New York
times article in December two
thousand fourteen eight years
ago and what happens is is that
these lawyers and I am a trial
lawyer and I'm proud of being a
trial lawyer but these are class
action cases that are sometimes
actually have merit right and I
in fact in most these cases they
do but initiate in these class
action lawyers around the
country are looking for
opportunities to sue companies
for bad practices and they want
to work a relationship with the
attorney generals around the
country because if they can do
that they can represent a large.
Number of consumers in affect
the state of New Mexico or
whatever state they're dealing
with if they are hired by the
attorney general's office.
All of that okay until we get to
this point.
The lawyers that are doing these
class actions have decided that
in order for them to get these
contracts from the attorney
general's office they have to
give campaign contributions to
their favorite candidate hoping
then that by doing that they
will be rewarded with contracts
for example in the Devon case
one of the lawyers that was
involved was a Pennsylvania
lawyer that gave five thousand
dollars to the attorney
general's office and then
received a contract and received
back his Fuhrman another firm
received over five hundred
thousand dollars on a five
thousand dollar investments so
not a bad way to invest your
money now the Attorney General
could say well Gee we set up
Blue Ribbon panel so we separate
ourselves from that but I will
tell you the lawyers that we're
talking about don't see it that
way they think they have to pay
this money in order to get these
contracts and we know that
because if you look at the last
three election cycles going back
ten years
you'll see that those
contributions and I've given all
I did was out of state borders
because the question would be
why would out of state lawyers
care about an attorney general's
race in state lawyers might care
they might know the candidate I
get that but out of state
lawyers who are giving between
thousand five thousand in some
cases twelve thousand dollars
those contributions are going up
each election cycle thirty and
forty percent each election
cycle the last election R. the
Attorney General for years ago
the Attorney General received
over two hundred thousand
dollars for lawyers outside of
the state many of whom are
getting contracts on so what
this has done is is this has had
I think a number of our adverse
effects on the attorney
general's office on the first
on.
They is that the first and most
obviously as the consumers are
not at the forefront of these
litigations as evidenced by the
bill in case the lawyers made
money off of this the Attorney
General but the consumers that
actually thought they were being
protected got nothing on
outsourcing.
That is hiring lawyers instead
of using your institutional
knowledge they are going outside
of the state or outside of their
office to instate lawyers on to
hire these lawyers are which
reduces the institutional
knowledge in the attorney
general's office
and I do values the lawyers that
are working with in the attorney
general's office we used to have
a very robust and vibrant our
consumer fraud division in the
attorney general's office but
it's not just consumer
litigation very confused but I
want to do at least give you the
first ten pages of the report of
the federal government our
Medicaid fraud unit last in the
country of the United size why I
in terms of prosecution and
investigations white because
twenty seven staff members of
those almost all of them have
been turned over the last four
years so there's no
institutional all is because
once you start these outsourcing
operations and you start to rely
on private lawyers and
privatizing attorney general's
office you devalue what's
happening in your office but it
also has the effect of creating
a situation that looks terrible
and could lead to very bad
results so for example and this
would be a local law firm with I
think strong ties to the journey
general's office the robust rail
firm was hired in taxes The New
Mexico which is a water law case
and many of you know that case
the estate is exposed in that
case to over a billion dollars
and I don't want to get into
great detail about that because
it is are currently in
litigation but I do want to read
you the Attorney General
initiatives to our LFC where
they asked for one point one
million dollars for this firm
under a sole source contracts
and no bidding for this firm and
here's what they said the
contractor.
Assesses specialized knowledge
and expertise in these very
complex areas water litigation
general legal service providers
would not have specialized
knowledge and expertise
necessary to representative or
by the office of Attorney
General the office of attorney
general's determined that no
other business other than the
perspective contractor has the
expertise and knowledge
necessary to perform the
contract that is flat out
schools and you can ask water
wall borders around the state
how that worked out and they
will give you chapter and verse
the details that this not only
wasn't the most qualified lawyer
but they were not qualified to
handle this and they should have
been involved but they work
because of these relationships
between private attorneys and
their assistants to attorney
general's not just in New Mexico
but around the country to get
these lucrative contracts and
what's happening is is the state
is B. and its citizens are being
adversely affected so now we get
to the spacious part that's what
The New Mexican called it of of
my office of consumer protection
well here's the reality the
Attorney General is no longer
the people's lawyer that's
what's going on and I've got
nobody that I can deal with so I
went to the state auditor's
office on the state auditor sad
we can't look at this they gave
me many reasons I'm happy to
share the letter with anybody I
can't go to the Attorney General
and asked him to investigate
himself I can't do that the
legislature the public may not
understand this we don't have an
investigative body what a couple
of the committees have subpoena
powers but not for investigative
purposes so we can't do it so
the only thing that I can do is
shine a light on this issue
because this is an issue that
not only is not going to go away
it's going to get worse as these
contributions continue to go up
even if this Attorney General is
not directly involved in the pay
to play it is.
Just a matter of time before we
go completely to these kind of
outsourcing things where you
will have to pay in order to get
these contracts now there are
solutions to this I frankly
don't think that the office of
consumer protection is the best
and most direct solution but it
was the one that allowed me to
be able to talk about this now
in two committees I do think
that in future legislators what
we could do is we could just
simply say if you give money to
the attorney general's race you
cannot apply for these contracts
for a period of say five or ten
years that might solve the
problem but the other problem
that is just much more nefarious
yes we need to rebuild our
journey general's office some of
our best current lawyers lawyers
that have been Briggs Rizwan is
me got their start the attorney
general's office and became
lawyers and justices and law
professors excellent lawyers we
need to rebuild the attorney
general's office and that way
and so I am are telling the
committee that I am willing to
roll over this bill stop the
discussion today but I I I so
appreciate the chair giving me
the opportunity to talk about
this because I do think it is a
growing scandal and is something
the legislature needs to pay
attention to and I've taken way
too long and I appreciate the
committee's patients of time on
this thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you Representative so I
know you like to have that
discussion and I'm going to try
to see where I am in tax because
they have a bill up in tax but
do you want to do the entire
process of going to the public
as well Representative madam
chair that's really up to you I
I'm I'm I'm at the will of the
committee I really am it was
whatever you would like to do I
I'm really actually very
appreciative you knowing that I
would be rolling the bill that
you gave me the time to discuss
it I think it's important and I
appreciate you give me that
Curtis.
Okay.
What we do this why don't we do
a poll
and then we can have you know
folks that are in the audience
raise their virtual hands in
support or in opposition and
then we can go to committee
members.
Can I get a pull up.
Great.
So this is how straight
resolution eight.
No keep it open for.
Ten more seconds.
Okay so we have six in favor and
two opposed.
And I'm just gonna jump to the
committee members Representative
Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
Representative Eli.
It was I was driving up here I
was thinking about this
particular a joint resolution
knowing what your plan was.
Hers to me that I know very
little about what is in statute
regarding the requirements of
the attorney general's office.
Something occurred to be and I
know you're concerned about the
campaign contributions.
About the
Simmers not having recovered
and.
So I I think we should.
Work to and I certainly can do
this off the top of my hat
whether there should be some
statutory requirements.
That
They would be reimbursed when
there is a favorable settlement
and that they number of.
Complainants would share in the
rewards if you will are the
what's gained from the company.
And I I just this I'm not
suggesting that this is the way
to go we need to do something
about the consumers.
In
the year and chair
the money that was received by
the attorney general's office
the one point two million
dollars went into what's called
the consumer settlement fund but
that does include consumers and
it's not statutory fund so I
mean it is one solution to say
if you're gonna put money in
that fund some of the best to go
to consumers I don't know how
you would do that but I think
it's something that's worthwhile
looking at at one point in that
consumer settlement fund the
Attorney General had more money
in that fund then their entire
operating budget and so I I mean
it's it's being used to fund
operations but it's not directly
helping the consumers who have
complained and then were used in
litigation to collect this
money.
Madam chair representative Ely.
I definitely think this is
something that the interim
committee on courts corrections
and justice should look at and
I I.
I also think the
it
not quite sure.
Is there was an ethics complaint
filed I know there was one filed
against you for raising the
issue yeah.
But
if if the ethics commission
would provide this kind of sole
source contract.
Rather suspect you madam chair
you're not the only one is
recommended that to me I hadn't
really thought of that but I had
a conversation madam chair this
morning with another member of
the committee who made the same
suggestion actually having the
one of the co sponsors the
ethics commission you think I
would have thought about that
but I didn't and so I think it
is something I'm gonna look at.
I mean there are issues madam
chair and representative Ely
perhaps with the campaign
finance system with the
protection of the consumers.
For the legislature to be
looking at it or are we not
funding the attorney general's
office to the extent necessary
and so therefore they're
creating their own little
funding source.
With with that so I think we
definitely need to look into
this in the future Madam chair
representative Representative
Ryan thank you for raising the
issue.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I had some questions on the.
Resolution itself for the the
discussion is taking me to
another place so I will ask my
questions regarding the text of
the resolution but instead of
the.
Focus on some of the things that
are the representative stated
It does really concern me that
if we have.
In this state Hey I thank the
word for pay to play scheme.
That.
Is.
That is a critical issue that I
think we attempted to address
with the state ethics
commission.
And.
You know we were all focused.
Maybe on.
The legislative body.
But certainly other elected
positions should not be
utilizing their positions
In such a way that compromises
the integrity of that office.
And so to me if you're free
indeed The New York Times or
others pointed those things out
I don't think we can
Just simply ignore it and the.
That that.
Troubles me dearly of so so my
first question Representative
and follows up on
Your question asked earlier by
madam chair from Judiciary and
that is.
To your knowledge of the ethics
commission.
Investigated.
The same sort of been brought up
I yes publicly
In the newspaper elsewhere.
So madam chair representative
there was one as X. complaint.
And I think was brought by new
energy against each very general
for similar conflicts I did not
follow that I know that that was
dismissed that's the only one
that I'm aware of the Attorney
General did file an ethics
complaint against me
I I I mean I I this is not for
me personally that has also been
dismissed
I'm simply raising the issue
because I just think it's
important for people to start
realizing that this is a real
problem it looks terrible I mean
in my office you for example if
a client came in and I said I'm
gonna take your case and I'll
make sure I get paid and I'm
going to set up a found you know
some kind of separate company
and they get paid but you're not
going to get anything I'd be in
front of the disciplinary board
as soon as they found out so I I
do think it's a fair point to
say let's go to the ethics
commission that is something
that I think I'm going to do
following this meeting because I
do I do at least want to raise
the issue and so I think that's
something I'm gonna do I've got
frankly I really hadn't thought
that thought that through and
that's why these discussions are
helpful so I can continue the
discussion there but I hope they
would look at.
Madam chair representative I
don't know anything about the
complaint that was lodged
against you but did it have
anything to do with some of the
are things that we're talking
about with respect to this
resolution yes it wasn't a
resolution directly what the I
think what the Attorney General
was trying to say was that I had
some kind of interest in these
issues that we're talking about
it's the same issue that I
complained about in the end the
answer that I give the ethics
commission would give public it
and you is I don't have and will
not have any financial interest
in this I don't do consumer
litigation I am not interested
in these contracts I don't do
class I years ago I did one
national class action case I
will never to keep it was
horrible because you lose
control I'm not interested in is
that and I think that's why you
have to have to ask the Attorney
General but when I read the
complaint against me it appeared
to be that I had some kind of
personal interest in the US and
he also said that I was
involving myself in ongoing
litigation which was objectively
not true because the case was
over so the a judge Torrez sin
of former federal magistrate
wrote the opinion
and I it does charge were
completely dismissed I mean I I
it's a free country he gets to
do that I'm it didn't bother me
because I knew I had done
anything wrong and see my the
ethics commission handled it
appropriately and it was all
fine but that's what it was
about it was really I think
accusing me of having some kind
of personal interest in the very
subject we're talking about
which I do not this is a public
concern.
Well it sounds like the Attorney
General selves but she'd up the
issue with the ethics commission
and and so why
I guess a little bit of concern
would be if.
He teed up this general issue it
the ethics commission will look
at war they are have a duty to
look at maybe some of the
broader issues and and the.
I am I recall correctly
Representative we placed in that
bill the ability for the ethics
commission of its own initiative
to.
Are you engaging and and.
One its own merit engage in some
investigations based on.
Information that's publicly
available it sounds like this
is.
Yeah I I'm madam chair and
Representative I understand the
point I think it was pretty
limited and I don't think the
ethics commission of would have
been tasked with looking at the
broader issue unless I raise it
because it really I think came
down to our a complaint that my
actions were some help violative
of you know conflicts of
interest in those kind of things
so it really didn't call for a
broader investigation and if it
did I would tell you but I don't
think so I that I don't think
that would be a fair I thought
the ethics commission handled it
fairly and and judiciously and I
think it's on the frankly to
make the broader complaint.
Madam chair representative you
mentioned of this a specific
case our districts are.
Are continuing to be mitigated
are.
But I.
I too was surprised I I've done
very little water log my career
I've done enough the to our know
that that's not an area that I
want to get involved there but I
have done some very large
transactions that have.
Brought me in contact with
a number of New Mexicos water
lawyers that are recognized not
only statewide but actually with
respect to their of.
The ability to deal with the
issue of water loss and you know
certainly I could probably say
your name about a thousand
of write offs for right off the
bat and that would capture
probably at least ninety percent
of the
Truly recognize specialist water
law the state of New Mexico and
certainly before but you
mentioned would be on that list
if we step out.
And and so that.
That concern me that it concerns
me now
Because.
Although I don't live in the Rio
Grande
Valley were this issue is
are particularly important the
issue of water.
And.
Having attorneys go up against
the state of Texas and the
resources the state of Texas has
and the depth of expertise of
lawyers that they can draw on
our.
Certainly requires us.
In requires the Attorney
General.
To.
Insure that New Mexico.
Has the best and the most
qualified water lawyers
available to defend the rights
of our state in water that is
passing through our state and
our thank you bye I share your
concern that the baby maybe of
politics were put above the
interests of the people there
and I am really concerned and
have been concerned about that
for for.
It's been what for five years
now that that's been ongoing and
and if so if it's frightening of
those saying should should
definitely not exist
particularly on basis of
specialized as water wall and
the you know I'm sure the other
water lawyers around the state I
have talked to several local
they too were mystified by the
leading of that particular
of Bill.
Madam chair and representative
of.
I.
Heard what you said about the
ethics commission and but I'm
kind of wondering if you this
committee are or maybe of the
house of representatives sure
the
Make that inquiry.
On its own.
whether that should be a
referral from from the
more than just one
representative at and I think
that may
For that issue may be worthy of
some further discussions and I
don't I'd have to look at the.
Thanks bill again or the ethics
law again and see but the it
seems to me that if we are.
Become knowledgeable of some.
Activity that.
is not proper and is subject to
maybe a violation of law or
violation of certainly for the
code about that Sir that we're
under I'm not sure we don't have
an obligation as a body to try
to
Transpositions so I I will look
into that and maybe see if if we
have a an obligation see what
maybe course of action this
committee for we just a a
legislature can take in that
regard but the this this is the
D. troubling them and I.
I certainly was not aware of the
New York times article or some
of the other things that you
order it but that is
obviously something that is been
investigated and maybe than what
your progress here New Mexico
that it deserves but if that is
indeed the current
it's who does do you for shining
a lot of all thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative.
Any other health madam chair and
so as I told you I am willing to
roll this over and I will not be
bringing it back so I think I've
I've taken up enough the
legislature's time to shine a
light on it I appreciate it very
much I really do.
Sure thank you Representative
we'll go ahead and move on to.
House.
Representative
house bill one twenty six.
Good morning madam chair good
morning members.
I do have a an amendment.
To.
Representative did you give it
to the committee analysts and
the committee assistance I
believe so through Legislative
Council services on Saturday.
So okay we're going to confirm
if we have that amendment thank
you.
See we're we.
Madam chair the amendment in the
share drive I'm happy to give
you the to to number.
Thank you so
Representative Lujan we got the
amendments on Saturday but they
were only provided to the
analysts this morning.
so are they subs substantive
amendments.
It takes out the appropriation
madam chair because we you H. B.
to the The appropriation was
provided so I amended that out
and just another brief amendment
that just made things more clear
so not very steps not to be the
only two okay great we do have
the amendments and go head we
can move the amendments for
discussion purposes along with
the bill.
Thank you madam chair created so
briefly on page one line
nineteen we just we just struck
making an appropriation there's
an appropriation for two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars for
the.
Creation of the position and now
we have taken that out and then
on page four lines twenty one to
twenty three we are struck the
chief diversity officers shall
be hired by and serve at the
pleasure of the director.
On page thirteen winds ninety
fourteen redistricting us
section seven in its entirety
which would also
remedy
the chief diversity officer
Being at at corresponding to not
being service not serving at the
pleasure of the director so we
just made that there is
conflicting language there so
this is a classified position
and we wanted to be very clear
that it's a classified mission
madam chair.
Thank you Representative for
explaining the amendments to
want to explain the bill as well
thank you.
Yes thank you.
For time
I'm just going to briefly
explain to build a house bill
twenty six creates the position
of the chief diversity officer
out the state person our office.
The chief diversity officer
with the development of
proactive diversity equality
equity and inclusion initiatives
and serve as a resource to other
agencies for training and
advice.
By agencies are questions of
diversity and inclusion.
So that the CDO that she
diversity officers tasked with
conducting annual evaluation of
race as it relates to hiring
promotion retention and pay as
well as to conduct analysis of
state government employment
datasets race.
Track progress toward ending
institutional racism.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and are you ready for
questions or I do have a I do
want to see if my expert witness
chairs of the secretary Ricky
Serna from.
State personnel office okay.
Thank you like for him to speak
yes.
And also Representative PAM
hundred and she's my co sponsor.
Okay Representative.
Madam chair I am here and the I
am ready to we are ready to go
to the audience.
Okay great so let's go ahead and
open the call then if you all
want to raise your hand in
support of house bill one twenty
six or in opposition you can do
so now we'll keep that open for
about ten more seconds and let's
take public comment from support
first so please raise your hand
if you like to speak in support.
Okay great so we closed and we
have I that raised their hands
and support and one in
opposition and so now we will go
to the audience Giuliana Kuby
are now in muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee to we had a coop I'm a
registered lobbyist for Planned
Parenthood votes New Mexico and
we stand and support thank you
so much.
Near record you are now and
muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee of near
record Policy Council and
regional manager of the ACLU of
New Mexico looking in Los crucis
and I am here on behalf of our
group to support at this bill
thank you.
Jeanne logs done you are now and
muted.
Yes hello my name is Jean Larson
and I represent the league of
women voters of New Mexico we
support one twenty six the state
person diversity at the league
believes that all levels of
government are responsible for
providing equality of
opportunity for employment for
all persons in New Mexico H. B.
one twenty six contributes to
this goal please give a do pass
to the bill thank you.
Thank you John block your now
and muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John block I'm in need of New
Mexican and Alamogordo resident
and I just stand in opposition
to this bill I think that it
creates a actual more
divisiveness and state agencies
and pits people against each
other it institutes multiple
principles of critical race
theory into state agencies
including equity and it's not
quality is equity so it would
really put people against each
other in state agencies and I
stand in strong opposition to
this bill and I urge you not to
pass it thank you.
Is there anyone else I would
like to speak in opposition.
Are there Puccini you are now
and made it.
Yes hello my name is our through
preaching and I stand opposed H.
B. one twenty six four because
it divides people
Along racial lines instead of
promoting people along.
How.
How they do things a what
they're qualified for so instead
of qualified for what you've
done you're promoting people
along racial lines and it it
just goes harkened back to the
days before the civil rights
laws opposed to thank you.
Renowned you are now in muted.
You have to you on your end.
All right thank you this is
required calling in from Los
crucis New Mexico I stand in
opposition to HB one twenty six
it's the same wishes we had down
here with the school board
bringing in CLR education why is
it needed where are the reports
were all the discrimination
Reports we have a state officer
here you know why isn't even
needed.
Losses from schools from two
thousand nineteen to twenty
twenty one had an equity office
testified inequities report and
post every year.
They never made one but yet one
twenty one CLR was passed so
what I'm saying is the state
does not discriminate they happy
all offices you're doing fine
without this up please don't has
it because it does create
division we are still fighting
and will continue to fight
losses public schools and in
MPD.
Because C. O. R. does not work
down here you don't know who
you're looking at down here it's
in a similar to society they get
along pretty well so all I'm
saying is a.
it's not needed because I don't
think there's best
discrimination.
Thank you.
Amanda we need to call the next
person I don't have that
capability and that chairman has
is going to tax now.
Thank
you.
I'm sorry man I didn't hear you.
It looks like there's no one
else to speak okay no one else
to speak committee members.
Representative night cream.
Representative Nibert yes ma'am
thank you madam chair.
I do have several questions
regarding.
This bill my first one.
Is on page two why and eight.
We're diversity is defined as
and.
I found the we're the definition
of a little bit different than I
had expected.
The first is not a result
diversity is the practice so
could you explain why diversity
you find about this matter.
Your response.
Your muted here.
Representative you madam chair.
Representative Nibert for your
question so in looking at the
term that burst to be here one
of the one of the things that
we're looking at is a broader
definition that is inclusive of
the practice that was intended
by this piece of legislation and
so what one of the things that
most people look at when they
think of adversity is that
there's usually Representative
I'm sorry Madam chair
representative night we're
looking only at a factor of
rates and that is not the only
factor that we look at when we
look at diversity with and a
within a of.
Practice within our state
appropriations and so it means a
practice of including and
involving a large group and
range of people so that's why
better definition is as broad as
it is to encompass the broadness
in which we are looking to
embrace and included this to
diversity officer
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
Madam chair representative then
you would agree with me that the
word diversity as used in this
legislation does not mean the
result.
It's the practice.
So Representative Madam chair
representative Nibert I'm not
sure I understand your question.
Well.
Diversity I think Houston it's
common are.
You look out in the state of
diverse landscape.
You see
in the workplace may be a
diverse
workplace of people from
different backgrounds different
races what have you but that's
not the word here the word thank
you have to find this to be
means the practice of getting.
to to maybe those results but
not the result itself.
And Madam chair representative
Nibert do you think that would
make a difference in the
application of a chief diversity
officer if they gonna have the
practice the pin that of
utilizing diversity in terms of
looking at how operational
aspects of working.
We Madam chair representative
not.
I just want to make sure that
the the defined term it is is
what you intend as if that's
what you're about I am perfectly
satisfied with that because that
word diversity appears in a
number of places throughout here
and it in every instance it's
going to be it's going to be in
the practice of not the result
of so that just I'm just trying
to get the what your intention
was so if you're comfortable
with that term and that I can
move all of.
The.
The next term of one twelve the
quality.
So quality means the equivalent
treatment of.
An opportunity for members of
different groups secretary.
so.
We're we're capturing.
Both concepts we're going to
treat but of and opportunity.
Within that wordy quality is
yes is that.
Accurate.
Madam Madam chair representative
of my bird that would be act.
Yeah.
Looking down on at one twenty
four the word inclusion and and
the help me here better.
I'm not sure I saw the word
inclusion not I've I've been
here all of the reading through
here maybe a little too quickly
I did not see the word inclusion
later on in the text of this
bill do you know if that works
was used elsewhere in this.
bill.
Madam chair representative it's
used on page five line one.
Great okay I.
Overlook that welches
On page three line six.
Your queries is defined.
And my question is.
How does inequity.
Involved.
Physical or mental health.
So I'm Madam chair
representative of divert one of
the things that happens when we
bring in a diverse group of
individuals within a workplace
sometimes there may be
it may be disabilities that
individuals have that they
should also not be an
exclusionary matter but keeping
them away from a job and so that
when we look at a large the
practice of diversity and
inclusion that means all aspects
of what a person brings to the
table will be are included and
as part of the decision making a
practice in terms of the hiring
within the state government.
You know
When I see the word inequity if
means.
Not equity or something that's
not equal
and equity over on page two one
seventeen of.
You know means.
Basically what I thought it
would be but.
The word inequity on page three.
Totally changes that caught
concept it's not the opposite of
that would be of it being
something entirely different and
I did not see how inequity means
disparities and does it will
help because of.
What that means.
Right now our legislative body
is and that is is in that
portable of because we have some
people dealing with COVID at
home
but that's not how most people I
think you are inequity and so
that this definition is so I
think it departure from what
most people we recognize see the
word inequity and the you know
that's become certified German
and that's it for the the that's
not what most people will be
reading when they when they rate
the legislation ought to go back
to the definition section see
that it means something
different than what they thought
and physical health mental
health are.
Yes maybe economic
opportunities.
Those seem to be of.
Maybe some things that result
from from inequity but if it's
not the defamation act so.
I just have a hard time getting
by by.
Federal level.
The word institutional racism
online line of page three
you know what it looks like.
I don't have a problem with the
definition but I do have a
question regarding institutional
racism.
as you look at state government
today because I think this is
directed at state government.
Do we know of.
Which departments institutional
racism occurs then and has there
been any current efforts to
We're in those departments in
two.
Of a state where that
institutional racism is
addressed and corrected.
Madam chair representative
Nibert we're gonna bring on I'll
were expert Ricky Serna to
address that question and
provide you with an answer.
Madam chair is Ricky summer on
brought forth out of it I'm to
the panelists.
Yes Representative go ahead Mr
stern.
Thank you madam chair
representative
Let me if I if I may ask your
question this way imagine if we
work in a factory or on a
construction site right if
you've ever been in an
environment where there is high
risk for physical harm you know
that those work environments
will typically require strong
protocols around workplace
safety you know if a supervisor
sees a worker without safety
goggles without a helmet without
protective gear if they're up on
scaffolding without a harness
it's going to be flagged there's
going to be a process for
reporting that for addressing it
and and the policies are are
well understood across the
board.
What's lacking now in state
government which this position
will centralize on is as easy it
is for someone to say Hey listen
there's someone up there not
wearing that helmet there's
someone up there not wearing
their safety goggles or their or
their guards whether welding we
need to have policies and
processes in place within the
workplace of state government
that flag workplace issue
revolving around institutional
racism the way our construction
site would fly when a worker is
up on scaffolding without a
harness and that's lacking
Representative and so this is in
about creating an apartment that
says there's racism go and look
forward to do something about it
it's about creating an
environment where institutional
racism right yes flag like a
physical safety hazard is in
other work environments across
the country and until we get
there the answer to your
question is there are
institution there are instances
of institutional racism where
the individual feels empowered
enough to claim that issued to
their supervisor to their agency
leaders or were lacking now is
the culture that flags those
issues for us the framework that
allow us to measure the number
of instances in which they're
happening and how they're being
resolved broadly so to be sure
there may be issues in certain
agencies that I point to
legislative you know the the
root cause is institutional
racism we've got to create a
framework that really help us
flag and identify those
circumstances capture report
data on them use them as
information that help us in for
where we need for their policy
development and staff I.
And again madam chair and up Mr
Sarna.
Has there been any effort to
determine which departments may
be lacking in that regard and.
Whether that in fact does exist
within state government.
Madam chair representative I
believe that there is a process
in every single agency in policy
through your see through title
seven that allow for employees
to identify
for identifying complaining
about racism in the workplace
discrimination in the workplace.
What this chief diversity
officer would be responsible for
doing is using those instances
as a metric to determine how
well agencies can improve in
mitigating the need for those
complaints.
To your knowledge there is no
specific agency right now but as
significant problems that have
to be addressed and I gather
that from your testimony.
Madam chair representative I
can't I can't think of HSD right
off hand or an example that's
correct.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Mr stern up
Page four of line three.
The definition for underserved
communities and I see the
definition but.
Madam chair representative do we
have any idea as to which
Communities in our state we're
we're that that or is that just
the.
Is that just a.
What what have they been but
identified or is this just an
effort to try to.
Madam chair Representative you
would be correct and saying that
this is a way and the metric
magic way to to identify and to
further understand those
underserved communities.
Right.
Hearing something but what that
is.
You hear me madam chair.
Representative Lujan we can hear
you but you may need to mute
here.
In between conversations thank
you thank you.
On page five one twenty two.
This chief diversity officer.
Is going to have full access to
the offices Representative that
so.
All offices.
Human resource management
systems.
Do not provide the danger and
that access Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative I did
not in terms of looking at that
reserve Senator you you don't
think that it's dangerous for
that person that access to
social security numbers to
disciplinary records and other
things that are internal to that
agency that need to be held of
early I.
So Madam chair representative
and I broke one of the things
that happens with any person who
is hired award state person is
they have to take an oath of of
of compliance and privacy and so
I do not expect that the person
that would be filling this
position would be any different
and that happens in every in any
situation where human resources
involved.
Madam chair I like to add to
that I have been a human
resources director for the state
and that is a very as a correct
statement.
And your now expanding the
number of people that have
access to
Personal records that each
agency may have policies that
serve somewhat protect the
information that's contained
therein would that not.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative we're
talking about one person a chief
diversity officer who would be
looking at of the application of
making sure that the.
Individuals and that the state.
And what we're doing is a
diverse application so it's not
multiple people were talking
about the chief diversity
officer.
Madam chair representative will
be chief diversity officer have
people's working under that
person.
Madam chair representative
Nibert one of the things that we
remember is let's just look at
your law firm you have people
working under you and they don't
have access to every single
aspect of your I so I do not
expect that the need diversity
officer would be any different
and so let's just look at this
in a practical matter and what
we're looking at is what is what
in reality what happened in the
situation so if you're looking
at the secretary for example
they would not.
Of have access to every single
aspect that the chief diversity
officer would have just as we
look at the at the governor of
the state of New Mexico
everybody who works under her
does not have the same access
but yes.
Well I would also present with
the governor does not have
access to certain information
that's contained in certain
agency files.
So Madam chair representative
Nibert I'm putting this in a and
the prospects so that not only
you but everybody listening to
this but I understand so we're
not talking about the governor
have access to every person
files we're looking at a process
and how it would be applied.
Well Madam chair representative.
We're creating this new office.
With.
Certain goals.
And you are saying that they
shall have full access to the.
The two agencies human resource
management systems I would
suggest to you that that
contains information that.
Centrally by law by federal law
maybe the program here but that
access that.
May I also remind.
Representative also that.
Public also has access to ask
for information the public
information act and
Secretary Sir and I would like
to add to this as well.
Madam chair representative I'm
for example some of the
questions that you asked can you
give us an example of an agency
can you tell us where this may
be occurring or that may be
occurring what we're looking for
here in this sentence helpful
access is what we would consider
query access within the share
database system for state
government.
Very access is the ability to
generate reports using data from
across all agencies not
necessarily to do would be to
your personal files which are
mostly not contained within
chair so to to answer the
questions in the future to
generate reports
to essentially pool data that
would include information in
aggregate from all agencies we
called we refer to that access
as share access with the ability
to pull very data and reporting
the aggregate on the metrics
identified for this office.
Well madam chair Mr Sarna that's
not what the language says on
page five one twenty two and
twenty three it says full access
full access to be means there's
no limitations this person has
access to virtually everything
that's maintain not just in one
particular stock.
File or one particular file
cabinet or one particular
program they have full access
and that to me is a problem and
it's particularly a problem with
respect to some of the agencies
that handle data and information
on people that is protected by
federal law.
And I would I would suggest to
you that that the yep would be
one of those I would also
suggest that access to social
security numbers and things of
that nature need to be probably
handle with care of.
I would suspect that we have
other laws on the books that
deal with disciplinary records
and the need to.
Keep those from being
disseminated so so your state
but the public has access to
this stuff is incorrect the
public does not have access full
access to everything and not
even people with them each
agency at the highest level as
for access those things are
generally cap.
Within a very tight group B. as
the as necessary to avoid having
of that information get out so I
have some some real concerns
about so the the breadth of that
particular
all.
Couple lines in your bill
On.
Eight six.
Begin at line twenty
The.
The diversity officer shall
develop all policies to identify
assess and reduce and prepare.
Inequities.
So how does state chief
financial officer.
Reduce or prevent physical
health issues.
Madam chair representative
Nibert you said the chief
financial officer we talked
about a jeep that burst of the
office it was a financial I'm
sorry to diverse the officer.
Right so is as you're looking at
as you're looking at developing
policies look let's look at a
practical aspect of it so as our
as our various agencies and even
throughout the state part of how
we recruit is making will also
address how diversity will be
addressed within within of the
state government within state
agencies so that you want to
make sure that when you're
looking into strategic direction
and your strategic plan on how
recruiting is taking place in
your chief diversity officers by
help with setting out these
these policies in these
practices so that we are making
sure that the most diverse
workplace workplace is in is
implemented throughout our state
and throughout all of our
agents.
What the goal but it says that
person's going to develop
policies.
To reinvent.
Inequities and why why why
question was how does that.
How does that how does one go
about three Benny.
Physical health issues.
So madam chair representative.
Representative member we gonna
just be concerned to help of you
see the bigger picture.
Here Representative one policy
in place currently
in affected at all state agency
ticket agencies for example the
ability for fitness and wellness
leave as you know there are a
number of state employees at all
levels in in all walks the work
you in are are working very long
hours in very stressful jobs and
often times mental health in
particular physical health
follow shortly thereafter before
as issues that often times the
to retention issues for state
government I can speak directly
having been in state agencies
over the course of the economic
downturn I've seen employees
work operative twelve fourteen
hours a day to ensure that New
Mexicans receive the services
that that that they need and so
I think assessment around
fitness wellness mental health
mental well being to ensure that
state workers are doing the good
work that they do aren't burning
now is it leading to stress
isn't causing mental health
issues which ultimately causes
turnover retention issues I
think one of the other more
policy level requirements is you
look at add a mother who's
nursing and providing other
space to for four of them other
to to actually pumped breast
milk and prepared for their
children to keep a space
designated for them to do that
that's contributing not only to
their health and well being but
also with their their children
while they're not at home so
those are a couple of examples
that I think are imperative for
us as be assess whether or not
the environment is really
conducive for all walks of life.
Madam chair Mr stern a look at
the next three words.
One twenty one.
Based on those next three words.
Would you change your answer.
To my question.
Madam chair representative the
next words institutional racism.
Due to well that sports due to
institutional racism.
Yes so that you just gave.
Madam chair representative rob
absolutely not I think.
I I think when you look at
institutional racism broadly
it's an organization that
doesn't take into consideration
any of the inequities that the
staff bring to the work.
Whether or not their parents
with their individuals work two
jobs the role that they play at
the agency in the organization
the services that they provide
instant bases on doesn't just
attach an issue try to race or
ethnicity it touches itself to
people of all walks of life and
if you have individuals who are
parents and individuals who are
not parents individuals who are
going to school and not going to
school to work full time they
all have barriers that they
bring to the workplace but they
also bring value and if we don't
find a way to include the value
that they bring by understanding
the barriers they need to
overcome that so important
institutional racism Mr Madam
chair representative I would not
change my answer.
Well let's look at your answer
the
Madam chair Mister chair.
You talked a lot about the.
The physical stress and what
have you so that students
judicial races of those that
need that you're allowing one
set of employees that have
certain characteristics to of
exercise have time outside the
building but you're not allowing
people from another race or
another one of the
Categories that you want to use
you're not allowing them to do
the same thing is is that what
I'm hearing.
Madam chair representative
absolutely not what you're
hearing that that's not what I'm
saying at all that that policy
is available to all individuals
and if if they request that so
we're not just saying that if
you have a high pressure high
stressful job in state
government you're entitled this
what we're saying is that that's
a consideration that we assess
and provide to all state workers
given the nature of the work
that they do so no it's not
isolated for certain.
Madam chair Mister service is
about the whole point you're
treating up everyone the state.
Chair representative in that
example that's absolutely true
my second example for example
providing space to a mother who
needed to.
To pump breast milk for her
child I would say that that
might not apply to work.
So you would treat a woman this
characteristic and allow it and
but not a woman with another
characteristic to have the same
treatment.
Madam chair and chair and
representative Mr Sarna.
Madam chair representative.
What what happens in the
workplace is that we we allow
for considerable consideration
considerations to be made and
opportunities to be given for
circumstances and that is what
we are discussing right now I
there is there are laws on the
books that we know what that
speak to the equality of.
Every.
Worker we are discussing here is
how we better develop the
culture so that there is more
equity in the workplace.
Madam chair.
Representative
yeah.
I don't see how.
We get to the point of
The goal.
We go.
To physical health.
If we're treating everyone the
same.
I don't I don't see that and I
could say the same thing with
mental health I don't think
that.
Mental health issues are being
treated any differently
The economic opportunities I
assume of.
Maybe I could I could figure out
policies to identify and assess
and reduce and prevent.
Inequities with respect to
economic opportunities the
that's where I really think
you're trying to go the
education I would assume that
each agency has its own
incentive plans for people to
answer education.
Again I'm I think it's a problem
with your definition of exactly
seven thousand it just doesn't
seem to to to to.
But that's how you define.
Madam chair and representative
has the state.
All ready.
Made a commitment.
To reduce and prevent
institutional racism.
Mr I'm sorry Representative.
Question please.
Madam chair representative as
the state already articulated a
commitment to.
Reduce pre bent.
Where met whatever word you want
to use institutional racism.
Madam chair.
Representative we have laws that
do you as we know our civil
rights laws that are in place
however in the culture as
defined
And we're looking at in equity
and equality in our workplace we
know that there are there are
imbalances and what we need to
do is keep an eye on those
imbalances because of
institutional racism racism that
does exist in our workplace and
if we fail to do that we fail to
acknowledge that this is
happening and we're failing to
acknowledge that we need to do
something about it and we know
here studies
that when we find a strong
culture of equity in our
workplace and we.
We look at inclusion budget and
everyone
Becomes more innovative there's
a higher employee engagement and
retention these are this is
information that we know that it
exists and we know that today I
personally training and
inclusion.
It is increasingly important
today's multicultural and and.
Multi generational workplace.
We know that social and racial
justice movements have raised
expectations for diversity
training and included in our
workplace and we know that it
works and we know in our state.
Agencies that we need to pay
more attention to this we need
to have laws that to provide.
The opportunities and.
so that we can understand where
those gaps are Sir and that's
what this piece of legislation
that's.
So.
Madam.
What what our state workforce
look like if we were perfect.
If we perfectly yep this
perfectly adhere to what what
with the state workforce look
like and how different would
that be then it looks to that
thank you Mr R. thank you madam
chair and representative there
is no such thing as perfect in
fact the reason why we bring
forward legislation like this
today's because we do not have
any kind of perfection you are
do we know that that that would
ever exist and therefore would
we have complaints that build up
that we that we know what we
have lawsuits when we hear that
there is that there are
inequities and
The fact that performance and
our workforce that that is why
we have to have legislation like
recruiting for today.
Okay let's take the work perfect
out Madam chair representative.
If you were able to fully
implement this public policy
Richard bring your for.
And you took a snapshot of that
workforce.
Statewide.
In you take a snapshot of the
current workforce with there be
much difference between those
two photographs.
Representative are you asking if
we implement if we have the
The ability to implement this
piece of legislation that it
would improve our workforce.
If that's what you're asking
then yes absolutely it will
improve and give us a snapshot
of.
What.
It measures and so we know how
to implement better training
into the culture of our
workforce then yes would have
better performers performance
measurements and retention and a
better work culture.
Madam chair representative you
probably budget promises you
can't keep their up.
Your any of us can can promised
retention the
The.
My view of New Mexico state
government.
And I'm if you all.
When I look out at.
State government I look at the
agencies that I deal with on.
A somewhat regular basis the
people that that I speak to.
I see.
A diverse workforce I see.
People with very backgrounds I
see people that fit your
definition of diversity in
including the the physical side
of it that you discussed.
Yeah and so what I'm trying to
get at is.
With this.
At the end of the day.
With this.
Really change the overall make
up of who's employed by the
state of New Mexico in its
agencies yeah that's government.
At.
And maybe every.
Representative that exist.
Madam chair representative then
let's make this into policy
let's put this let's put this to
practice so that we we can have
those measures in place.
Okay.
Let's look at the page ten why
not.
one of the things that
They're going to look at is.
Rating I report it still reach
here and that report is to
contain.
Thank you to all the promotion
outcomes of women and racial or
ethnic minorities so my question
is
what.
What specific data are you of
wanting just the outcomes of
those things are you wanting
performance data of individuals.
Madam chair representative we we
want good data we want
information that can
Give us.
More information so we know how
what those measures look like
where there are gaps and how we
can remedy that madam chair.
Well it says data all promotion
outcomes that tells me yes there
were five people brought for job
all you want to know is what the
outcome was and and my question
really got gets to.
Do you want to look at the
underlying.
Data as well regarding maybe the
performance data of each
individual that was.
Maybe up with the job.
Madam chair representative
NABARD we have Ricky Serna with
his hands up let's have him
address your concerns.
Madam chair representative there
are a couple things that we
could look at in comparing these
percent groups to other
subgroups for example what the
percent increase was of that
promotion relative to other
subgroups to determine equity
for when a male for example
receives a promotion what might
that promotional increase being
when compared to women surely as
you referenced the number of
instances of the demographic of
make up of the hiring committee
that interviewed those
individuals for that promotion
whether or not they were
reflective of the applicant pool
and whether or not that's an
issue so the outcomes of looking
at that data could really inform
best practices in the interview
process it could inform tighter
policies around determining the
percent increase for functions
instead of a range which
currently exists and
understanding the extent of
which these subgroups Committee
and racial or ethnic minorities
are likely to be promoted and
whether or not that calls for
additional training those
individuals it's better care
than those.
So madam chair and member
Representative Mr Sarna what I
hear you saying is that that
data is much broader than just
the our.
Whether.
A person with these
characteristics stop hired Bob
are up.
Your.
Madam chair representative
that's accurate okay search
further down on that page line
twenty three we see the word
unlawful.
Domingo that line what we need
to work on lawful should we
refrain from discrimination
whether it's lawful or unlawful
in the.
It seems to me our goal is to is
to not discriminate but.
I wondered what the work I'm all
was.
There.
Mr chair of I'm sorry madam
chair representative Nibert
sometimes when you're filling
positions
you do have to look at.
At the specific backgrounds that
are necessary for filling those
positions and that everybody who
applies does not necessarily
have those backgrounds for
example the look at amended more
and somebody who's gonna be
removing copper from the money
for example are you look at
someone's going to be
you can absolutely be looking at
someone who is going to be
helping to design solar panels
every once in awhile you would
have to be looking solely at
those types of individuals and
that might be a type of
discrimination that would be
allowed the cost of the the
requisites and requirements of
the position so unlawful
discrimination that which is not
allowed verses that which is a
about is the distinction has
been made.
Well.
Yes.
Your idea discrimination minor
or maybe different it's not at
the point for your but seems to
me that that if you're requiring
certain qualifications.
You're not you're not
discriminating because you're
the person that that has the
educational were professional
the our work experience.
background.
But what we're trying to refrain
from is making decisions based
on
their criteria that we all know
is is.
Discrimination sex race creed
color you know the the the list
has been expanded over the
years.
And and certainly that so that's
where I thought we were to go
and I just just a question as to
why that was.
What it was in service.
Madam chair representative of.
What was section seven students.
Mr I'm sorry Representative
Nibert can you to questions.
I'll say it real slow R. Y. was
section seven stricken.
Okay so second that demographic
data.
My rank great great equivalent
of contractors and sub conscious
as well as non government
organizations Madam I'm sorry
Representative he's referring to
the appropriation.
Yeah I'm looking I'm sorry thank
you was looking at something
else
that is a good question
And when I think I I try to
address earlier when addressing
the amendment it's because.
And I and I will be.
Have
Secretary add to if necessary
the in the house bill to you.
In the budget for the state
personnel office is Madam that
would be covered.
Representative.
Appropriation of adding on a new
FTE would be covered under their
budget.
Sure.
Thank you for.
The time you're you're of.
I do think it still needs a
little work and and I really do
think.
Some of the best national or
some of the conditions.
Right we the problems.
If you apply those definitions
as their utilized throughout
this bill.
We're just first a word in that
with the work to the test really
when you look at the definition
doesn't fit later on in the in
the bill when the term is is
utilized so with that the I will
you for and madam chair on by
our our Representative Rehm does
want yes.
Thank.
Chair representative right.
Thank you madam chair in the
Representative thanks for the
one of my questions was just
answered that house bill two as
at appropriations are to go
ahead and and
I have this chief diversity
officer that you describe on
page four is that correct.
madam chair Representative it
doesn't specifically state are.
The chief diversity officer but
it is under the operational
budget.
But what what you're saying is
the that position is covered so
it has a.
It is a house bill two.
Madam chair that under their
operational budget this amount
would be covered for FTP.
Yes.
Madam chair and representative
will this person have any staff.
And is that covered in the house
bill two.
Madam chair.
They would not have staff right
now but I would ask
Secretaries if you would like to
add to that.
Representative initially no they
would not have stopped.
Madam chairman Mr Sardar.
how much money is in House Bill
to for this position.
Madam chair representative to
clarify without the
appropriation the state
personnel office would utilize
existing resources.
Our office.
Madam chair Mister service so
what you're saying is you have
somebody who could.
Take over this activity full
time.
No Madam chair representative
that's not what I'm saying what
I'm saying is that we would
utilize existing budget at the
state personnel office to create
the position to post recruit for
it and fill it.
Okay.
Madam chair and representative
let's go to page five in will go
down to
Why twenty two with having full
access to the our human resource
data.
Does an employee have the right
to go ahead if you ask them
the rest Mississippi to refuse
to answer it or answer it other.
Adam chair yes.
And madam chair and
representative how are you going
to deal with that issue in
trying to figure out the
diversity of the entire
universe.
Madam chair that becomes a data
point.
We have to address we have to
include and address that that is
a data point.
You madam chair I see Mr service
iterations Mr secretary Sir
madam chair.
Representative there's a couple
of ways that I think you're
absolutely right that there are
certain instances of which
application for example many
trips it's close to prince right
are not identified with there
are strategies that we could and
deployed that would allow for
the worker to disclose the race
ethnicity or any other
demographic data point without
disclosing who they are which
would be a strategy for allowing
us to capture that information
without the employee feeling as
though it might have
implications on their ability to
gain employment or in.
Madam chair and Mr service can
you describe one of those
strategies.
Sure I mean Madam chair
representative for example right
now we wanted to all state
workers allowing them to
anonymously identify with
certain demographic information
send we allow for them to do
that without disclosing who they
are they may be more likely to
disclose that demographic
understanding that we know we
would be able to identify who it
was that disclosed.
Madam chair and Mr Cerner how do
you how to how to use and
connect the winds between that
person and the information.
you know we want to we want to
know how many are of whatever
and in whatever position.
Madam chair representative if
we're going to measure
specifically among applicants if
we're going to measure
specifically among females males
or are under represented
minority yeah identify them then
absolutely in those instances we
would need to be able to
identify and connect the
individual whatever metric we're
trying to measure for that point
but I apologize your question
was do people in some instances
not disclose how might we be
able to get them to sit
generally speaking to we wanted
to understand that a state
agency an aggregate of various
levels we can identify that
information without the employee
need to disclose who they are
certainly you get down to a
level where you understand
there's only one person in that
position that's what we're
talking about but surely in many
many many instances the
overwhelming majority of our the
employee is going to identify
with those profits during the
application process.
Madam chairman Mr chair no I
agree most of them are going to
what I'm saying is to try to get
your accuracy numbers which is
what I want to go to next
I I think that what you're what
I'm hearing is is you're gonna
have some subjectivity into
determining what that person is.
Madam chair representative it is
it going to be limiting that not
every single person is going to
identify with the demographic it
can be in some regard but there
would be no requirement we
impose on them to do that okay.
Madam chair and the.
Mr service so when we get over
to page six was one twenty and
we're talking about we're going
to develop these policies so
everything is equal and and all
that so we're do you give the.
Percentage data if you would or
the target number that you have
to have.
Madam chair representative of
the target for what exactly
for the madam chair and Mr
service the target number that
you this is going to be the
ideal workforce for the state.
Representative Herndon respond
to that if you're if at the last
committee it's about the
legality in our ability to
identify targets of the
population Representative
printed.
Hello of beverage Madam chair
representative
Representative Rehm one of the
things that we look at this we
have census data and census data
tells us the make up of our
state and so that when we're
looking at the make up about of
the population of the people
that are employed by the state
making sure that we have blesses
the burst will bless is one of
the one of the committee what's
that we can look at this and
look at census data.
Okay madam chair and
representative for let which is
pick a number let's say that
number of whatever group is
fifty six percent so if we look
at our current workforce and
let's say that it's fifty eight
percent does that mean that we
need to.
Terminate two percent or or or
if we're under it to say that
we're fifty four percent does
that mean that the next two
percent we hire must be of this
group.
So Representative I mean I'm
sorry madam chair representative
re what we're looking at is
we're looking at base the data
and information but it turning
if we are truly that burst
within our our and let me just
give you a bigger a better look
at this example so for example
if we are looking at at looking
at it and our schools for
example and we're looking at our
schools and we're seeing that
the population of a native
Americans is ten percent of the
population but we look at the
disciplinary actions we're
saying that ninety percent of
the disciplinary actions are
against native Americans then we
know that there's a problem that
we need to address so then the
diversity officer is going to be
sent out to look policies to
address this differential that
is occurring that should not be
occurring based upon the of the
staff and the data that is
before us so the similar
situation would occur with
respect to hire so we're saying
that our state is made up of of
fifty percent of people who
speak Spanish but we only have a
fifty six percent of those hired
right now it doesn't say the
next two percent have to be
hired we're looking at the
totality of the circumstances
but what does the rest of the
data look like how we doing in
other areas of the points that
we would be looking at for
purposes of determining that
person but then I work place.
Madam chair and representative
for I think that you've said
we're gonna use the census data
and that tends to
make me believe that if we don't
hit that target.
Then there is a cause of action
by an employee or applicant.
who wants to go ahead and bid
for that job.
So I'm Madam chair
representative of green I think
you're looking at that this
process and correctly so we're
looking at hiring for example in
a particular agency and we're
looking at there are a hundred
people to be hired within the
agency fifty eight percent of
them may be of of maybe they are
a people who are handicapped and
may need to have accommodations
and then maybe a ten percent of
them are people who live in
rural areas and five percent of
them maybe people who live in
the urban areas we are still
looking at the totality of the
groups of numbers within a
particular area and do we have
deficiencies that we need to
look at as we continue to hire
it doesn't mean that the very
next person is going to fit that
percentage is in your case fifty
six to the fifty eight what
we're looking at the at the
bigger picture of the number of
people within a in HSD and how
are we all so that we're making
sure that all the voices are
equity being hurt with decisions
that are being made by that
agency.
Okay Madam.
Madam chair and Representative
Herndon so
Will this.
Diversity.
Apply to the selection of the of
the the governor selection of
cabinet secretaries.
Madam chair representative
Nibert one of the things that
this diversity officer will be
doing is providing data and
information and points of
information so if the if the
governor is looking at how she's
hiring individuals is he wants
to say well is there some area
that I voice is not being heard
to make sure that every that the
voices within our state our she
may look to the pivot of this
information just as you
Representative bring in the work
and madam chair in terms of the
work that you do each and every
day I know that you are very
concerned that you want to make
sure that this applicables a
diversity in the work in the way
in which to carry out the things
that you do so madam chair
representative of rain you may
well look at the information and
ask for data point within the
state like what else do I need
to do to make sure that I having
all the voices heard and
everyone has been lifted that.
So madam chair and
Representative heard and yes.
The whole.
Secretary the whole cabinet
secretaries were of X. whatever
rex's.
then could you go ahead and
complain about what we don't
have any whites in the years
sees.
Madam chair representative
dispel it really deals with the
state personnel office and
agencies not with the cabinet.
Which is subject to
approval an appointment by the
governor which make them exempt
positions.
Madam chair in the.
Representative when we moved
over to page seven one twenty
two.
That section eight so every
every state agency is going to
have to
this diversity inclusion why is
our and what is that and F. T.
or part of an FTP.
Mr Mr I mean I'm sorry madam
chair representative I'm not
sure.
We understand your question so
we talked about the hiring of
the chief diversity officer
within the state personnel
office please explain your
question a little more good
madam chair and Representative
H. seven one twenty two each
agency shall designate a
diversity inclusion why is on we
shall report directly to the end
of the state agency is that
person is that a full FTE or is
part of a nasty because we get
to the next stage we're gonna
talk about the governor develop
programs and do all this.
Madam chair
Representative these would be
additional duties to already
existing conditions as a as a
former HR director distant fall
upon my duties I would I would
assume when I was working for
the state treasurer's office and
in fact did I would look at
these these measures myself just
add in that official office
but it was it would be it would
go out to additional duties not
to more FTEs.
Madam chair representative then
we get over to page eight we get
to line twenty all employees or
participate in in training are
we not having anti racism
training currently.
Madam chair
I would ask
Secretary Stewart about the
training I do know that as a
former HR director we had
different
Trainings in place and I believe
we need more diversified in more
But I will
what are.
Your secretary srna respond
please.
Thank you madam chair
representative tents your
question there are number of
trainings that fit into that
team including how to
appropriately process ADA
accommodations cultural
competency training in
partnership with the Indian
Affairs division and and the
gamut I think what's important
to note is that trainings don't
change behaviors trainings
identified the strategies they
identified the tactics the tools
what's critical which this bill
addresses is how they become
part of the culture of an agency
an organization right so it
isn't just going to get that
training crossed off the list
you get it for the year we're
good it's a matter how do those
strategies tools materialized in
our everyday practice.
Okay well we move on from that
madam chair and Mr service so
when we get the H. T. M..
wine all up and we're talking
about the demographic data of
contractors and subcontractors
to win bets.
Now.
How we obtain that what if they
refused to provide that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Representative
again there to the question
earlier is it limiting in some
regard if there's a.
You know either an inability to
capture data unwillingness to
provide the data that we need
absolutely none the less being
able to capture that information
report from and I think it's
critical understanding that in
some instances these contractors
are providing direct services to
New Mexicans right so we you
will be are committed through
our contract support for
constituent services to ensure
that those workers are
reflective not just race and
ethnicity right and I want to
expand the scope here there
linguistically diverse they
understand the communities in
the populations that they serve
those are all factors that we
need to be clear about if we're
going to use contractors to
provide support to.
It.
Thank you.
Madam chair I just I see a lot
of cost in here and I think
taking the appropriation al was
disingenuous I think that the
appropriation needs to be there
I see that you know obviously
it's going to take time and
other agencies and are you I
think the cost is is something
that needs to be considered with
that madam chair that's all my
questions thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Representative
Ortez.
I move it to pass of HB one one
twenty six as amended.
Thank you Representative we have
a due time do passed motion by
Representative Ortez sorry this
is taking it hard to concentrate
and I'll second that motion
the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely.
Representative diagnose.
Representative Nibert.
No ma'am.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative green.
No ma'am.
Representative Zamora no.
I'm here.
Representative Chasey yes.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair Lewis yes.
Thanks for the test three.
Thank you Representative you
have a do pass on house bill one
twenty six.
Thank you to the committee thank
you madam chair and thank you
for the discussion.
Great thank you and what that we
will move house bill six to the
one stand gender and thanks to
the committee members and the
members of the public that
joined us today we are
adjourned.
