The pre for the speaker to be
with us help us to understand
one another helpless and bless
us with wisdom and understanding
and patience and kindness as we
go about the people's work
mothers were thankful for those
to help us in our staff and and
the those who make this body run
smoothly and we're grateful for
them and what they do for us
again we pray for those who are
here with us that that might
have COVID or other illnesses we
pray for their safety we prefer
their health insurance to be
returned so that they can return
and meet with us as a body again
we're grateful for all the
blessings and pray for those for
the state in the name of Jesus
Christ our savior and friend and
then.
From San Juan Representative
Montoya with the pledge of
allegiance.
Representative kids with the
pledge to the New Mexico flag.
Is.
Label on.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker and we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business scene
objection it is so ordered good
morning members.
When is yes.
Are there else miss.
The gentle lady from earlier
percent of Thompson thank.
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial sixty to be
removed from the speakers table
and be made the next order of
business.
I see no objection it is so
ordered Mr speaker would you
give me to that point that the
record reflect that elections
are for placing House memorial
sixty two on final passage has
been taking it is a subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the generator's plan the
memorial thank you Mr speaker so
Mario is proclaiming February
the first public health day in
the house of representatives and
I'm just going to give you a few
facts I don't see my get stuff
there the leader Public Health
promotes and protects the health
of people and the communities
where they live learn work and
play they were especially
helpful during the Corona virus
disease pandemic including
vaccine promotion
they play a critical role in
identifying the needs and
priorities of the communities
that they serve.
The New Mexico Public Health
Association and the New Mexico
Alliance of health councils have
a close ongoing relationship.
The end for thirty one years New
Mexicos county and tribal health
tools have served the state the
public health of the state they
continue to serve as the hub of
public health systems in
counties and tribal communities
they attract federal state and
private funding to communities
to support health programs and
they continue to provide
accurate up to date information
on local health needs to state
agencies and nonprofit service
providers and Mr speaker I would
like to give some to my co
sponsor representative Allison.
Certainly gentle lady the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker hello
gentlelady yields IT of.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I'm very happy that my co
sponsor introducing this
memorial because I think it is
long long overdue.
Tension that we give to our
health care workers.
Have always been our frontline
defense especially
with the advent of the Covid
pandemic we have served.
And so so many lives and I think
it's just propria that we
recognize them on their own
special day.
Councils have been so beneficial
especially the rural communities
and we hope that they continue
even with limited funds the name
will still continue and we hope
that we have a better chance at
the gate and other funds as well
but I'm so happy to be part of
this memorial and I think my co
sponsor and my mentor for
bringing this forward of it is
yes.
Serving with the representative
Thompson thank you madam of
Representative and Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen thank the
gentle lady.
The chief clerks please read the
title of the memorial it's a
long one third to read.
House memorial sixty two
introduced by representatives
Thompson and Allison memorial
proclaiming February twenty
first twenty twenty three public
health day in the house of
representatives house memorial
sixty two.
Is there for the debate on house
morals is to.
I
see no debate related like
closer introduce guest.
Still don't see my guess maybe
I'll just introduce if I can so
they were to be Valerie I'll
learn call in New Mexico
Association of health councils
along with jerilyn Antonio and
Leah Centers Intesa beta from
New Mexico Public Health
Association.
Senate majority leader to close
I now move that house memorial
sixty two do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the house
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative there's been a
motion show all members of the
house present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
Well final passage of house
memorial sixty two the vote is
now open.
One of seven in the affirmative
during the negative house
memorial service tell has duly
passed this house.
Gentleman from Sandoval
Representative no this.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house memorial fifty be removed
from the speakers table and made
the next order of business no
objection it is so ordered that
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial fifty on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentleman to
explain the memorial thank you
Mr speaker we're here to
celebrate Santa Fe counties
hundred and twentieth aniversary
it was founded in nineteen
hundred and three and is now the
fourth most populated county
within with about a hundred and
fifty thousand residents I would
like to introduce my guests on
the rostrum I have the president
of a of the Rio Rancho regional
chamber of commerce Jareth
shallow.
The mayor of the town of
Bernalillo Jack Torrance.
And the Bernalillo town
administrator ida Fierro.
Mr speaker can I ask the court
to read the memorial please
click to read.
House memorial fifty introduced
by representatives and on this
Harper Alan Martinez Kate's and
then to a moral declaring
February twenty first twenty
twenty three Sandoval County one
hundred twentieth anniversary
day and house of representatives
house memorial fifty.
I will continue
whereas Sandoval county was
founded on March tenth nineteen
oh three nine years before New
Mexico statehood and was created
from the northern part of
Bernalillo county and whereas
Sandoval County is the fourth
most populous county in New
Mexico with a population of
slightly more than one hundred.
One hundred fifty one thousand
residents and we're as Sandoval
County measures three three
thousand seven hundred square
miles and boasts a diverse
economic base consisting of high
technology industries health
care construction and tourism
and whereas Sandoval County
includes ten public's Kochi
Hamis he was Santo Laguna
seventy been sent the funds so
Sandia from the Hana from the
Collett a yes.
Into tribal nations that he
could be Apache nation and the
Navajo Nation and whereas
Sandoval County includes the
continental divide national
scenic trail Coronado historic
site tennis mountain trail
scenic byway.
Kasha go to a tent rocks
national monument route sixty
six national by way pre nineteen
thirty seven historic route
sixty six I called it a national
preserve and Redondo peak and
aware of.
Sandoval County has the third
largest city in the state Rio
Rancho and the safest community
in the state what are less and
is home to the original route
for route sixty six in
Bernalillo.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
February twenty first twenty
twenty three be declared
Sandoval County one hundred
twentieth anniversary day in the
house of representatives and.
Be it further resolved that
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to the Sandoval
county manager the Sandoval
County board of county
commissioners and the president
and chief executive officer of
the Rio Rancho regional chamber
of commerce.
Thank you Mr speaker with that I
uh open up for debate.
Is it.
It is a debate.
The general of the sellers of
Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you John from Santa for for
during this memorial I too would
like to introduce to of my
guests in the maybe speak on the
memorial if joining us today is
cinema county commission chair
Mister David Heil if you'd stand
to be recognized.
We also have several county
commissioner Catherine Burch
could stand to be recognized as
well thank you for joining us.
And all of the state I have the
privilege of the the chair
living directly across the
street from my in laws for as
long as I can remember so he
remembers me way back and will
please don't talk to him about
my behavior and and that but to.
I chair and and Representative I
just want to say Mr speaker
Representative I just wanna say
I really love Sandoval County I
was born in Bernalillo county
and taken about twelve hours
later Sandoval County and that's
where I was that's where I was
raised in is a special place
it's incredible to see how much
it's grown over the.
forty something years that I've
I've been around but it is a
special place and I really
appreciate those who are giving
of themselves to help the to to
make it a special place and make
it better
so with that the speaker and
gentleman thank you for this
opportunity speak thank you
gentlemen.
There is for the originally
digital person from Bernalillo
Sandoval Representative kits
thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Santa yield I do.
Thank you very much hi to and
are proud resident of Santa Fe
County my children are graduates
of the Senate of the Rio Rancho
public school system and I run
businesses nonprofits and I'm so
proud to be part of this a
hundred and twenty year
anniversary I'd like to
introduce to my guests the Santa
county commissioner Joshua A.
Jones.
Bernalillo economic development
director my global.
Thank you very much.
There is individually from
Bernalillo Representative
little.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa yield I
yield thank you good morning all
hi Jim Representative little and
some of you may know that I
actually come from the pueblo of
San Felipe pay in Santa Fe
County I'm a graduate of
Bernalillo high school goes
Perkins and
and had a wonderful life and of
my childhood years and teenagers
growing up in the pueblo an
incentive county it's been a
blessing to be able to watch the
county grow and evolve over the
years and I'm very excited to
look forward to all that's
possible in the years to come
and the work that can be done as
I am just across the border in
the in my district sixty eight
put representative of northern's
second with with section of the
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county so congratulations I wish
you all the best and I look
forward to all that's coming
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
The gentleman from Santa or
percent of my ****.
Mr speaker will the good
gentleman from San Juan County
you'll I yield.
I stand also as a proud to
residents of San Juan County I
actually live in what we like to
call west Bernalillo.
It is a suburb of the town of
Bernalillo.
I stand today to recognize.
Of the the by by
Chair of the commission Michael
meek.
Western I walked.
A lot of neighborhoods this
summer I got to know him
and I'm happy that I get to
introduce in today but also like
to introduce.
Sandoval County deputy Matt
deputy county manager John
Garcia.
Many of you may remember Mr
Garcia from his long career in
state government city
governments
what I love about him is.
Another layer of economic
development presentable County
thank you very much.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
but.
Will the gentleman from Sandoval
County yield I yield.
I'm learning this protocol thank
you Mr speaker I just want to
say that I am proud to support
Sandoval county's hundred and
twentieth anniversary day and I
am proud to say that I worked
with many of the commissioners
counselors from Santa Fe County
including a more hall and
commissioner Dave
Dave Heil and the chamber of
commerce the regional chamber of
commerce and I just want to say
that we worked on some really
great projects because they
bordered my city council
district one which is very
important to this area which is
West Side Boulevard and
actually provides a lot of
economic development thank.
He added a water line to that
that goes directly to Intel
Boulevard of I'm sorry Intel
The the actual into a whole and
provided quite a few jobs
actually so I'm happy just to
say hi to my neighbors and thank
you Representative for that.
Is there for the.
Seeing no debate no further
debate the gentleman close.
Thank you before we close I want
to also thank my wife Jennifer
for coming and celebrating
Sandoval County day with us
today.
Thank you for sharing your
husband with the this Jennifer.
With that Mr speaker I move that
house memorial number fifty do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
record show that the role has
been called and all those
present present voted in the
affirmative on house memorial
number fifty there's been a
motion to show all members of
the house present a vote in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial fifty.
The vote is now open.
Seven informative zero one eight
and house bill fifty has duly
passed this house.
Thank you Mr speaker.
For the fifth graders from
central elementary.
In the gallery.
Yes Representative I'm way up in
the gallery central elementary
fourth graders from billion with
teachers Mrs one billion
missions or full and Mr Tapia
welcome to the house please rise
to be recognized.
Other announcements the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr.
Yes.
My colleagues
of a notebook.
with the emblem Navajo
preparatory school and also the
mascot of Navajo preparatory
School that frightened handles.
In addition to that special to
us this morning is Watson with
for.
Is level preparatory school and
also is there a student body
president.
After graduation what Senator.
Montana State University.
Biology so a round of applause
for Mr with.
Welcome to the house Mr
Whitford.
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen
the gentleman from Chavis any
and all dental Representative
Townsend thank you Mr speaker I
rise on a point of personal
privilege state your point Sir
of.
Mr speaker I
Became concerned the few days
ago.
On our capital outlay process.
And I would like the body to
listen just a minute and see if
they to have concerns.
Our capital outlay for.
Coming from legislative finance
committee.
Was.
Originally recommended that six
hundred and fifty million
dollars.
Subsequent to that.
The decision was made and I
don't know by who.
That it would should be
increased to just over a billion
dollars.
But then the plot thickens Mr
speaker.
The division.
Of capital outlay has always
been.
A third a third and a third a
third of the House third Senate
third to the governor's office.
That is constitutionally.
Appropriate.
But Mr speaker.
That system has been changed
without the knowledge I believe
of this body which is the
appropriating body.
Some place down the line.
The decision was made to remove
a hundred million dollars.
From that.
That that some that should be a
Division held by members of this
house and the Senate.
A hundred million dollars was
removed and dedicated to the
tribal community.
One hundred million dollars.
Mr speaker that effectively
stole from my district.
I have the million dollar round
numbers.
It effectively stole from every
Senate district.
About eight hundred thousand
dollars.
Mr speaker I don't believe
that stare every square inch of
New Mexico is covered by a house
district every person.
In New Mexico has a state
representative for their on
tribal community or in the south
valley or in Artesia New Mexico
every person has a state
representative.
And into the.
By constitution.
Or by our historical accident
precedence allows for a hundred
million dollars to be taken
straight off the top.
Without this body scan current.
That is wrong Mr speaker and
it's not fair to every member of
this body.
On top of that Mr speaker.
This body is the appropriating
body.
We are the the body that should
appropriate for the state of New
Mexico.
And Mister speaker.
Our constitutional authority has
been diminished.
By this process and I don't
believe anyone here without
regard to what political
affiliation the sitting governor
has and I promise you I would be
with that maybe
A more quick response had it
been a Republican upstairs
that's not right Mr speaker and
if I'm wrong.
And what I have been told is not
truthful.
Then.
I would like to body or new or
whoever Mr speaker set me
straight because right now.
Taking a hundred million
dollars.
Of thirty three million dollars
out of the house and half a
million dollars from each one of
the sitting members is not in
our best interest.
So Mister speaker.
On top of that I think for the
first time this year our
governor took a third of our
capital outlay.
I don't believe that's ever been
done before.
And I think that's a precedence
that this body does not need to
condone or set summer speaker I
would ask.
If you would help me.
To ascertain exactly how much
money was in the pool of money
for capital outlay and what the
division should be based on
historical precedents.
And Mr speaker at also asks for
your indulgence I I
I took a minute to talk to my
friend from San Juan the other
night and I asked him
specifically about this and and
at that time he told me he
thought this hundred million
dollars came out of the
governor's portion and if it
came out of her third.
She has every right of spend it
however she wants to and and I
wouldn't be here but if this
hundred million dollars came out
of the pop up for the division
to the house and the Senate and
the governor was taken I take
great exception to that and I
would answer here help in
correcting that because the body
this legislature lives for ever.
Governors come and go.
And starting a precedence like
this is not good for New Mexico
thank you Mr speaker for the
time thank you gentlemen and I
would invite any member of the
body to
to speak with chair Lynn they
and the capital outlay team
which was a bipartisan team that
came together over the last four
weeks or so to negotiate capital
outlay
I agree with you gentleman hi
good one hundred percent with
you we don't want to set
precedents that in any way
diminish the position of the
house of representatives and
that is not at all what took
place during this negotiation in
fact the initial number member
share was a lot lower than what
we ended up with I believe the
initial numbers one point seven
million dollars were now upwards
of twenty half million dollars
per member but your points are
well taken Sir and I would
invite you to to to have a
conversation with her Lente they
and is negotiating team to
answer any specifics with regard
to the point that you raised
thank you for that
The other elements gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker I did have my hand
up.
The lady will come back
announcements and it is helpful
if you can stand up and wave
your Mike it's hard to see from
this vantage point thank you
welcome back to announcements
click to read.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill three
twenty one has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that a do pass an
answer for to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair Mr speaker
move adoption Mr.
Got a double motion.
When an option available in
house bill three twenty one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was named the Islamic reported
up to.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee too has
been referred house bill four
twenty eight has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house
transportation public works in
capital improvements committee
substitute for house bill for
twenty to pass an answer for to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Hochman Vigil chair.
Mr speaker move adoption for
that option one non verbal
commit report on house bill four
twenty eight but a favorable
committee report on house
transportation public works and
capital improvements of stiffer
house bill four twenty eight all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Yes I have a committee boarded
up to Mr speaker and health and
Human Services Committee members
been referred house bill two
thirty six has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendations to pass finance
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
of those Thomson chair option
reduction of a federal committee
put in house bill two thirty six
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Was me just have a committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two sixty
three has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair
reduction reduction of federal
committee report on house bill
two sixty three of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Was it just have a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two sixty
four has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that do pass and
this referred to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption
when adoption of federal
committee report on house bill
two sixty four of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Yes having committed productive.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred house bill three
seventy has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair reduction.
Is an option of federal
government for those with three
seventy of those in favor
signify by saying aye opposed me
the S. have a committee report
opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill one eighty has had it
under consideration point I was
recommendation to pass
respectfully submitted submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of a federal committee
for the house bill one eighty
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those offenders in this day not.
Jose.
The S. have a committee for
adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill one
eighty two has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair.
Move adoption for the job option
available committed for the
house bill one eighty two of
those of everything about this
and I.
Proposing the as have a
committee productive.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee to
miss been referred house bill
two seventy has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair food option run
option of federal committee
point house bill two seventy all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
May this have a committee report
update.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
was been referred house bill two
seventy four as amended has had
it under consideration reports
it was recommendation that a do
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption production of
federal committee for the house
bill three three three thirteen
of the severity of this and I.
Excuse me I'm sorry.
Don't take all that back
reduction of recorded for House
Bill to seventy four as amended
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Couples may just have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill
three thirteen has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation but I do passed
as amended and then just
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair move
adoption production of federal
government fund House Bill three
thirteen of those in favor say
about us and I.
Yes having committed productive.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill
three eighty has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that do pass and
this referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair of
adoption reduction of a federal
committee for now with three
eighty a list of everything if I
was and I.
Propose day yes have a committee
productive.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill
three eighty eight has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation but it do
not pass but that house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill three eighty eight do
pass and that's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair fruit option where
that option of an unfavorable
committee report on house with
three eighty eight but a
favorable committee report on
house government election in the
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill three eighty eight
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose may just have a
committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to miss
been referred house bill eight
as amended has had it under
consideration point things
recommendation that I do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
needs and small chair.
Small and small chair.
Mr speaker I move adoption
option of federal committee for
the house bill eight eight as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Yes having committed for doctor
Mr speaker I appropriations and
finance committee to miss been
referred house bill thirty five
has had it under consideration
reports it was recommendation to
do pass respectfully submitted a
that small chair food option Mr
speaker reduction of a favorable
committee report on house bill
thirty five all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Yes I'm a committee report up
to.
Mr speaker a appropriations and
finance committee team is been
referred house bill seventy six
as amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendations to pass as
amended respectfully submitted
that small chair Mr speaker move
adoption when adoption will
Ferrell Committee for the house
bill seventy six as amended all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose a test of a committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker you appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill one twenty
seven has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation to to pass
respectfully submitted that
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption for an adoption of
federal coming up on house bill
one twenty seven of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Yes I'd like a more productive.
Mr speaker I appropriations and
finance committee to is been
referred house bill one ninety
one has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that do pass as
amended respectfully submitted a
that small chair Mr speaker move
adoption for adoption with
federal committee for house bill
one eighty one of those in favor
say if I was and I.
Couples made.
The as have a committee reported
up.
Mr speaker your rules
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee to ms
been referred house bill five
ten has had it under
consideration point same as
recommendation that I do pass
and then just referred to the
government elections and ending
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Christina are yes
chair Mister speaker so excited
to move adoption.
For the option of a fable
report on house bill five
hundred and ten all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose in the.
Yes this committee reported up
to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
terms the referred house bill
one eighty five as amended has
had it under consideration point
seems recommendation that it do
not pass but that house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House for one eighty five do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption.
For that option no federal
committee report on house bill
one eighty five as amended but a
favorable committee report on
house Judiciary Committee
substance for house bill one
eighty five all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Yes have a committee report
opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
two twenty nine has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair move adoption for
that option available committee
put on house bill two twenty
nine of those have been missing
about the same night.
Yes I'm a committee report
opted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to ms been
referred house bill one seventy
has had it under consideration
point I was recommendation that
do pass respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
adoption referral committee
report on house bill one seventy
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Couple's name the S. have a
committer productive.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill three
seventy seven has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it do passed
as amended finance referred to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
during Y. Gallegos chair Mr
speaker move adoption adoption
referral committee report on
house bill three seventy seven
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Signify by saying aye.
Propose the eyes of the
committee reported up to.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house bill
two forty three has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendations that do not pass
the House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill two
forty three do pass and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair move
adoption for that option no
federal government for the house
bill two forty three but a
favorable committee report on
house energy environment natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill two forty three
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose maybe just have a
committee reported up to Mr
speaker Energy Environment and
natural resources committee to
is been referred house bill four
thirty two has had it under
consideration point in this
recommendation but it do not
pass without House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee substitute for house
bill four thirty to do pass
sentence referred to the
consumer and public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair with us
and production no federal
committee put house bill four
thirty two but a federal
committee report on house Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill four thirty two
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Was named the as having
committed for not to.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Representative Webster basket.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business messages
objection it is so ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill three as
amended Senate bill seventy
three as amended Senate bill
ninety four as amended Senate
bill one fifty three with
emergency clause and requests
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted sherry do
the Lujan Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Can lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation see no
objection it is so ordered.
Is a gentleman from Bernalillo.
Representative SCO ready on item
number.
Twenty.
Speaker can you get me to that
power point.
The record reflect that election
is a state for placing House
memorial forty one of final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentleman to
explain of the memorial yes yes
speaker as speaker of the house
and more forty one a request
that the county commission
transfer the escalate the
building to make one about the
stuff on this land grant fifty
miles speaker about one about
the stuff about this land grant
is located south of the LFC
condemn in fact is the most
because you actually have to
cross the damn going south to
get to point out the state run
this is the most because twenty
years ago the the elders about
these that are this Land Grant
constructed two buildings for
the children in New
of the communist community using
locally made on it breaks and
other local materials estimates
speaker twenty years ago this
quickly building transferred
ownership from M. as mountain
public school district in the
county.
And as the speaker the escalate
the building is the only
facility on the land grants
available for public meetings
for example baby showers wedding
receptions except on the land
grant is the most speaker will
open the building.
Local subdivisions and public
service organizations that serve
the community like one The New
Mexico domestic flight
Association two seconds.
Grazing associations and less
than most people continue with
the communist early childhood
center with that I stand for
questions see no debate the
gentleman to close thank you Mr
speaker appreciated the sign and
the data with that I do not move
house more forty one to pass.
Well final passage of house
memorial forty one the vote is
now open.
What's about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
those yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes.
Representative Sarinana.
Yes representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative Madrid.
The vote is now closed by one of
six one in the affirmative
during the negative house
memorial forty one has duly
passed this house.
Is a gentle lady from Chavis
ready on item number three.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent of the house the rules
be suspended and that the record
show that all action for placing
House Bill one forty five on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Gentility thanks for doing my
job gentlelady to explain the
bill saving your voice Mr
speaker Mr speaker what we are
trying to do here the purpose of
the general Richard Knowles
legislative scholarship it
allows each one of us in the
house and the Senate to nominate
a student from their district
for scholarship consideration.
Is.
Proposal will amend.
It's called legislative
scholarship.
To a six year scholarship
program for each one of the
young people that we do nominate
Mr speaker I stand for questions
seeing a debate the gentle lady
to close Mr speaker I move that
house bill one forty five do now
pass where final passage of
house bill one forty five the
vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Madrid.
Representative.
Yes Representative votes yes
representative Sarinana yes
Representative Sarinana votes
yes.
The vote is now closed by one of
sixteen the affirmative zero
negative house bill one forty
five has duly passed this house.
Gentlelady from really over the
Chasey.
This is the primary cause of
that order business introduction
of legislation objection it is
so ordered.
House memorial sixty three.
Introduce fire representative
for a go a memorial recognizing
the history and contributions of
the Albuquerque metropolitan
Arroyo flood control authority
and honoring the Albuquerque
metropolitan Arroyo flood
control authority on its
sixtieth anniversary requesting
the governor to proclaim March
twenty six twenty twenty three
Albuquerque metropolitan Arroyo
flood control authority day
House memorial sixty three zero
six three eminent twice by title
is ordered not printed and plays
on the speakers table.
House Bill sorry Senate bill
three as amended introduced by
Senator Stewart and actually
need to public school finance
providing more flexibility for
users of family income index
distributions making
appropriation Senate bill three
as amended.
The Senate bill three as amended
amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then so house appropriations and
finance committee.
Senate bill seventy three as
amended.
Introduced by senators o'neill
Hemphill and Representative
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
primary elections allowing
voters who have not designated a
major political party
affiliation on their
certificates of registration to
participate in the primary
election process by choosing to
affiliate with a major political
party participating in a primary
by requesting the party's ballot
making conforming changes Senate
bill seventy three as amended
Senate bill seventy three as
amended have equipment was by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee vents the house
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill ninety four as
amended.
Introduced by Senator Steinborn
and Senator Diamond and
potentially leading to outdoor
recreation transferring
administration of the Rio Grande
trail commission to the Rio
Grande trail fund from the
energy minerals and natural
resources department to the
Economic Development Department
provided duties to the New
Mexico outdoor recreation
division of the economic
development department to
complete the Rio Grande trail
making appropriation Senate bill
ninety four as amended Senate
bill ninety four have been there
twice but as amended have
amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee this
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill one fifty three.
Engines by Senator Rodriguez and
actually need to Legislative
Council Service requiring the
Legislative Council Service to
publish on the provided with
website a searchable list of
appropriation allocations
contained in the supplemental
general appropriation act
declaring an emergency Senate
bill one fifty three.
Senate Bill.
If W. one for three more read
twice by title is ordered not
printed referred house
government elections in
indifference Committee this
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consultant Mr speaker.
I ask unanimous consent that the
speaker for the committee to
invite the honorable Montana
governor how we what islands and
the honorable members of the
Senate today in joint session
with the house in this chamber
for the purpose of being
addressed by senator Ben Ray
Lujan Representative Melanie A.
Stansbury.
If there's injection the chair
will appoint Representative
Cortes Representative I'll go
and and Representative and none
this to invite the honorable
lieutenant governor how we what
is and the honorable members of
the Senate committee joint
session with the house for the
purpose of being addressed by
our distinguished guests.
Mr speaker chair recognizes
Representative Chasey this is
because I ask unanimous consent
that house did in recess subject
to the call of the chair and the
rules be suspended to allow the
seating of guests in the chamber
during the joint session if
there's no objection the house
was in recess subject to the
call of the chair.
