Now the acting state engineer
for the second time since John
DiSanto yo retired.
I've worked for six state
engineers including John twenty
twice and four governors.
So I've been coming in front of
this committee on or about
nineteen years and this is my
twentieth year.
And if anybody remembers
Representative Joe staff who was
that chairmen.
I have fond memories of having
conversations on water issues
with him in his office.
So well yeah I've been doing
this half of my career so thank
you for having us.
Today myself Rolf Schmidt
Petersen I. C. director and now
check press R. O. C. general
counsel will present on various
water issues and agencies
staffing and some budget needs.
I please.
So this is the quick agenda
overview we talk about drought
in the outlook and some water
ministration I know Mike and
then on Tuesday spoke about this
the drought so I won't spend too
much time on it.
Talk about active water resource
management what it is and what
the tools are that we use to
talk about water rights backlog
the HSD cannabis dam safety.
talk about the social services
and staffing and then Matt will
finish up with Indian water
rights settlements and the
update on taxes The New Mexico
and then we'll move on to wall
for.
Next slide please.
So the LFC eyes the legislative
financial services dream
pandemic and and the ongoing
content and the severe drought
that we've been experiencing the
last twenty years so water
supply critical component to
public health and safety and
everything we do with the was
the eyes the supports that.
Severe drought is required
direct water administration by
the OC Water masters multiple
river basins for example the Rio
Grande Rio Chama Paco this guy
is just up in Las Vegas members
down by damning sign one up in
Farmington and the heaviest
alley.
Also we're doing a lot of
enforcement actions against
illegal diversions and over
diversions so that takes a lot
of staff time not a resource
very resource intensive.
And we do a lot of this with our
seven district offices statewide
to provide those essential
services so I want to just
kind of ring our bell ring this
pandemic we never close down any
of our district offices we
always had somebody there
answering the phones and helping
people with permits for domestic
wells and other permits to help
in the change of ownerships
transfers.
All that type of stuff that
people need done so we we we I
am proud to say we've been open
every district office throughout
we never close down basically.
And we also do well to our
licenses so we regulate well
drillers.
It's that office the state
engineer inside please.
This is staffing challenges so
we've been very busy in the last
sixteen months we've had ninety
five recruitment set hires that
accounts for about thirty
percent of our workforce.
With the ICSI has sought
recruiting of is terrible hi
ninety five of the three hundred
fourteen positions not sixteen
months so basically.
Thirty two of these new hires of
the ninety five our new people
coming into the agencies that's
a net increase we have sixty
three internal hires or
advancements are promotions I
guess so somebody that was a
maybe a water resource recording
progress.
And then when it occurs mission
just read out of.
For most.
US.
Yes.
Chair at that we're we're going
forty forty I have a have a New
Mexico.
So
there.
These mute themselves okay
that's better okay so.
So the point is we've been
really busy phone banking
positions you know
It takes a lot of time to to
fill positions but we also have
thirty nine employees that we've
lost in the last sixteen months
nineteen which retirements and
about seven.
Possible retirement the next six
months that they've told us they
were gonna be retiring so we
lose a lot of institutional
knowledge when we lose somebody
to retirement or just lose on to
another agency and we have
twenty two I would say
terminations but they're
transfers over they just left
the agency basically we lose
staff to other entities that pay
more or in some cases we lost
some entities to other state
agencies that allow me to
telework five days because we
only allow one to two days
telework and what happens
another agency around five days
so they rather go and work from
home so that's a problem.
Next slide please.
Inside.
Okay so despite high recruitment
actions completed last year you
have no increase in staff to
handle the regular our workload
much less traveled to the work
of the drought specialness
dimension is and now cannabis.
So the recruitment process is
competitive time consuming labor
intensive it takes about one to
two months just to get somebody
hired on on board it takes
another Sixtyeight months to
train Water Rights.
Large portion of HSD positions
required for four years of
college education and licensure
like that P. E. for our dam
safety engineers we hire
hydrologists engineers
scientists planners geologists
ninety folks.
No with the competes for
employees in in legal
engineering science and I. T.
field office in some players
like the oil and gas industry
down in the Roswell area agency
policies federal agencies tribes
and pueblos.
So we hire somebody and they get
experience in the agency it's
very valuable also we have water
rights variance is very valuable
so.
We got to retain the staff and
that's for the budget.
Keypoint
right now.
We have two hundred forty four
feel that T. in back in January
of two thousand eight we had
three hundred and twelve so we
have sixty eight do the math
with sixty eight less staff yes
what workload is done up has
gone down.
Yes please.
Vacancies summary.
This is the breakdown of the
four programs within the office
the state engineer is the the
water resource allocation
program Interstate Stream
Commission additional education
programs or and the rap program
hundred seventy one F. T. E.
there in the middle first first
line is a hundred seventy one
staff.
So I want to point you to a
couple of things here
the total vacant F. T. brought
seventy right down the middle of
the state's.
The percentage of vacant
positions that twenty two
percent.
I love you guys and see you all
over to the right because I can
see on my screen but it's on the
back and so how can.
I have a screen set up but
there's
Right this two columns one bacon
F. D. E. an act.
Improvement and funded Bacon not
yet enacted recruitment up go
back.
So there's there's two columns
there and you see that for
example wrap program water
resource allocation program
of fourteen.
That we're actively recruiting
positions we have the reason do
the math at seventeen positions.
We go all the way down this is
true commission here three and
three that they're actively
recruiting for that there
that they're not added up seven
thank you relegation and
Education at seven and go across
from support that too that's up
to thirty three positions.
Remember the seventy.
So we have thirty three
positions that we have the
budget to fill.
Yes we have a total of seventy
that are vacant.
So we can never ever fail all
seven do you feel maybe half of
the thirty three.
So my point is that basically
you right the twenty two is very
high so can never even we have
the ability to fulfill this
people you know we had people
knocking on doors between phone.
Next slide please.
Now get into actual water stuff.
Drought outlook statewide water
administration this is a center
pivot in the Tularosa Tularosa
basin next slide.
So.
You saw this map maybe see it
before it was from last year
actually it's January January
nineteen twenty twenty one and
when you see this map of that
drought monitor it's dark like
this it's just that so the
darker the color that so this is
last year's in use this I think
Mike Hammond had this slide up
so I just want to reiterate that
next slide please.
So this is what it looks like
now this is for January
eighteenth twenty twenty two
current.
In right now we have ninety
percent of the state in
abnormally dry to extreme
drought.
Twenty percent of the state is
it extreme drought.
It's good that we have none in
its exceptional drought so
that's the real dark D. four
exceptional drought we have none
so it's it's it's an improvement
we'll see which way it goes
against the impact or not
Okay that's it seems some storms
coming in now so that's that's
good next slide please.
This is just a blow up of the
United States yes the New Mexico
state map this is last year the
US.
Next slide please.
Is a yes next slide.
There we go so this is the
current quarter January
eighteenth current drought
manage monitor for the whole
United States the the the the
dark in there
New Mexico.
Next slide.
So this is a three month outlook
for New Mexico and the US and if
you look at southern New Mexico
on both maps down the bottom
thank you Mexico and look at the
bottom so basically this is
saying we're going to be the
next three months the outlook
with the warmer and drier.
Slide.
This is a New Mexico the drought
is going to process that's the
outlook for the for drought and
look at the Mexico were dark.
Well southwest doesn't look good
for the southwest almost
completely brown in New Mexico
slide please.
This is a chart of the reservoir
storage volumes New Mexico and I
want to point you this is our
level is eleven reservoirs here.
What you the current look at the
current column and the average
column if you see in almost
every case current.
Volume in each of those lakes is
less than the average so it's
not looking good the only one
that has a little bit more and I
didn't have time to check with
Julie yes my your chief with
this together is the Bradley
lake it says twenty eight.
And the average twenty one so if
you were doing a little better
brownie at this point in time.
Next slide please.
So we are M. this is a picture
of the guy in this very very at
the end of that on twenty
twenty.
I'm gonna go over a W. next
slide.
So I can spoke about a W. around
on Tuesday and out of this
pandemic little further on this
initiative I'm sure you've all
heard the term end of the RN's
over the years you know what is
that well it we are in the water
resource management.
There's the definition as we see
it active water resource
management is the office of the
state engineers initiative to
actively manage our water
resources it we are and is
guided by state a statewide
framework rules the legislative
agencies agencies the tools
remember that tools that's
important pourtant
Ask Miss tools for prior
administration to help the state
actively manage water
transported just caused by
drought variability excitement.
Houses protect senior water
rights and the Interstate
delivery obligations inside.
So
the water resource management
one of these tools.
These tools include metering and
measuring devices are measuring
diversions surface water and
groundwater adopting specific
districts specific rules that
DSLRs pointing of water masters
hiring water masters and train
you know about the water master
manuals and abstracting of the
water right files into the
waters database we have a lot of
paper files and allows an issue
while back with Representative
is down files being taken to
Albuquerque from Roswell well
we've got a lot of those files
into our database already now
the anybody can look at those
from the computer at home so
that's the idea.
I want to talk about one tool
that I mentioned which is
metering and the legislature has
helped us a lot they've given us
probably close to right now as a
nine million dollars over the
since two thousand two we spent
about seven of that
we have we have two hundred
twenty five surface water meters
installed with telemetry and
that's when the tree shoots the
information to our computers put
it on a website and anybody can
see it.
So it helps with transparency
stated you can see what your
neighbors using
helps with disputes and it helps
the short sharing in those
basins.
Each of those meters costs
depending on the size of the
meter about thirty five thousand
meter some hire summer lower
depends on how much concrete
things of that nature.
The member this one behind us on
that walk in so again there in
Santa Fe charm on the lower part
of the charm on and most of the
upper.
And the lower Rio Grande yeah I
do our meter surface the surface
waters meter.
Note also the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district is neater.
As well.
They do their own meters inside.
Mr Merriman binder that you
about thirty minutes left the
staff okay trying to move fast.
So I.
So we have a water resource
management Tivity is currently
being performed in the following
bureau basins that guiding us
forever they're not state guest
and this river in Chama members
favored down by Deming wonderful
consists of care in the San
Juan.
Technically the act waters act
administration is triggered by
low water flows and specific
river system.
Sure sure what patients are
being planned for that this
coming their engagement season.
Again the rich Thomas Thomas and
dying us unless we do sure sure.
We have distance specific rules
only one district and that's the
number Baca just to get basin.
So what rights backlog of
applications.
Right now currently in the state
in our district office we have a
backlog of four hundred ninety
two applications that says at
the end of a December.
We serve the resources are
needed for the agency to keep up
existing applications and
anticipate new applications
associated with cannabis grown.
Approval process takes anywhere
from six to eight months
sometimes longer to review and
act on an application depending
on some doctors those factors
are complex the complexity of
the application type of the tap
water right to the to carry
water ride that needs more
research is that a.
Judicata water right is that
through previous the permanent
water.
And the type of impairment
analysis that goes with that
application and it depends on
the workload of the district and
the staffing needs.
If you get protest and talking
one to two years to get that
through the process the flight.
Cannabis is been a lot of
questions about cannabis.
So new legislation is passed the
twenty twenty one legalizing
recreational cannabis use.
Cannabis producers must acquire
about water rights for outdoor
cultivation.
What rights for indoor
cultivation and that's in
statute and rules.
Usually requires a permit from
the OCD do this produce is we
need to file the applications to
reconfigure their water rights
again a permanent.
Miss wells may not be used to
grow commercial crops include
cannabis that's a big thing
everybody thinks they can use
their massive well.
You cannot use your domestic
wealth cannabis use is that you
can do it for about water rights
water right into that domestic
well again it's a permanent
takes time.
tools will require meter
installation and according to
the agency.
And we're working really closely
with our L. D. good lesson
licensing and and
Session lesson and part and and
all of the above this permitting
activity.
In to date.
From our of the we received
about thirty five requests for
validation of their water rights
the different producers and of
the thirty five may be five to
seven have been shown to be
about water rights and they have
everything in order to get their
their their license from our of
the.
We're seeing that the this
they're not sending us the right
information is sending us a
change of ownership and that are
they don't have the water it's
configured properly for the
commercial use so there's a lot
of problems and it's a big
education of these these
individuals trying to grow
cannabis and now I want to make
a real big points there is a
Senate bill one hundred cannabis
Act.
Introduced this session and it's
a cleanup bill from what I
understand and one of the things
that we asked trip for their
original bill.
There is a fund created to and
that funded not include the
office the state engineer to be
able to hit this fund are
dropping this fund so we've
given the language to our the to
their to their legal departments
and it did make it into the bill
as introduced hoping maybe they
can amended into the bill that
at the office the state engineer
to be able to hit this fund.
Very helpful to us to get some
staff.
Next slide please I know all try
to go fast.
Yeah the so approximately three
hundred dams in New Mexico a
regulated by the office the
state engineer.
Estimated dollar amount to
rehabilitate the deficient dams
statewide is about three hundred
million dollars I don't know if
this number's been out there for
a while but it's still there may
be even higher.
the staff needs well we funding
for resources and needed to meet
the demands on the agency.
The executive budget recommended
wanted to do and other resources
for HSD and the policy did the
same at one F. T. E. in their
recommendation as well so that's
a good thing that's a picture of
Santa Cruz down spelling I'm not
sure what it was but that's a
nice picture of the damage your
engineer like to see those
things yes I.
So so now I'm gonna hand off to
Matt is that a few slides on
water rights settlements and on
taxes The New Mexico will one
two wealth so thank you and I'll
be available for questions
later.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr state
engineer Mr chairman and members
of the committee I'm just going
to give a very fast thirty
thousand foot overview so the
committee has has some awareness
on these topics particularly on
Texas The New Mexico a more
detailed briefing in executive
session with the attorney
general's litigation team will
be for the appropriate place to
to dive into the details there
but we want the committee to
know what the agency's
activities are and what the
general statuses.
First I want to give the
committee a just a really quick
update we are
negotiating really aggressively
on a number of fronts to settle
the claims of nations tribes and
pueblos in New Mexico and we can
go to the next slide.
This Madam that we're currently
working on include nine pueblos
are tribes in the nine nine
public tribes nations in six
different educations it is
absolutely critical that we
resolve these senior right the
the rights of nations tribes and
pueblos are often the most
senior or or among the most
senior right in the basin and
often among the largest so if
you're talking about
administering in a time of
shortage if you don't know how
large the most senior rate is
you really cannot effectively
administer and in our time when
shortages are going to be the
norm in many years it's really
important that we resolve these
claims and reduce the
uncertainty related to these
claims litigating then we've
done it on a few occasions we're
doing it in a few cases right
now where Madam is not
the doesn't look like it's
possible but that is expensive
it's uncertain and it's slow and
there's a lot of downside risk
because we don't know what
course are going to do with
respect to the rights when we
negotiate settlements we are
able to reach resolutions that
are workable for all the parties
in the basin even if everybody
doesn't love it it's something
that it reduces the chance of
significant disruption and
dislocation to establish uses in
these basins
it also provides the framework
for alternative water resources
management that Mr Romero was
was just speaking about we
establish rules that pueblos
tribes and nations typically
agree to that can be shortage
sharing rules and so we can much
more efficiently and much more
smoothly allow for shortage
sharing with the settlements in
place.
We are currently pass through
the executive recommendation and
we're not going to go through
the details there for some
additional staff to allow us to
negotiate in litigate the Indian
Water Rights claims we have not
received that funding in the in
in the LFC recommendations and
so that's that's and that's
something that is really
critical.
On a lot of different fronts
we're trying to move things
forward and by and large the
majority of the positions were
seeking to fill or not attorney
position so it's not just
throwing money at lawyers these
are but hydrologists
Hydrographic survey staff watery
said ministration folks to help
with administering the rules
implementing the settlements so
this is a really critical part
of what we're doing I even in
the absence of additional
funding.
The litigation and adjudication
program in the office the state
engineer has this year stood up
a specialized.
Indian Water Rights team that is
focusing on moving these
settlements in this litigation
forward so we'd like to staff it
out completely but in the
absence of that this is a
critical priority of both for
the nation's pueblos and tribes
and the other users in these
basins in order to have
effective management of our
water resources.
And if we could move to the next
slide.
I'm gonna give again just some
brief thirty thousand foot
updates on Texas The New Mexico
a number of agency staff
including at the highest levels
including Mr Schmidt Petersen
has devoted an enormous amount
of time to supporting New
Mexico's case in Texas New
Mexico we have seen positive
results from that involvement
already as I'm going to be going
through here would you go to the
next slide.
So.
The parties last year filed
summary judgment motions on a
broad range of issues and on may
twenty first the special master
in charge of the proceedings
who'd been appointed by the US
Supreme Court ruled on pre trial
summary judgment motions those
rulings were on balance quite
favorable to New Mexico and
again we'll go into the details
we need to with the AG's office
explaining these and executive
session but in general we got it
rulings one that New Mexico has
a contact apportionment below
elephant Butte and we also got a
ruling that New Mexico the
sovereign.
Has control over water within
New Mexico's borders so long
that it is a need to students to
neighboring states under the
compact those were really hard
fought issues that they were
really important for us to get
positive results on and those
really referring the posture of
the case in our favor because if
we have a contact apportionment
we can be damaged by Texas and
so we're really in a in a much
better position here to obtain a
good result the trial began in
Texas The New Mexico in
September of this year with both
fact in historical witnesses so
Mister Schmidt Petersen was one
of New Mexicos fact witnesses we
had a number of others of those
officials in in our agency as
well as a number of farmers in
southern New Mexico who gave
very compelling testimony about
the real world effects of of
what's been going on on them and
we believe that the the the
factors to money what well for
us the the fact that we're
hoping to establish we think we
got a good clean record on the
second phase of the trial is
going to be the expert of phase
so the modelers and the experts
saying exactly who's been harmed
in how much water's been going
where and that was scheduled to
begin next I'm sorry in about
six weeks and on March
fourteenth but if we can go to
the next slide
We have moved I think to the
thirty mediator in the case late
at the end of last year.
We went to we we sent a team to
Minnesota to to go to a
mediation session with Texas in
the United States this mediation
sessions begin again in December
the extended into January in New
Mexico and we're not gonna go
into the details there are
significant confidentiality
concerns by the mediation
sessions have been positive so
far we are very long way away
from knowing if we're gonna be
able to settle the case but
there was enough promising
movement from Texas in the
United States that we had not
seen before that we agreed that
it was in our interests to
postpone for just about
Four five months the beginning
of the second phase of trial so
that our experts can focus on
doing the technical work
necessary to determine whether a
settlement would be appropriate
in this case
if we can go to the next slide.
And it just really briefly go
over the finances you know the
legislature is is really stepped
up in supporting New Mexico's
efforts to defend itself and
that in this litigation and it
hasn't been cheap we recognize
that but we we really do think
that we're seeing the results of
those investments we have an
additional appropriation request
in for US six million dollars in
the executive recommendation
I believe it's four million
dollars in the LFC
recommendation this is in
addition to a four million
dollar request on behalf of the
attorney general's office
industry requests were put
together in harmony R. six
million in their four million we
do need all of those all of that
money it's the majority of it is
again not to go to lawyers some
some will go to lawyers but most
of it is going to go to
technical experts and we really
think our experts are better
than Texas is and and that's a
big part of the reason why we've
been able to sort of shift the
dynamic in the case more in our
favor we are now faced with
we're trying to negotiate and
mediate in parallel to preparing
for trial so are our cost or not
going down at least in the
foreseeable future so we really
this is a critical part the
again the legislature has been
steadfast in its of port of this
litigation so far the AG's team
is doing a great job we're
standing shoulder to shoulder
with them we're seeing the
results and we would just like
to stay the course so with that
I'm ready to hand this over to
Mr Peterson thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you the thing to do so for
the committees reference we will
go to questions after Rolf
provides for FY any water issues
so we can all the questions to
that that be great Ralph you
have our our yes Mr chairman
members of the committee first
Mr Chairman just looking at the
time I have a separate
presentation that I can either
share or I believe Mr dean has
it that we could put up on the
on the on the The presentation
here and my apologies it's my
fault for not giving it earlier
given some of the things that
that was talking about but my
first opportunity to work on it
was about five o'clock this
morning
And I.
How would you like me to proceed
and how many minutes Mr
chairman.
Ralph and I think at this point
depending on how quickly miss
dean can get the presentation on
the screen I don't mind giving
you you know a twenty to twenty
twenty five minutes to to
present in these waters are
super important now what I would
be remiss if we try to rescue
them and just try to be some
type of time frame.
Thank you Mr chairman my my
presentation is not duplicative
of the others that have been
presented so far okay so so are
we just gonna miss dean to put
up of the presentation for you.
Mr chairman we can do that
unless you do if you see my
screen I can.
Go forward from here hi you you
started sharing your screen but
I don't see anything on the
screen.
Hi.
Merry can you can you can you
see if you can accommodate this.
Yes Mr chairman and I I need to
definitely not sure at.
we will share presentation.
Having internet issues is
whenever I try to share.
Okay.
There you go there you go that's
the NBA's though.
Yes they are as well no no Sir
it is not.
Well merry's doing this I want
to give a
as with the chase into Mr Romero
and Daniel for for your
presentations really appreciate
your insight and and that smart
way in doing it knowing that we
have a about five members of the
LESC of the house Appropriations
on this committee for for giving
us such as a dire need and
snapshot of your need for
additional budgets I know that
we have to talk about supporting
water in this state and when we
do so with with our minds and
and New Hope and in our hopes
but when it comes on the funding
it needs to be.
Our aggressive and step a little
bit more so appreciate that I
think it's a what well received
here and so looks like we see it
Ralph your present.
Thank you Mr chairman
Very happy to speak with the
committee this morning and
wanted to talk specifically
about activities that the
Interstate Stream Commission is
undertaking across New Mexico
and also wanted to remind the
the committee that for the
Interstate Stream Commission of
which I'm the director pointed
by the governor in June of two
thousand nineteen I report
directly to a nine member
commission appointed by the
governor and and and basically
all of the funding related
activities that the Interstate
Stream Commission engages in is
is is essentially of proposed to
that a commission and then based
on the direction of that
commission we move forward with
those and I I just want to
mention very quickly in that
regard who those members are for
for your information and so
first on that up mark Sanchez
who is the director of the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water utility authority is our
chair.
The C. ten mins from New Mexico
tech that I think the a number
of you know New Mexico bureau of
geology and mineral resources
our vice chair elected yesterday
John Romero Muniz role as acting
state engineer is acting
secretary of the ISC.
Erin bailout Ballack from PVC
deep is a commissioner a great
Carrasco from the lower Rio
Grande and then all of Garcia
from the acequia association we
have a three vacant positions
that we're seeking to for the
governor to fill in the next few
months and I I just want to
mention this and just because of
the the what I think is that New
Mexicans just tremendous
experience in water.
Ross the west we have Tania
Trujillo who was Senators
Interstate Stream commissioners
recently until a year ago and
she is now arguably in the top
water position for United States
department of interior as the
Assistant Secretary for water
and science to the department of
interior we have been Becker
from the Navajo Nation into you
a who was recently appointed by
Gavin Newsom to the California
EPA is a W. secretary over
Indian and border issues that
are there tribal and others and
then my Cayman who you all know
from the presentation just the
other day.
With regards to move to the next
slide.
So I think everybody here it is
a where I just wanted to point
out a couple of things because I
I know you have a few new
members but most of the of the
committee is well aware of this
you know we are semi arid to
desert region I wasn't aware
until I really started engaging
the Colorado River issues in the
southwest that in fact New
Mexico has the least amount of
surface water of any state in
the west this includes Utah and
Nevada about two million acre
feet of our surface water that
is available in our state in an
average year and and and
essentially that's less than
anybody else
of that surface water and
groundwater you know at which
I'll talk about in a minute on
the left hand side we give a
general overview of our water
uses you can see that you know
why this committee so important
in many ways about seventy five
to seventy seven percent of the
water put to beneficial use in
New Mexico is for irrigated
agriculture.
all the cities about ten percent
at six percent for livestock
commercial industrial power and
so on and seven is to
evaporation from lakes next
slide.
If we can move forward one more.
Thank you so you know given that
relatively small surface water
supply groundwater groundwater
aquifer is our very important
with the New Mexico they make up
a large portion of of water use
and that is Representative
Ezzell knows from her region she
has a world class artesian
aquifer in that system limestone
aquifer that is a major source
of supply and and and protection
of these aquifers is is very
important for New Mexico's
longevity out of water use next
slide.
Just that that big piece there.
You know so just talking a
little bit about the Interstate
Stream Commission and what we do
that's that's different from the
Office of the state engineer
from a set of statutes right
so within the commission we're
we're charged with investigating
protecting conserving and
developing the state's waters
in streams systems are charges
also to negotiate and administer
Interstate Stream compacts of
which there eight in New Mexico
for essentially all of these
basins but you see except for
the Texas Gulf basin there is a
interstate compact with another
state upstream or downstream we
oversee development of regional
water plans in the state wide
water plant and then we engage
in federal issues management
largely for Endangered Species
Act issues to do better for
endangered species but also
allow our water users to
continue their operations in
compliance with the Endangered
Species Act in their water right
permits
It really quickly there's a
large number of things that the
I. S. C. engages in that I don't
have time to talk about today
but I want to make you aware of
in the first one of those that I
think is near and dear to this
committee with a particularly
it's a new name with the acequia
piece in there the Interstate
Stream Commission has the charge
of of administering and
overseeing the state kick and
community infrastructure fund.
And we have a set of guidelines
associated with that act two
point five million a year of IAC
trust fund monies that can go to
that effort for planning design.
Construction of a safety and
community ditch projects and I
think I want to bring this up
because it's a critically
important element that goes to
capability and capacity to
implement funded projects from
state in New Mexico
my manager on this Jonathan
Martinez and his staff which is
really just one and a half
people are managing about a
hundred and seventy five
different contracts with the
state cues across the state
mainly in northern New Mexico
but across the state and seeking
to help them put those dollars
on the ground from that fund and
from Capitol from legislators
right we have about sixteen or
seventeen million dollars that
we're trying to put out and put
on the ground under that
program.
in looking at this over a period
of time these are volunteer
organizations many cases very
rural areas of the state
in order to go through the
process sees for utilizing state
funds audits being able to make
sure your by laws are in effect
understanding how to work with
engineers and so on to get a
project employees takes a lot of
time and effort my staff seek to
do that but it's very difficult
you know for two and a half
people to do that for a hundred
and seventy five so if we're
gonna get more capital projects
and do more these we need to
build capability and capacity
within agencies to do that and
R. C. I think our E. C. D. I. F.
guidelines permit provides a
really great example of how to
do that if we were funded for
more people would be able to do
that and I would just point out
that I that the LESC did not
provided additional of staff
funding for that program the
executive recommendation did my
understanding is from several
representatives that they are
better not on the finance
committee that they have
recognize that and they're
seeking to provide some of
their.
Signing up even recurring
funding to try to support that
effort I would just say to this
committee and others I think
that's going to be critical as
the infastructure Act money
comes into the state because
you're gonna need to find ways
to actually put that money on
the ground and have shovel ready
projects the capacity in the
local community annually needed
in the state agencies
Next slide.
I'm gonna spend just a few
minutes hundred fifty year water
planned that the governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham directed
us to coordinate in and now that
my Cayman is heavily involved in
this from our perspective of the
infrastructure in the policy
piece of it
Just very quickly on here the
overall guiding principles that
the governor asked us to look
like look at in development of
this plan which is really
looking at how is New Mexico's
water supply likely to change in
the next fifty years is to look
at that and and and and have
three great guiding principles
stewardship in smart water
management which for a number of
you you know how to do that
we're seeking to learn from you
sustainability in our systems
and equity and in order to do
this we we haven't received
funding from the legislature for
this we've made a number of
requests over the last three
years
have the initially got some
support for staffing but then
lost that with the pandemic
and and even in this year LESC
has a has recommended a couple
of staff to help which is great
but no funding for contractual
support we had about three
hundred fifty thousand.
of that they were asking for
implementation and completion of
the plan that's not recommended
we think it's very important but
but nonetheless we're moving
forward and we were able to do
that is with our partners so I
really want to point out where
they are and how important they
are New Mexico bureau of geology
and mineral resources pulled
together a group of scientists
New Mexico research experts in
water to look at fifty years and
they did a wonderful job with
that although the results are
not ones that you really want to
spend a lot of time looking at
because of all mentioned that in
the in a moment Indian Affairs
Department the secretary
Trujillo and the tribal water
workgroup there with W.
secretary Padilla tremendous
help in this regard and bringing
really the tribal Pueblo of
framework forward New Mexico
water resources research
institute from their state wide
framework in water budget and
their annual conference the US
army corps of engineers who we
cost shared with and then the
New Mexico water dialogue who
just had a annual meeting with
lot of really valuable input on
recommendations next slide.
So here's part of the bottom
line message this graphic
depicts actual average
temperature and precipitation in
New Mexico since nineteen thirty
to two thousand and twenty and
its statewide average is here
the temperature is in the red
the precipitation is in the blue
and just very quickly if you
look at this the in the blue the
the blue lines that the kind of
straight lines across there are
these ten year approximate
average differences in in
precipitation and you can see
overall it's relatively flat
with very ability and it
for different web time periods
in dry periods on the other hand
if you look above that and you
look at temperature you know
from that nineteen thirty period
to about nineteen ninety same
type of relationship was
occurring in New Mexico in that
regard but since nineteen ninety
four actual measured
temperatures average across the
state we see a continuing
increase in temperature and as I
think all of you know has a
significant impact on water
and I'll in the next slide.
I just that impact in water
we're ready seeing today we hear
this from farmers and ranchers
and water users across the state
right the same amount of water
is not going as far we know that
and that is because more water
evaporates or transpires through
plants.
Under the warmer climate than a
cooler climate.
In addition when we look at
projections of future
temperature change in New Mexico
this graphic is up and annual
average simulated
assessment of temperature in New
Mexico in the change
through twenty forty to twenty
seventies sensually so what it
shows is continuing increases in
temperature and I pointed out to
people before that that if you
go to the northwest corner of
the state well that's where the
highest expected increase the
temperature is about six degrees
or so but in reality the entire
state should expect an increase
in temperature another five
degrees.
That means even less water will
be available if the
precipitation remains the same
we'll have variability in
precipitation will get warmer
winter time periods will have
dry time periods but each of
those will have less water
supply available to them perhaps
as much detail as twenty five
percent and that is tremendously
significant and and and
difficult number to deal with
next slide.
You know before well I'll stay
off that piece I would just say
we're working with Mr Hammond as
he presented to you the other
day and I don't want to repeat
that piece of pulling together
recommendations on
infrastructure governance and
policy research and then
operational activities that that
entities take today on the
ground pueblos tribes seeking as
other water users to put
together a list of
recommendations to the governor
and the legislature that we
carry through this July prepping
for the twenty twenty three
session.
I'm going quickly around the
state on a number of high
priority issues we're dealing
with that deal with climate
change let's start with the
Pecos river basin and I know of
at least several of the
representatives here know this
very well in fact better than I
do but on the Pecos river basin
at with the rate goes compact we
are now in a very good position
with the state of Texas for
compact deliveries we have a
credit in that basin of about a
hundred and sixty thousand acre
feet of water which is really
remarkable and and goes to the
implementation of something
called the two thousand three
pay go settlement agreement and
that we we really believe that
that Madam is our strongest tool
in supporting compliance with
the papers compact in the U. S.
Supreme Court decree.
It was developed collaboratively
by an ad hoc committee of water
users and throughout the basin
and includes the office of the
state engineer the IOC the PVA
CDC ID in the bureau of
reclamation next slide.
In that regard we're doing
really well when it comes to
Texas in Texas water deliveries
but as I think a lot of you know
with the extreme drought
extraordinary drop the John
Romero described not doing so
well with water supply for the
Carlsbad irrigation district and
as part of the settlement
agreements
in in exchange really for C. I.
D. and others hoping the state
with their deliveries at the
state line in this regard to
Texas there is a provision that
basically helps to increase the
supply for C. I. D. and and
that's represented in this slide
and and essentially B. I. S. C.
is charged with operating a set
of oil fields to help.
Crease the supply of C. IDE.
under dry conditions and fruit
prevent or reduce the likelihood
of a priority call this March
one date that you say in here
for the chart the target date is
a critically important one
because of on March one there's
fifty thousand acre feet of
supply volume available to to
see I do that a priority call
cannot go forward and and the I
just see this last year my staff
Frank Scott Hanna Riseley white
and others.
For almost twenty thousand acre
feet of water into Brantley
reservoir to help improve of the
C. I. D. supply next slide.
And is Representative in there
is L. does very well
you know here's where we're
doing it from you can see in the
middle of the slide the blue
bears Brantley reservoir the
yellow right above that seven
rivers well field is where our
meeting will feel this for this
Madam purpose and then we have
the lake Arthur will field up
above we pumped most of last
year we probably spent close to
two million dollars in doing
that it was all for C. I. D. and
C. ID supply and to reduce you
know the potential for that
priority call it wasn't
successful in doing that but in
this year we were in looking
forward to March one of this
year we're again in a situation
where we may not be at fifty
thousand acre feet of Brantley
and as a result of my staff up
open the lake Arthur well field
last week or two weeks ago and
have begun pumping the seven
rivers will fill the gap.
I'll point out here the LFC and
LESC and the House
appropriations and finance
committee has a appropriated
about a two million dollar
special appropriation to the icy
that can help with that very
grateful for that because we'll
definitely need it next slide.
for the Rio Grande basin.
My came and talked a lot about
this Mr chairman and it to the
extent that up we might have
time later on I don't know if I
want to repeat it I can move
through this just given the time
based on.
Up your direction.
One to four but just keep in
mind that I'd like to wrap up in
about five to ten minutes with
you.
Mr Chairman all right let's so
this for the Rio Grande basin we
have the Rio Grande compact.
That brought that up.
In the lower portion of the
slide I would just remarked that
the New Mexico has known and has
a specific delivery out
obligation under the Rio Grande
compact to also do damn and we
have managed for that in parts
this presentation are all about
that today but we know from of
the special master's ruling in
may.
you know the positive piece that
that brought up about some you
know we we we we have an
apportionment in the lower rate
grant that's New Mexico's
apportionment not Texas is part
instrument not compact taxes New
Mexico's apportionment that
really means we have another
it's a very good thing but it
also means will have a specific
deliveries and activities we
need to do in the lower rate
Grandin will need to prepare for
that as we go forward I don't
think we have a really good
handle of what all that will
look like going forward but it's
something will likely bring for
this summer next slide.
I just want to talk a little bit
about the the delivery by New
Mexico or deliveries by New
Mexico into hello from the
reservoir over time and this
graphic depicts.
The accumulated deliveries like
a running average of New
Mexico's deliveries Intel from
Butte reservoir in our
compliance goes from nineteen
forty to two thousand and twenty
and I just want to remark that
this red line which is a
negative two hundred thousand
number
different from the papers
compact represents one we're in
compliance with our deliveries
telephone do it or not and what
you can see on here is that
really since about nineteen
sixty eight New Mexico has been
in compliance with its delivery
obligations to all from the
reservoir under the compact
currently we well with my in
twenty twenty one we had a
what's called an accrued debit
about a hundred thousand acre
feet of water to elephant Butte
as Mike mentioned the other day
that that Tuesday that is going
to decrease more we will drop to
about a hundred twenty seven
thousand acre feet of accrued
debit
in this year we're still in
compliance but we are
approaching a point where that's
threatened under the Rio Grande
compact for its for our
deliveries and we need to do
something different and and new
things in the middle Rio Grande
in order to get this value
really above zero and that's
really important for the middle
Rio Grande Conservancy district
in particular because when New
Mexico it has added zero point
four you know greater in compact
compliance then of auto
reservoir operations are not
restricted by the compact and in
fact the same applies for Santa
Fe so in compliance with
deliveries but still in a
position where we can't really
easily operated a lot of them
and reservoir under these types
of conditions next slide.
you very quickly and I'll go
through this book I just want to
mention that in the middle Rio
Grande it is really important
for people to understand that
your gated agriculture is not
the largest consumption of water
in the middle re requests
the Basti and and open water
particularly reservoir
evaporation far exceed the
depletions by the crops of all
the farmland in the middle
valley or the impacts on the
river from groundwater pumping
by cities crops are estimated to
use around thirty five to thirty
seven percent of the water and
the urban areas the impact is
about five maybe seven percent
the rest is in the river or in
the reservoir and that drives a
lot of the work that the
Interstate Stream Commission
does and the reason we ask for
so much money from the
legislature.
Next slides.
Yep so number one we have to
maintain an open a river channel
three grand has a real tendency
to plug itself often not flow.
This is that a picture on one of
the air boats with our Louisiana
contractors you back in the far
back you can see an amphibious
excavator clearing and
settlement plug in the Rio
Grande down by Moscatel Apache
next slide.
We engage with the middle Rio
Grande Conservancy district and
other partners on a lot of
projects trying to maintain the
river channel this is one
project which I'm really proud
of it took us about fifteen
years to put in place.
Fifty five million dollars
mostly federal money eight
million dollars of state for
building an engineer levy that
protects the city of Sapporo and
by protecting Sapporo it also
allows the corps of engineers to
release more water upstream for
deliveries to often do these
things are tied together next
slide.
Keep the river flowing into
elephant Butte probably the
biggest project that we continue
to work on it to maintain well
we built eighteen miles of river
channel in the elephant Butte
reservoir as the reservoir
dropped from its high levels in
early two thousand this slide
you can just see the far
background a white line and that
would be the high water mark of
elephant Butte reservoir when it
was filled and you can see the
in figure is to be as excavators
here just creating our own river
channel and we have continued to
maintain that probably saves
more water in anyone here than
almost any other activity that
I'm aware of in New Mexico next
slide.
And one of the if you can wrap
up and in a couple minutes sure
okay Mr chairman I will
just habitat restoration we do
Mr Chairman let's go down to the
very and there's more slides
that can go out and I can talk
to you or others about it but if
we go down to just the second to
last slide I want to point one
thing out.
Keep on moving all the way down
to the.
Right here the slide so Mr
Chairman as you're aware and as
many of your members are aware
of water from the San Juan basin
supplies a significant amount of
water into the right requests
for the San Juan Chama projects
and that water is used by middle
Rio Grande Conservancy district
the water authority city of
Santa Fe Los Alamos.
House well below the Pojoaque to
valley pueblos okay Wingate and
hickory Apache nation.
that water supply is not
necessarily an assured water
supply if water issues on the
Colorado River
for state compact compliance
call and my staff and I in a
number of other parties
are actively engaged on the
Colorado River to protect the
Mexico's water supplies in that
situation.
Lake Powell it has drop
significantly there's concerns
that its ability to generate
power which is very important to
rural New Mexico because that's
where they get a lot of power
and is potentially threatens and
we're part of activities that
are trying to maintain that
elevation and New Mexico's
compliance I want to point out
to that just last week
our chairman signed a contract
with the hickory Apache nation
and TNC that would utilize a
portion of the hickory of
Apache nations water
for endangered species purposes
on the river between Navajo
reservoir and lake Powell and
also ultimately to help us with
compact compliance lot of
details to that piece but I
think it's a very critical first
step in protecting New Mexico
and New Mexicans from being
negatively affected by bigger
issues or other issues on the
Colorado River want to thank the
LFC and HSC for supporting that
half a million dollars a year
that goes to our families it is
critically important and will be
very valuable Mr Chairman all in
my presentation at that point.
Role thank you so much John
thank you thank you thank you
for your presentation this
morning.
Let's go to the the committee
for questions or comments on any
of the three percent this
morning before we move with that
Jeff Whitty and discussion on
agricultural issues that's going
to Representative Ezzell good
morning the floor is yours then.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I appreciate the information
that was given to us I did
receive the handouts from our
staff person Elizabeth and
I've been taking notes on them
so that's why I am requesting
these that we do have in our
position right now.
I appreciate Liz with getting
this done and I think merry for
getting them to her I'm gonna
start out with John Romero.
Mr Romero.
What should I call you acting
director.
Whatever.
Representative through
Representative the wrap program
water rights and act state
engineer so whatever you want.
Okay I'll just tell you the big
dog Mr Romero.
One thing I am going to point
out.
At the start of your.
You were talking about the hot
historical documents out of the
district to office there in
Travis county.
For that whole area my whole
contention with that is whenever
your predecessor.
The all these documents were
going to be leaving the Roswell
office to be transferred on to
digital or whatever the case may
be for public.
Use.
My Vigil contention there and I
was not the only one there was
many many many farmers down in
that area that we're opposed to
those documents even leaving the
building whenever the office of
the state engineer could go down
there to transfer all that
information because I know
there have been several people
that have come to me saying our
original documents were not
returned to that office so I
have a problem with that.
my and just because that's out
there okay it's out there now.
Mr Romero are you registered
engineer.
Yes I am I'm sorry about that Mr
chair of Representative al yes I
am okay thank you Mr chair and
Mr Romero how many other
engineers right now or in the
office of the state engineer.
Mr chair Paul Representative
Ezzell.
A licensed professional
engineers in the agency.
I don't have an exact number but
we we we have our down safety
engineers and money down safety
manager they are all licensed
professional engineers and we
have five of them this myself
six we have a few other
engineers scattered throughout
the agency might the hydrology
bureau manager the sun which of
pharmacy he's an engineer so I
would say my best estimate you
know not having taken an account
team would be about.
I'd say maybe.
Fifteen masks and professional
engineers in the agency.
Okay Mister Ramesh Mr chairman
Mr Romero whether we're talking
about office of the state
engineer and I'm going to stress
engineer on this.
These people that are coming up
through the ranks.
They have to print this for four
years is that correct before
they do right before they are
licensed in my understanding
that correctly.
Chairman T. Representative
Ezzell when somebody an
engineering graduate from a
university New Mexico state.
Are you in ma'am they they're
just a graduate engineer.
And if they want to sit to be a
professional engineers that for
the exam they have to get
experience under their belt
since usually about four years
of experience under a licensed
professional engineer so you
need that experience just to be
able to sit for the exam to to
ask the board of licensure to
sit for the exam so yes.
I've been asked by several
individuals to sign up for them
and myself when I was an
engineer.
A young engineer out of college
I ask we're state engineer on
Tom tourney turning to sign off
for me and he did as the person
that I was working under he was
the head of agencies so yes you
have to do that to be able to
set up a test.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this is very
important.
What Mr America just stated.
Thank you these.
To it engineers do have to work
under the guidelines under the
auspices I have a registered a
licensed engineer so Mister
chairman Mr Romero a chairman
Lente and Mr Romero.
These.
Engineers to to set are now
working in the office if they
are premises.
They will not be licensed unless
they are working on that under
the direction of a of a licensed
engineer that is heading up the
office of the state engineer I
want that clear to the
committee.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna leave that
one alone Mr Romero
You were talking about it's it's
taking right now six to eight
months for approval of
transfers.
Is this just due to the cannabis
to regulate the recreational
cannabis legislation that was
passed.
The last official session I
guess.
She chairman went to
Representative
Ezzell so right now the average
time for a regular application
just you know and and there's no
regular application they're
they're everyone's different
it's about six to eight months
to do the transfer that's based
on the complexity of the
application what kind of water
rights what kind of impairment
analysis and it's also based on
resources and what district
office some district offices
like in Roswell are very that
supply most active basins it is
next to Los crucis.
Office Ricky in Santa Fe office
so it depends on a lot of
factors but we're not even
including cannabis into that
equation right now we're really
starting to see those come in
and the questions come in and
what they need to do as far as
comparing their water rights in
the proper manner so I'm
thinking in the next few months
we're gonna start seeing those
applications come in for
cannabis alone will be added on
top of every other application
we have in our our backlog could
severely just increase in
exponentially because of all
these applications people wanted
to do something so that time
frame of bill if we don't get
the resources the time is been
just expand it that there's no
way to around it.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
and Mr Romero what about any
sort of emergency transfers
let's say that there is a farmer
that has run short of the three
year cycle is for I which is a
three year five year I've had
many numbers.
Yes on the five year accounting.
If they're running out of water
but for them to be able to
finish up their crop production
for that for the very end here.
What is the process what is the
protocol now for emergency
transfers and there's another
farmer that's willing to.
Leases the remainder of his
water in the five year cycle to
the so the farmer is that is
that happening in a timely
fashion with this other form
that's in dire need needs that
water now what is your office
doing to ensure that that is
happening.
Mr Chairman representative is
out we are seeing a lot of those
emergency they they happen a lot
towards the end of last year
because the end of the five year
County current at that time so
we had a lot of farmers that
were maybe and and little over
diversion so they needed to
provide water rights to transfer
in to make up for that over to
version so they will sometimes
they'll ask for a least short
term lease of those water rights
or emergency and those cases we
do what's a preliminary approval
will look at it to see what's
about water rights we'll see if
there's any impairment and if
there is not impairments since
about water rights will will
allow them to transfer it and if
it's an emergency or a lot of
these farmers have been leases.
And I don't get into all the
issues of leases but that is an
issue statewide so now we're
seeing a lot of emergencies and
if it's a true emergency we kind
of set it as a priority because
we know some farmers trying to
do something to save his farm.
What are grow crop or something
so those are priority.
And there's a reason why it's
emergency so we kind of move
those to the queue but it's got
to be a true emergency we can
yes you have some of individuals
calling everything register
because they want priority or
they wanna get it through
without protest so there's a lot
involved in their so.
Mr Chairman.
What I'm trying to stress right
here to the rest of the
committee that may not be aware
of this that emergency situation
does take precedent over just
normal transfers because in my
opinion this is only my opinion.
Of.
Most of these farmers out there
are going down a pretty tough
row and they have been for quite
some time and if they are
running short on water but that
can least water elsewhere.
It's imperative that it happens
in a timely fashion because
they're still having to pay back
their loans at the bank to pay
their suppliers to pay their
equipment dealers and especially
to pay their hired help if they
if they're lucky enough to even
find any higher to go so I just
wanted to point that out to the
committee Mr Merrill thank you
for your answers then these are
now
I would like to visit with Mr
Rolf Schmidt Petersen how are
you today well Representative
how are you I am good Mr
Chairman the first question I'd
like to ask Miss Peterson are
you an engineer.
Representative I am not I am up
water resource manager with a
science background that came
through New Mexico tech okay.
And Mr Peterson.
In the back of my mind and I
have I took really really
copious notes whenever for just
tell was in office and over the
past year many years that I've
been up here I've learned a lot
I've also learned how
detrimental not only.
Your.
Department as far as in office
of the state engineers goes
along with them.
It is very interesting to me to
find out how this water is used
throughout the state of New
Mexico and I do realize that our
culture does take up over
seventy percent of our water.
The said that Mr chairman and
members of the committee we all
still the.
And that's very very important
to me.
And if memory serves me right
now I have it written down I
found it in my notes as I was
going through my file cabinet
oil and gas only counts for one
third of one percent.
Of the water used it is a very
small amount and I do also want
to point out to the committee
that there has never been never
ever been water contamination
through oil and gas.
And you can check that out with
the.
Okay what is it the OCD.
So anyway.
As far as the army corps of
engineers came to and the.
The B. O. R. do you have a good
relationship with the army corps
of engineers and the bureau of
reclamation as.
Oh sorry excuse me
Representative Representative
please continue okay do you have
a good working relationship with
them as far as our endangered
species go.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell
Okay yeah I would say that with
the the US army corps of
engineers we we have a very
little involvement with them
from endangered species
standpoint.
at least on the Rio Grande
the the WildEarth guardians sued
the US army corps of engineers a
number of years ago over the
course of engineers discretion
and the corps of engineers one
in that regard saying they had
none so it Tom the Rio Grande
the court has limited
involvement
on the rate goes our engagement
on of ESA issues with
reclamation is pretty good for
the von conservation pilot up hi
point project in as well as the
cause but no shiner that is all
working I think very well on the
Rio Grande we are partners with
the bureau of reclamation and
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district on a
biological opinion
for the endangered silvery
minnow and we work
collaboratively on that to
maintain compliance with that
biological opinion because doing
so As those species but also
it stops the potential for big
fights between water users
endangered species okay.
Very good answer thank you for
all that information right there
and Mr chairman Mr Peterson
Many years ago the Interstate
Stream Commission this is for
the committee members were
buying up river right users from
for some or all the way down to
seven rivers and that's on the
thank you side.
And Mr chairman.
Members
Interstate Stream Commission is
in charge of water delivery to
so we can be in compliance
that's basically what it boils
down to the.
But what they were doing as far
as the land that they purchased
and even whenever they were
purchasing artesian water rights
to make our commitment to Texas
on the pay because that.
It was devastating to the other
farmers around there because
they are not good stewards of
the land they may know water but
they were not good stewards of
the land we change that for the
land could be separated from the
water rights they could not.
Use that land for agricultural
purposes or any other purposes
such as the subdivision and less
they retained part of the Water
Rights or less they transferred
the water rights in to build the
subdivisions and that has maybe
played a big difference.
If thank you.
The third generation of the
family wanted to maintain the
land of Grandaddy's land.
They could not afford to hold on
to it without.
Selling off the water right
especially to the Interstate
Stream Commission.
Whenever I'm talking about the
Interstate Stream Commission we
do have problems I'm glad to
know that we have that much of
a.
Overage credit to Texas that a
hundred and sixty thousand acre
feet.
Because right now because of the
Supreme Court ruling we cannot
pay taxes back in dollars it has
to be with water.
And believe you me every night
whenever I say my prayers and
every morning whenever I say my
prayers is god please let us
know economic Colorado.
The only way we're gonna be able
to fulfill that commitment is
for that water coming from
further upstream.
Get along to pay because in the
Rio Grande side of.
My other question as far as
elephant Butte goes.
I know that there has been
litigation in place Mr Chairman
and Mr Peterson.
Does control the gates at L. for
you right now I know that there
was a huge dispute whether Texas
could control them or New Mexico
could control that.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell the bureau of reclamation
is the entity that controls the
gates said elephant Butte
reservoir they also operate
could bio reservoir up by you
they coordinate with the the
irrigation districts downstream
New Mexico on the releases from
that location.
Okay I said of the remnant by of
my bad my bad right there.
So I know that those farmers
over on the Rio Grande side are
in dire straits as well.
And again.
Right now I am not buying into
the.
Global warming or.
Climate change.
We don't we in our capacity here
in the state of New Mexico we
cannot control everything that
goes on worldwide and until
other countries understand how
importance.
It is to.
Two seven about emissions that
type of stuff we do have a
problem.
Mr Chairman.
And and I'm I don't know if Mr
Romero wants to addresses or if
Mr Peterson wants to address
this.
There is a huge basin of water
ended so basically.
I've been hearing that Texas is
sticking their finger in our
water.
What are we doing to protect the
water under that order basin
down south.
John.
Well it's Mr Chairman
representative is L. we are
currently working to better
understand the the available
resource the possible resource
in that area at if you've been
down I'm sure you have into the
salt basin section there it
right at the state line if you
move south of the state line
into the Texas area you're in
kind of alluvial sands and
gravels and up more but a
productive offered there there
with a lot of your gated land on
the New Mexico side there is
some of that but we are also
have a big limestone aquifer in
there for seeking to evaluate
the that resource in more detail
we're doing that with the New
Mexico bureau of geology and
mineral resources and the bureau
of reclamation and then really
looking at the state the
potential in the cost of capital
and NM to move some of that
water actually the idea is
really towards the pay close.
We're currently evaluating that
potential as to
The this the Texas water use in
that area I'm aware that the
city of all Paso has purchased
to the many of the lands in the
Texas portion of that area and
they see that as you know back
up supply for the city of el
Paso long term if they were able
to build up up pipeline and
pumping stations from that area
John.
I was just going to add which is
that Ralph about we've seen some
change of ownership come into
the mail about Paso trying to
purchase what it purchased water
rides in the San basin.
Sorry but just jumping in
Representative chairman to.
Mr Chairman gentleman I do
appreciate those in for the the
statement you just gave us
concerning that's all basin down
there and I think it's.
Very important that we do study
that and make sure that our
water.
Is our water.
Is a simple as that.
And for those of those members
on the committee that may not
know this when they were talking
about acre feet of water there's
three hundred and twenty five
thousand eight hundred fifty one
gallons in nature for water.
That sounds like an awful lot
the.
It's really not it's really not
Mr chairman thank you for
allowing me to ask these
questions to me they're very
pertinent to the entire state I
appreciate through the responses
gentleman.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
let's go to Representative brown
Representative brown for your
amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman I am
curious to get a little more
information about the Texas
versus New Mexico and Colorado
dispute and so couple questions
for acting state engineer Romero
Mr chairman Mr Romero so we've
heard that in may the special
master rules on some pre trial
motions and it says here in your
presentation I would be told us
that some of the ruling was in
New Mexico's favor according
court underlying issues and so
if you could elaborate on that
just a little bit I think you
mention two aspects when was
compact portion meant and the
other was New Mexican truck New
Mexico control over New Mexico
water but I want a little more
information if you don't mind Mr
Chairman.
So Mr Chairman representative
brown I I prefer for napped or
Ralph to answer that question
and that's okay at manta you
still on.
Yes Mr chairman I will I will
provide a little more
information and
Representative members of the
committee if if you want to have
a more in depth conversation
about this I do think that the
attorney general's litigation
team would be able to find the
most information we don't want
to get ahead there but the the
issues that we wanted to
highlight in that may ruling
where what you what you
identified and they're really
critical for several reasons
first
there was an assertion by the
other by Texas in the United
States that New Mexico has no
right to any water below
elephant Butte and that the only
source of right for anybody New
Mexico to have any water below
elephant Butte was the contract
that
you know the E. D. I. D. and
farmers had with with that
you're reclamation that that was
rejected and the court ruled
that New Mexico does have a
right to water below ocean view
and it it provided some
preliminary condors about the
quantification of that right
which is consistent with our
theory of the case but didn't
make any for rulings there the
importance there is we have
alleged the Texas in the United
States through various actions
that will go through all the
details have impaired the
ability of New Mexico to receive
it's contact apportionment
particularly since two thousand
the with changes in operation of
of the project New Mexico
farmers have been receiving far
less water under the
It's far less water from the
releases and will as we've been
harms and if we didn't have an
apportionment there'd be no
grounds for saying would be hard
and so that is that is one of
the most critical reasons why
that issue going in New Mexico's
favor was was significant
as for the the second issue
this really has to do with
whether New Mexico whether New
Mexico and allow New Mexico's
water users to change water rigs
to develop water right to
transfer water rights without
undue interference from say
Texas or particularly in this
case the United States
just.
Ensuring that New Mexico's rules
governing water rights apply to
water rights in the lower Rio
Grande that's that's an
important principle it to
provide certainty for our for
our farmers the you know these
are property rights that they
own and it enables us to know
that that it.
Do we can continue to administer
the Water Rights pursued to New
Mexico's laws that was that was
challenged by the United States
and that was rejected in a lead
role is been very involved
elaborate on that this will Mr
chairman if you'll.
Thank you thank you Mr Chairman
representative at and that also
I I just wanted to add I think
you have another piece that I I
found to be very valuable from
this may ruling of the special
master relates to the United
States and and its claims
because originally in this
action you know the state of
Texas sued New Mexico making up
several claims that now has a
really described and then they
were joined by the United States
and
that's difficult to.
Situation to take on legally and
otherwise and I would I just
want to say that the attorney
general's office and again in
Montgomery and Andrews is Jeff
Wexler have done I think a
excellent job for the state in
New Mexico because we are in a
better position now the United
States if if you can believe
this at our initially said.
Yeah nobody in the lower Rio
Grande can pump any groundwater.
Hello without a contract with
the United States and you know
that situation if it moves
forward would have been you know
I think devastating for New
Mexico.
and and I won't go into the
details of the the mediation or
discussion but I think that's
largely off the table now and
those are huge wins for the
state in New Mexico and for our
citizens.
And happy to talk more in closed
session absolutely.
Thank you very much I appreciate
the details on that I know you
you can only say so much
probably about the mediation
process going on but Mr chairman
and gentleman another and I
don't know maybe you've already
answered this but there was
apparently here re framing a
posture of the case and so and
this is in the favor of New
Mexico and so I it is that tied
to what you just told us there
were there some other elements
that may be a burden shifting
that occurred.
Okay so we have we cover that
now or is there more to say Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative the
the restraining of the faster
the basis is exactly what Mr
Schmidt Petersen just described
we're we're no longer be you
know on the defensive trying to
defend the right of New Mexicans
to continue to pump the ground
water rates under New Mexico law
now it's it's it's it's on a
completely different funding
where we are
well we are in litigation
asserting actual damages
by Texas communities against New
Mexico which was sort of
unthinkable in the litigation
began.
the Stiller certain damages
against us but at least what I
do we think we're we we have
And equal playing ground Senate
to fight on thanks and.
So Mister chairman I think you
know it's a at the beginning of
all this we have the impression
this was dated birth first
disquiet and I know that our
committee and the the
legislature decided we did need
to put more resources into this
to this lawsuit and this sounds
like it's it's paid dividends
for us so I really appreciate
all the effort all the work
that's gone into this and this
really is a.
One of those matters that they
can be the crux of so much at
all so I really really I'm happy
to hear that things are moving
in in the direction that we were
probably if hoping for but not
sure we could achieve
I thank everybody for the
presentations it's it's been
very informative this morning Mr
chair thank you so much yes
ma'am thank you miss brown
Representative brown excuse me
let's go to Representative
Zamora good morning
Representative says the more the
floor is yours Sir good morning
and thank you Mr chair and
I don't know who this question
should be directed to but what I
want to talk about a little bit
is the drought monitor.
Going through the slides in the
presentations everybody comes up
with the drought monitor and and
we see about.
How it changes and stuff but who
is actually in charge of the
drought monitor.
And then Mr chair maybe you can
help direct to who might answer
this question.
Mr chair Representative Zamora.
I.
I can give a little bit of
information maybe twelve might
have some information or that
but
I think that's group of
individuals I know are are a
tall just as involved with this
down in New Mexico state I'm not
sure who else is involved Ralph
do you have any but any other
knowledge of yes John Mr
Chairman Representative Zamora
really that comes out to from no
one.
on a regular basis I can't
remember the the actual timing
for it but it's developed you
know it nation wide right and
you we we show you the New
Mexico portion of that and as a
John Romero mentions that
drought monitor is developed in
coordination with a number of
parties across the state on a
frequent basis so it's the no it
goes to the weather service the
state climatologist that's out
there other parties weigh in
from you know department of ag
in other places to say here's
what's happening on the ground
and based upon all of that input
they shift these values to some
degree
in order to provide us that
representation that
representation for New Mexico
then gets tied in with the
United States.
And and thank you for the answer
Mr Chairman and Mr all so that's
exactly what I want the
committee to understand.
Is when we're talking about the
drought monitor.
Is the state of New Mexico has a
responsibility to their strength
climatologist.
Measure the rainfall in the
state and what's been happening
in the past is is known as no I
uses a lot are what they call
algorithms and and and no a
stance for national oceanic
weather Senator and so.
We as new Mexicans.
Need to understand that the
state needs to do a better job
measuring the rainfall.
So that no one can receive
information.
From the state of New Mexico
which will affect the drought
monitor.
When.
When I say effective drought
monitor.
What I mean by that is that it
will change the drought monitor
in a faster way in a more
accurate way.
So many times we see the drought
map the drought monitor map.
From Nova in the in the national
people and it's so.
Out of kilter with what's
actually happening on the
ground.
And and what that does is it
says that
maybe chairman Linda has had a
bunch of rain and is part of the
country any really hasn't
because we're not doing a good
job measuring the rainfall and I
believe.
That is we go into the future.
The state of New Mexico and
counting every drop of rain and
water that we have in the state
we need these deprivations
rainfall measurements so we can
have a accurate drop meant.
And and.
I believe just about everybody
knows in the legislature that
we've been pushing.
Or weather stations across is
the state of New Mexico.
That has to do.
With the drought monitor and if
the drought monitor.
Is lazy about getting kicked in
and get real time data.
The state of New Mexico loses
out on federal monies that would
come into the state which would
be new monies for the state of
New Mexico and this is this once
support the farmers.
And act people and ranchers of
the state.
In saying that.
I believe that the state water
engineer.
And everybody involved with that
with with the office.
Should be looking at holding the
state climatologist in the state
of New Mexico.
Holding them accountable for
accurate information that we can
use in the state.
I think that I think we we look
at water we always talk about
drought monitor this that the
other but then we're not really
holding anybody wrist
responsible for the for the
accuracy of the information and
and I think we need to work
together with the state water
engineer the state climatologist
and no up.
To get these these these numbers
more accurate more real time.
So that we can.
Do a better job managing waters
and in the state of New Mexico
and the thank you and the and we
look forward to be working with
you guys on that and in helping
you guys with whatever help you
need in the state.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative Zamora
any other questions or comments
from any member of our
committee.
At okay Representative Matthews
I saw your hand up real quick
Representative Matthews.
The floor is yours when you're
ready.
Receive.
Can you hear me now I'm not
seeming all I see is you but but
that that that is a beautiful
picture.
It was yours.
Okay I have a question regarding
the staffing and I think this is
for Mr Romero
And he was talking about the
lack of staff and it took two
questions first of all.
That is the lack of staff a lack
of applicants for the positions.
And the difficulty of finding
the applicants or is it a
funding issue of whether or not
we the agency has sufficient
money to hire the people needs
to hire.
Mr chair Representative Matthews
it's two fold.
It's
of it is us it it's resources
because we would have to be
careful that we don't overspend
out of our bank account we don't
hire too many people and then
come to the end of the fiscal
year we find out we've hired me
to meet people so that thing
without the percent vacancy rate
the help of twenty seven percent
as a way to hide it should be
maybe more and
ten maybe fifteen fifty might be
too high.
we are seeing some difficulties
in attracting people because of
what we pay they can go
somewhere else your your your
college graduates and you can
sometimes make money more money
at the Oil Field or doing
something else versus coming to
state government.
but expect more you know I I've
seen college grads say Hey I'm a
college grad I need to be making
fifty thousand or more a year so
that's part of it to what what
we pay on
in some areas of the state like
let's say I'll give an example
up in
R. Simone office down in the
Roswell office are outlined
offices.
We have a difficulty attracting
people that meet the minimum
Qualls that that is that they
have
a science education or an
engineering degree so it is
difficult.
Attracting individuals now if we
have the correct K. or the
budget to pay people maybe up
those salaries I think that
would take care of itself we've
been having difficulties in Los
crucis with the university there
I told my managers to a reach
out to New Mexico State
University to the placement
office to professors try to get
people from the university of
college grads.
But it was too it's it's just
too thing it's not just one
thing by itself I guess I hope I
answered your question.
Thank you yes you get and I
appreciate that my second
question is
And I actually probably we
should know the answer this but
I do know is who caps the
salaries who puts the limit on
what we can pay someone.
Mr Chairman Representative
Matthews.
So I was part of a for engineer
and I can tell you as far as the
engineering classification I was
part of a the classification
study it's been probably about
five years with CPO state
personnel office and was other
agencies like the Mexico highway
department and EMNRD and barley
Department we all have
individuals representing on that
committee.
So we did a study and in that
study to we felt that the
salaries needed to be raised
higher for certain types of
engineering so we went to the
whole process it is actually CPO
that does that with with with
feedback from agencies like our
agency that have engineers I
know that they've done one
recently for I believe IT
specialists and maybe even
attorneys and that's all that is
spoke so
with with feedback from the
agency so I guess that's that's
the answer.
And is.
Let's just stand for state
personnel office okay okay I
just wanna be sure I was thing
at the right one and I was.
Told by someone at.
On the LFC staff that the HSD
the state engineers office has
substantial money in trust funds
that it could use force hours.
Is that.
Acrid of or inaccurate or
something in between.
Mr Chairman I'll try to try to
answer that.
The Matthews.
Right now I think the the trust
funds there's a maybe twenty
thousand eighteen twenty
thousand available there but not
all of that money is available
for our agency all the
legislature appropriates a
certain amount our agencies.
And then that amount your speech
of your staff has a.
their position so to speak and
that position has a salary range
so so you have that salary range
discussed it stay within it.
And we best fit within the
budget that was given to us
whether it's the trust fund
General Fund we still have to
stick to it so regardless of the
source It is
we still have.
Those needs.
In the agency so.
I'm not sure I answer that but I
defer to Ralph is turned up as
well.
Yes Mr chairman Representative
Matthews and John I I just
wanted to add a little bit of
context relative to that trust
funds and there are two trust
funds that
The really they're they're
they're they're managing
overseen by
the Interstate Stream Commission
with Jeff pram who is on here to
from the agency overall one of
them's called the irrigation
works construction fund and
that's the major trust fund and
the other one is the improvement
of the Rio Grande income fund
these trust funds received
receive money really a largely
from different lands across the
state and oil and gas and those
come in as revenue to the state
land office and then a portion
of that comes over to the
Interstate Stream Commission
back did the funds themselves
were never originally meant to
pay for operations of the agency
O. S. C. I. S. C. but with the
economic downturn back in two
thousand and eight
at that point in time with the
very short general fund
that decision was made in really
direction from the legislature
to utilize these trust funds for
HSD purposes and over time that
has turned out to be a very
large fraction or out of the
available trust fund monies
which stands make some of those
money's not available for other
types of projects such as some
of those I showed you the rate
goes Madam pumping Rio Grande
let the work and so on we have
boy I think seven hundred
million dollars a backlog levee
work just in the middle Rio
Grande that there's no cost sure
to provide right that's what
those trust funds were
originally intended for as well
as you know your addition system
improvements throughout the
state
and and so what the agency is
sought to do over the last
several years in coordination
with the LFC and others is
reduce that dependency
Of the agency for operational
funding from the trust funds and
LFC supported that to some
degree this year about three
million dollars and we
appreciate that the executive
had closer to six million which
would potentially get us on
track with what the plan was in
the idea is funding agency from
general fund have those trust
funds be available to support
all of the other projects those
those trust funds were
originally intended to be
expended on and Jeff I don't
know if you have anything more
you want to add.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
The I would just clarify I
believe because dollars are
often expressed in thousands I
think
it was stated as eighteen
thousand dollars it's a little
over eighteen million dollars
currently is the starting point
for the the fund in FY twenty
two thank you addition works
construction fund the larger of
the two funds.
Thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I I'm asking these
questions because of this issue
about salary caps and lack of
funding is impacting not just
these agencies Richard critical
agencies but also broadband and
a number of other areas in the
state and.
I'm I'm trying to get a handle
on what's holding us back in
being able to pay the salaries
we need to hire
to hire and keep our agencies at
full capacity with qualified
people I don't mean to suggest
that the people there now are
not qualified.
Please send me emails as I'm not
saying that but
And I'm I'm wondering if you all
have any suggestions for what
would be the best approach to
keep our salary limits are caps.
Up to date with the market and
with the demand for the skilled
and people that we need to run
many parts particularly these
special areas water broadband
and others
and I know you're not going to
dress broadband specifically but
I'm really looking for do we
need to require that CPO the do
updates much more regularly than
is it is happening now or is
there some other suggestion that
you would have for how we might
fix this which seems to be
recurring problem and recurring
in many different agencies in
addition to your on.
Well for John.
I'll go first Mr Mr Chairman
Representative Matthews I think
our CPO as far as engineering
and most of our positions in the
agency I think the bands okay
bands are good it's just what we
can offer to pay up due to the
available budget a lot of times
we pay mid mid.
Mid range of the budget of the
band and it's not competitive
with with but others to pay
other municipalities the private
industry so it in my opinion it
comes down to having the budget
it decreasing that of vacancy
rate should be down maybe at ten
percent so that we have the
budget to pay people specially
high performers to retain so we
don't lose them to.
Federal agencies or to.
I industry so it comes in my
opinion it comes down to having
that additional budget
decreasing that vacancy rate so
we can pay individuals in the
tract of Ralph go ahead.
Mr Chairman representative John
I I would agree with what the
general merit just sent out
although I'm from recent
experience with hiring in order
just to get somebody interested
in some of our jobs I'm having
to look at offering them one
point one five percent of the
mid point just to get qualified
applicants to be interested in
taking the job and that sets up
a really out you know kind of
difficult precedent with the
agency when you know we have
many people who have many years
of experience that aren't admit
point right because we haven't
we haven't had the funding to
pay on so I I think there's a
shift in these pay bands that
needs to happen that doesn't
require a large new
you don't assessment study it's
just a recognition of Hey this
the the market has changed
significantly so let's raise the
pay band that then that mid
point to reflect this and then
let's make sure the funding is
available in order to hire those
people and then retain them
I've lost a lot of people in the
last few years and I think you
all know you know the lack of
any raises in state government
of any size has resulted in a
number of people just saying I
don't need to go to Los Alamos
rating well Hey that's double
the salary that that they could
get here but I also just lost
other people to California a
number of other places just
because they easily can get on a
greater salary and potentially
more benefits to in the long run
that's just what we're facing so
more funding and then just
modestly the pay band instead of
mid point you know raise the mid
point to one point one of what
it is right now and I think that
would help us a lot.
Yeah.
Is German Representative
Matthews one thing that I would
just add is that
It's a multi stage process in
terms of creating is updated
salary bands PO as as you've
heard our agency because we have
so many lawyers so much so the
engineers and and water use
professionals and I. T. our
agency actually has the first
step which is a number of major
I would say of our employees are
covered outside of the general
class study which hasn't had as
much update but within those
special salary studies for
particular salary classes and
professions.
Those studies usually come out
on funded and the problem is
then you have to cannibalize
your existing agency budget to
then respond to the recognition
that you have certain salary cap
classifications that are
underpaid relative to the market
so when you see our vacancy rate
at about twenty percent what
that reflects is and our agency
is doing a good job of raising
trying to raise where we can and
with parity and everything else
and in mind we're trying to
raise our salaries to stay
competitive to get people closer
to mid point or so within the
new salary studies but the
dollars that we use to make
those increases are the dollars
that are available for for
across the board so there is a
disconnect between the new
salary studies Richard right and
and are are starting to update
and keep current some of the the
fields and professions but when
those studies come out there's
no funding it cannibalize our
budget raises are on funded they
vacancy rate to levels like that
twenty two percent that Mr
Romero.
Indicated.
Mr chairman at.
Analysts.
Membership Mr Romero Mr Graham
and Mr Mr often that's rob this
is first name.
thank you for the information
I'm really interested in how we
develop greater flexibility and
I guess what I'm hearing each of
you say is that it's more of a
funding problem.
Then it is a structural problem
in the pay scales in it is that
is that accurate so that is
really gets back to the budget
committees.
See them agree nodding their
head.
member Matthews that's exactly
right what I tell my managers is
it doesn't matter so much how
many FTE.
Are included in an
organizational list it used to
be that the FTEs are included in
statute now they're they're kind
of in the background but when we
tell you how many employees we
have and I have to inform
managers it's not how many
positions we think we have it's
how many dollars we have to fill
the positions that we think we
have right now that's one of the
major thresholds is just.
You know obviously were having
some short term challenges like
all other agencies with the
pandemic it's a double whammy of
the pandemic or maybe a triple I
don't know how many elements to
talk about the the pandemic is
making it very hard to hire for
all kinds of industries and and
employers in the state
government we just happen to
have a demographic trend that's
pretty acute here as with other
places where we have a lot of
retirements at the high levels
when somebody has a senior level
person leaves the agency a
junior manager comes up someone
who isn't it Madam comes into
the chair and then we hire some
somebody at the lower levels you
know out of college or something
so sometimes one one vacancy
creates the need to do for
higher ends before you have you
know get back to normal or have
a net increase so right now it's
it's just really hard to use up
the the budget and get positions
filled up and down the chain we
for see that that'll be a short
term a relatively short term
channel challenge hopefully with
the long term channel at
challenges just that we have so
many positions that we would
never be able to fulfill based
on the amount of dollars we have
versus positions that are
expected of us to be able to
fulfill there's a mismatch
there.
Okay what and then Mr chairman
and
Members of the committee thank
you are for sharing that
information
Hopefully maybe our resources
our financial resources will
stabilize at some point you we
can do a better job of helping
you run your agencies with
adequate funding thank you thank
you Representative Matthews
let's uh move on to any other
questions or comments from other
members we do have a our time
running short on this topic.
Any other questions or comments
from other members.
If not one quick question
perhaps for for Mr Romero and
and and Rolf that's hold on to
your question or comment at this
point in time regarding the
cannabis discussion we had
earlier who will be the police.
Regarding who is using the
domestic wells for for growing
cannabis who is that.
Mr chairman members of the
committee
So that will fall upon the HSD
any water usage illegal or over
usage over diversions well I
just now.
We don't have an the staff to be
up there police in this usually
somebody will complain we'll
hear about it from a neighbor
and they tell us that we go do
the investigation and you know
do the field work to find this
and make contact with the
alleged over user are illegal
user so it takes a lot of
resources but it'll be us and
we've already seen it it's
happening it's happening with
cannabis a lot of individuals
that we're doing medical I think
they can just jump into the
recreational and they were doing
something politician I've been
doing is in the domestic well
and that's going to so there
they submitted to work with
paperwork to our of the thank
you what should all just.
So I've I've been using as well
I can continue for recreation
and they're finding out that
they can't because.
They were doing something
illegal in the first place so
we're seeing a lot of that and
it's going to fall on us and it
takes a lot of resources to.
Police to enforce the new
compliance.
And that's what we're asking why
would be maybe if that oversee
can be added to that it that
Fund in this bill that that the
cleanup that we were left off of
so that's why I brought it up.
Mr Romero thank you Ralph thank
you Mr Gramm and then you know
thank you for your presentation
this morning for your questions
and your answers we really
appreciate you and we're here to
help support you with with
policy obviously are you
speaking to a large constituency
of the house Appropriations
Committee as well when you're in
this committee so we thank you
for plugging in your budgetary
needs as well but know that we
are here to support you and so
please feel free to reach out
and and again we thank you for
your time this morning have a
great day everyone you will.
A lot of if you can't stick
around as we hear from our
secretary of agriculture Mr Jeff
woody Mr way I see you on the
floor is yours Sir as I
mentioned it's ten forty two we
go on the floor at eleven thirty
so if you could please keep your
presentation between ten to
fifteen then that'll be with
some sufficient time for Q. NA I
would appreciate it Mr Stewart
secretary would excuse me the
floor here Sir all right thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee it's a pleasure to
be before you this morning if
merry has my A. R. points you
can load it if not we'll just
talk about it.
All Representative yet you sells
got it and so what Mr Chairman
can we keep her on mute this
morning.
We're not gonna answer that.
Thank you can you get the
presentation up and running.
So so while she's doing that let
me just begin as time is short
you when when the first slide
comes up you're going to see the
results and and I and I it's
it's great to follow John and
and Ralph in the presentations
the next slide please
because you know we talk about
water and water is what keeps me
up at night
Who and where we're at in the
state of New Mexico with our
water programs but the next
slide.
Do I change that are.
Sorry about that we're having a
little bit of an issue just a
moment okay well the the water
that's used in in silos one
graphic that you know
agriculture uses about seventy
percent water and and when I'm
talking to chambers of commerce
and others this point out that
agriculture only uses that water
to produce what we're eating on
on their plate and so in essence
it's the consumers that are
using the the water but after
culture New Mexico and and
twenty twenty which is the
latest.
That's the came out was a three
billion dollar enterprise and
we're we're in the in across the
nation we are tops in Chile
production there you go tops and
Chile production and we are
number two and the cons we
ranked fifth in the nation and
onions and that night the milk
production and cattle and calves
ranks fourteenth in the nation
next slide.
I want to start off isn't
challenges and that we go to the
next slide and and as we as we
start the challenges here's some
later some staff to came out in
the last quarter of twenty
twenty one as you can see our
dairy production in the in the
last quarter was down thirteen
and a half percent
Representative Ezzell and I've
had some discussions about that
in in in in what's going on in
Derry land our wheat winter
wheat production was down
sixteen percent
Hey production was down one
percent but the interesting note
Hey stored in New Mexico was up
fourteen percent you might ask
why it's easy to drop we're in a
pretty severe drought we've been
in a drought you saw the photos
that are the pictures are here
and there in the presentations
about the drought monitor and
this is all and in relation to
where we're going to be at with
the twenty twenty one stats come
out next year next slide please.
Here's a re hash of the of the
earlier slide that is something
that that we monitor at the
department every month and and
why I wanted to just talk about
this a little bit is that we're
the first Thursday of every
month I convene a meeting of the
emergency support function
number eleven which includes the
agencies involved in agriculture
the department of ag livestock
board extension service and all
of the ag organizations out
there we talk about where we're
at in the state as far as
emergency response goes this is
what I call leaning forward.
Next slide.
And we look at water levels with
the good drought if we're in the
middle of a and you saw the
slider here about the the lake
levels we go to the to the next
slide.
and we monitor the snow pack in
Representative Ezzell talked
about you know all she wants for
Christmas is snow in in Colorado
and this is what we look at this
kind of get a gauge of what
we're going to be in the spring
and the and the summer as you
can see the the blue and green
is kind of promising the yellow
on the brown in the red is not
so much and and we use this
information so that we can
prepare for wildfire season we
can prepare for other jobs to
make sure we have the ability to
to get our producers informed so
that they can be ready for any
purpose of my come through US
state next slide.
Another thing we look at is the
seasonal production outlook of
as you can see over the next
three months is not looking so
good
Below average for this for the
state the temperature outlooks
as little bit higher than
average next slide please.
So we use all this and and I'll
just and we can run through
these merry a pretty quick the
we look at the USDA programs and
make sure our producers know
what they can qualify for in the
event of a drought declaration
next slide.
And here here's another some
more those programs and next
slide please.
We participate in the southwest
drought learning network and and
that's the the network that
allows us to stay on top and and
to really look out ahead and
lean forward next slide please.
With the slides in for
Representative Zamora and when
you talk about the weather data
programs you can see this in the
current scenario right now is
that we've got a lot of data
gaps in the state of New Mexico
and I know there's some
legislation and from the from
the legislature to fund that
next slide and if that
legislation passes and we get
funding this is what you could
conceivably see through the
through the weather modification
or whether at
monitoring network and I think
it's gonna be really important
because as as that
Representative Zamora pointed
out these are programs and and
monitoring systems that we need
to make sure we qualify for all
of the federal programs that are
available to agricultural
producers next slide please.
When we talk about some other
challenges in agriculture I
can't leave without talking
about labor labor is probably
the number one thing that only
Representative Matthews with our
state agencies in hiring people
but getting crops out of the
field getting Derry's the
milking done two or three times
a day
There's just not a lot of people
anymore that want to do that
kind of work and I think it is
as we're in a transformation I
called the transformation of
agriculture we're gonna have to
be looking at more mechanization
down the road and it's not just
a labor issue in the United
States when I travel to other
countries including Mexico
including Guatemala including
parts of Asia we're doing our
our international marketing
trips.
The number one thing the
producers tell me and and
process or tell me these other
countries is labor labor labor
there just isn't a lot of labor
for agriculture supply chain has
been a problem using that in
specially in the beef industry
we're some of the big plants
went down and it caused a backup
that we're still not over rural
veterinarians is a is an area
we've got to pay attention to
and
you know they get the
legislature funded a couple
years ago a program through our
department we work with we pass
that through the college of
agriculture here but it's it's
for to get but Marion's in a
partnership with Texas Tech
University that programs up and
running now but it I was talking
or extensions that the other day
and and I it's a very promising
because these are veterinarians
will be trained practitioners to
be able to work out the rural
areas and they're going to be in
partnership with some of the
existing that clinics around the
state of New Mexico
another troubling is part of a
role that Erin's representative
Lente is is our extension that
did it be quality assurance
program with the pueblos I think
last month and there wasn't a
veterinarian available to sign
off on the producers the key
rate plans and that's something
he's got a he's got a plan and
we may be using with you about
some opportunities over the next
year to to see if we can get
some veterinarians dedicated to
our tribes nations and pueblos
and cybersecurity something
keeps me up at night when when
you think about all the entry
points of agriculture we have
twenty seven thousand twenty
four thousand seven R. funds
state of New Mexico you can see
it right here on my shoulders.
Every one of them has multiple
points of entry to the internet
every one of them is vulnerable
to cyber security attacks some
may not be as sophisticated as a
as a dairy or a or a meat
processing facility.
But it just as much people can
get into the bank accounts we
have got to figure out as a
nation especially as we expand
broadband and get more
sophisticated with this we've
got to figure out the
cybersecurity and the button so
that's something that that's
near and dear to my heart that
we keep working on when you
think about the average age of
our producers sixty point five
were signaled the state in the
nation there's a lot of
opportunities for
vulnerabilities there and and
it's not and I don't mean to
just say it's with our our older
producers it's just that they
haven't had the training like
some of our kids get these days
I'm I'm in that category with
the lack of training and I work
for state department of
agriculture who is a very good
cybersecurity program with in
our department next slide.
We talk about some opportunities
I don't want to be negative in
this conversation next slide
please when you when you think
about when I was appointed back
in two thousand and eleven to
sit in this chair and it's been
a great honor to to be here.
We're in a drought we are proud
and and I think the state
climatologist and state
engineers office a pointed out
that the period that we're in
now is been drier than the dust
bowl days but we haven't had the
severe decibel times like we did
back in the day and a lot of
that is due to the practices of
our of our producers programs
now that we're ramping up into
and through the the support of
the Legislature health it's all
program making our producers
better making are healthy our
soils Health your next slide.
So one of the projects that
we're funding because of the of
the and and we're partnering
with the Interstate Stream
Commission on this as we follow
lands is farmers are having to
lay out their some of their
lands because of the lack of
irrigation water we wanted to
know what the impact on those
would be for from temporary
following so we've got a program
a project we provide with the
health as well program of New
Mexico State University and it's
looking at those impacts and so
what you really want to do is
prepare folks for the future of
what's the best practices to do
before you have to follow so to
protect that soil next slide.
In front of the legislature's
part of the department finance
administration budget you've got
a there's a what we call the
hunger initiative for years I
have been saying we need to take
a comprehensive look at the food
and hunger policies and and the
programs in the state of New
Mexico because I don't think a
lot of people realize just how
many agencies are involved in
delivering food to.
Well who need it school systems
like cetera and and so this past
year the governor's office took
the lead and and and Kendall
Chavis is done a fantastic job
of of identifying and pulling
all that together we added a lot
it's like one point six billion
dollars of resources both
federal and state are put into
the food system so there's a
great opportunity here to to get
more of our farmers direct
marketing to this the school
systems and two others seniors
programs and and others who need
it through the food banks are or
other places and yes
Representative is that we
continue to push to get our
meeting in the school system
there's appropriate money in
this part of the program to help
do that next slide please.
Last year the legislature
appropriated some money to
department of agriculture and
this year the LFC recommended to
make it permanent to give us a a
a position to really die take a
deep dive into the meat supply
chain and and this is part of
the work that our staff person
has done he's done a great job
make is doing a great job out
there but he's identified the
places where people can take
their their livestock to get
processed in the state of New
Mexico a lot of these are small
and and that you can see the
purple ones are the ones that
are USDA inspected we've got to
grow that and we need more
across the state of New Mexico
to help with the supply chain
next slide.
Industries just want to throw in
there because I always get
questions no matter where I'm at
I always get questions about
what are we doing with the open
house going well you know that
we started off with a Big Bang
and in producers realize just
how labor intensive and how much
it took to to grow this crop
acreage outside is Gail back
quite a bit this last year but
we have revitalized greenhouse
nursery industry and we have
over thirteen million square
feet of greenhouse space being
dedicated to help production the
state of New Mexico next slide.
A few of the other things we do
at the department we continue to
do domestic marketing of of
agricultural products from New
Mexico all across the United
States and and in New Mexico as
part of a five dollar challenge
and other things you see some of
our ads on TV it's all about
connecting our producers to the
consumers next slide.
Even though the global pandemic
we haven't slowed down on the
international side we just
haven't traveled anywhere as
we've done these
virtual export seminars we've
done virtual inbound trade
missions and actually the folks
on the other countries love
these opportunities to get to
know our our producers you know
even virtually and and we've has
quite a bit of success there too
next slide.
And I'm gonna close out with
this is is it may may
seventeenth to the nineteenth I
invite everybody who wants to
comes out there registration is
now open after future in
educational institute it's a
it's a program we started
several years ago but it's a
it's a it's a across the
conference about opportunities
in production agriculture in the
state of New Mexico it's it's
mentors talking to folks who
want to be involved in the in
agriculture in the future we
target the twenty to forty year
old but I can tell you that over
a third of the people who've
come in the past have been over
forty that are looking to to
shift gears out of their current
work environment and get back to
the roots of agriculture so it's
been a great a conference and
highly successful with all the
information on our website at in
NBA next slide.
Mr Chairman you know as as I
wrap up you've heard me say this
before you know back many years
ago when I first presented and
and started working with the
house agriculture committee the
chairman was Representative at
Jex McSherry.
In any after a long conversation
my very first session the
legislature he told me he he he
said Sonny boy just remember
Callas are neither Democrats or
Republicans they just need Hey
let's go make a.
And that's always been the
mantra this committee it's never
been about the label of the
party or anything it's all a bit
it's always been about and I've
always appreciated and your
leadership this it's that hasn't
changed it's always been about
the best thing for the state of
New Mexico and agriculture so
thank you and thanks to the
committee happy to answer any
questions secretary we thank you
so much for joining us this
morning and thank you for your
presentation when I open it up
to the committee members for
questions comments so that the
right hand I see the first one
Representative Ezzell.
The floor is.
You very much.
Jeff Whitty thank you for your
presentation today I found it
very informative I'm kind of
curious do you need to go to the
doctor you said that water keeps
you up at night do you need to
have your interior plumbing.
Question there.
Also want to thank you for
participating in the act bags
that we received day before
yesterday on the house floor and
it was pointed out to members of
the floor of the house and to
the members that were to the
people that were set up in the
gallery these are all products
that were.
Grown but New Mexico producers
and right now Mr chairman
members of the committee.
I was directly involved in
agriculture throughout our great
nation is now less than two
percent.
Scares me to death.
Mr Mr chairman and.
Secretary witty.
Because I do have this handout
but I do appreciate the more you
get this to.
Our committee.
Person so we could have it hands
on I like to go through and I
left to go back and be able to
read out of the.
Whenever you're talking about.
On this particular page the
twenty twenty one annual summary
you stated that the all cotton
production in New Mexico is
expected to be around sixty two
thousand bales of cotton.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
In my estimation.
At one time in New Mexico cotton
was king because it was drought
tolerant it didn't take that
much money prices were good.
That because due to the efforts
of them bye rement Department.
to cotton gins left in the state
of New Mexico to.
There is to this cotton is
shipped out of state to be G.
end.
So are you basing your numbers
Dr Wendy.
Secretary witty off of.
What is actually.
In here in the state of New
Mexico.
Or total numbers that our
farmers in New Mexico that do
grow cotton that are now having
to stay in their crop out of
state the process which is that
I'm curious.
Mr Chairman representative is
out those numbers come from
USDA's national ag statistics
service and those are based off
of former production numbers not
Jenny okay.
Okay.
That that that would really does
bother me because the
environment department has to do
so such tough standards on
cotton gins even though they
have been in compliance they
were dragging their feet so bad
during.
And Administration about fifteen
years ago.
That they could not stay in
business and to me that's
nothing but disgraceful.
Mr Chairman.
Secretary witty.
I am real real sorry that you
all have having to work.
With the cannabis industry.
You didn't receive any funding
you no funds there.
To enable you all to monitor
what is actually happening.
We have seen that happen with
the office of the state engineer
as you heard in the prior.
Discussion.
That we've all given it to the
environment department to once
again.
I I better be quite of that no
Mr chairman because they are not
doing a very good job as far as
anything goes and state of New
Mexico.
And if they would like to
discuss that with me in person I
will be glad this.
Mr Chairman.
I am involved in agriculture I
have been all my life my parents
were my grandparents were my
great grandparents were.
And it's getting tougher and
tougher for us to be able to
feed the world.
And Jeff Mitchell Mr chairman
secretary lady scope to Jeff I
apologize for that you have a
huge undertaking.
And you've got arrested on your
shoulders.
Appreciate all the child of
done.
Right now.
New Mexico's farmers and
ranchers are doing more
production.
With less resources than ever
before we are producing more
milk with fewer cal's than ever
before we are growing more beef.
And hopefully god will send more
rain to help all of us ranchers
out and now I am the better
farmer as opposed to chairman
Lente day.
But it is tougher and tougher we
don't have that anybody in the
next generation that is really
that a rent interested in
becoming.
Part of the act farming and
ranching industry.
Based on the ground very
important to get the job done in
New Mexico you just better hang
on and you better be aware of
for your face governments from
like I said before I'm really
sorry you've been burdened with
the task of working with him
recreational hemp growers.
Because you don't have the
resources to do whenever we can
even fund our experimental
farms.
I think it's a big disgrace over
what is happening Mr chairman
thank you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell whoever's
transcribing deceiving get
struck Representative Ezzell
first comment related to Mr
Secretary woody's plumbing of
some sort.
We'll go to the representative
of the more.
The floor is yours Sir.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Secretary waiting for
the work that you do.
And and thank you for.
Expanding a little bit on the
drought monitor and how
important it is to the state.
We we as farmers and ranchers
understand it.
Sometimes there's there's a
there's all kinds of people in
the legislature that that don't
understand why we keep harping
and pounding on this subject.
And the thank you for helping us
with that the one thing that I
haven't heard any mention of.
Mr chair Mr Secretary witty is a
what's going on with the P. foss
contaminations and how it's
affecting the dairies in in
eastern New Mexico can you kind
of.
Update us a little bit on that.
Chair Mister chairman
Representative Zamora.
Little bit of background we had
a dairy contaminated a couple
years ago with from P. files
from that Canada for space.
We have been working closely
with USDA FDA and EPA on on
that.
You a USDA recently as December
finally published are is rolling
out a new dairy indemnity
program as part of a broader
emergency declaration part of
their programs.
So now they're finalizing their
their program as as to they will
compensate the producer for the
cattle he's in the process of of
creating a plan to move move
those cattle out and then
hopefully we'll get that behind
us I'm on a the EPA I was
appointed by the administrator
of EPA several years ago and
this administrators asked me to
stay on the on their local
government by re council and
they asked me to chair the
healthy community subcommittee
our workgroup and our task is to
advise the administrator on on
how to deal with the P. I just a
plan.
So EPA is in the process of of
of.
Rolling out.
And to start.
Looking at the regulatory
framework around P. five.
And that's going to be important
for the state of New Mexico
because you know right now it's
only on thresholds it's not a
it's an advisory levels at some
point in time he is going to go
through the science of
determining what the real
impacts are to to folks and to
determine the regulatory
thresholds that they tell us
that the couple years out but
it's something that we're
working on the meantime we're
close with secretary Kenny and
and that we were making sure
that that that plume is not
spreading so far we're we're you
know just the environment
department's and steady contact
with the Air Force
so hopefully we'll get our arms
around that and push EPA FDA and
USDA to get all of these things
are in motion finalized so that
we can get this behind us.
And and thank you for that
answer and.
Mister chair Mister chair and
and and secretary Wendy I I have
drove by the site there that can
and on the south side of
economic.
And I was very disappointed to
see that all has that has been
done is is there's been some
containers moved into the house
of the base there to be able to
pump water into them.
And the from from outside the
base and and maybe we can.
Sometimes I get a tour or an
update from from DOD or
whoever's responsible for that
site.
And.
Have them explain to us why why
would they just have some some
storage containers to to maybe
holds water and one little
filter that doesn't look like
much from the rope.
I hear numbers of how much
money's been spent on the
cleanup.
And I guess it's all been
paperwork I don't I don't see.
Physically and through my eyes
from looking at the site that
there's much of anything being
done.
And I think that's sad for for
New Mexico I think it's sad for
our country.
I think it's sad from the
department of defense.
Not to attend.
To a such a serious issue.
And how it can affect people
across the country.
When we're when we're talking
about food supplies.
And I hope.
The.
U. S. secretary of agriculture
from the state of New Mexico are
staying on top of it and not let
this issue die and and and go
silent and and not.
Follow through with the claim
that.
Because.
It's it's very important not to
let these things happen and then
just let him die out and and.
And not attentive and and we can
learn from cleaning up as to
prevention also.
So I I think it's a very
important issue that it's it's
the the the talk and and and
everything about it has kind of
dwindled down I hope we don't
bundle down the efforts the the
follow through with the clean up
and and thank you for what you
do again and thank you for your
presentation thank you Charlie
and.
Thank you Representative Zamora
any other questions or comments
from the committee.
Seeing none security thank you
so much for joining us this
morning we we appreciate you we
appreciate your Department of
what you're trying to do for
agriculture in our state and if
there's anything that we can do
for you please do feel free to
call upon us any other any other
final comment to me Sir.
Mr chairman thank you it's
always a pleasure to work with
you and and the rest of the
committee and and the entire
legislature it's it's great you
guys did great so thank you for
all your support as well
absolutely thank you so much
again to committee members thank
you so much for a good meeting
this morning thank you to all of
our presenters this morning I
know that was a lot to take in
at one time a reminder again is
that next Tuesday because the
house appropriation of finance
committee will be meeting in the
morning as I still understand we
will not have a committee
meeting to allow them to have
their time to pass a budget so
we can have some money to do
things that we want to do for
our state so that being said
know the questions or comments
we will adjourn until probably
Thursday will up enough enough.
We'll see you all next time by.
