Zamora.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Here.
Madam chair blue here.
So we have a quorum thank you
everyone we'll go ahead and move
along and
Representative Figueroa house
joint resolution nine is there
anyone else you'd like for us to
promote to panelist.
Thank you madam chair yes we
have judge Robert Kennedy.
Judge if you would raise your
hand so they can find you and
pull you in.
We have their ballots.
And Jeremy Harris.
Okay great removing all of.
those experts along and you may
begin.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee.
I am honored to be before you
this morning to percent of bills
that I believe is important for
New Mexico.
Give you a little background on
how this came to be.
Because so recently this
committee has seen the citizens
redistricting act just last
session.
The origins both were similar.
The two thousand twenty is we
were facing redistricting again
there was a common consensus
across the state and a coalition
of groups.
That read that our process was
flawed we knew that.
Because I redistricting process.
Have been going to court and
spending millions of dollars in
court losing and being having
maps drawn by the courts in fact
this happened in two thousand
eleven it happened in two
thousand one it happened in the
nineteen nineties it's part of
New Mexico's history of
redistricting.
So there was a common consensus
that we needed to change and
improve this process some.
A coalition of as I said forty
different groups I'm from across
the state gather together and
hold together a task force.
That meant it for months in
twenty twenty we met weekly for
months and this was balanced
across the state it had four
representatives or senators and
had for Democrats intended for
Republicans but it also had
voting rights advocates and good
governance stakeholders
geographic representation
representation from native
Americans African Americans is
the Hispanic community.
This task force spent those
months learning about the
redistricting process pulling in
experts from across New Mexico
across the country to learn how
it's been working.
What the legalities involved.
What is the best way forward.
And the task force came up with
recommendations to bring to the
legislature.
Those recommendations.
We brought forward.
In the two thousand twenty one
session and led to our citizens
redistricting committee.
But one of the essential
recommendations we could not
bring forward at that time.
Because it required a
constitutional amendment.
So during those discussions many
legislators said well so
citizens redistricting changes
that needs to be in the
constitution.
And yes yes it does but we could
not get a constitutional
amendment before the people of
New Mexico in time to deal with
our twenty twenty one census
data and redistricting.
So we had to create a process
that would serve New Mexico in
twenty twenty one.
And now circle back to the issue
at hand.
H. proposes an independent
redistricting commission.
So it does address that
constitutional change.
This will protect us from
losing a process that we are
trying to improve.
At the whim of the future
ministration.
We need it protective.
And permanent in our
constitution.
Here to share information and
expertise we have.
Judge Kennedy was the co chair
of the twenty twenty New Mexico
redistricting task force.
It was former chief judge of the
New Mexico court of appeals and
has sat on every level of the
state courts.
Bizarre expert in from election
reformers Network and she has
broad expertise across how we
districting is done all across
the nation so we have
discussions about why do one
particular way.
She can talk to us about other
options that are used in other
places.
And we have Jeremy fares who is
the executive director of our
New Mexico state ethics
commission sh you may not know
that the state ethics commission
staffed Garcia Garcia the
citizens redistricting
committee.
Any assisted in writing that
final report it was a member of
the task force as well they came
up with the recommendations.
And I have to mention an expert
witness who is not here.
Justice Edward Chavez is unable
to join us today but he was an
integral partner in creating
this bill that you see before
you.
And I wanted to recognize his
efforts.
We also have a co sponsor on
your committee who might want to
say a few words at this point.
I'm thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so first and
I apologize to the committee I
could not get out of a ten
o'clock hearing why hearing I'm
gonna try to attend both so I
just wanna let the public in the
committee no we're volunteer
legislature so I start to
practice law
my position on the on an
independent redistricting
councils remain the same I want
I I'm and I just need to share
with you my kind of you of this
I think the notion that this is
going to bring people together
it's going to solve partisan
divides that kind of social
engineering I I think is a false
promise and I I I don't support
legislation for that reason.
as many of you know I see
lawyers for living on a legal
malpractice lawyer and in that
capacity I get to see lots of
conflicts and you know a in fact
it is an integral part of my
practice is to identify
conflicts of interest and I just
have a basically principled
objection to legislators
choosing their own districts as
being a conflict I do think it's
a conflict I think we order on
the house floor during the
discussion of the CRC's
recommendations on the house
maps and for that reason I
supported but I I have a strong
push back up of need it's gonna
make everything better in the
country I don't agree with that
I think every process is
political this one as well but
it solves what I think is a
principal problem that the
public identifies as a problem
is that we have a conflict and
it's for that reason I support
it and I'll turn it back over to
the chair and the prime sponsor
Representative Figueroa thank
you.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Eli and
that that is the core of it we
have an inherent conflict of
interest that the people of New
Mexico recognized and the people
of New Mexico want to see
changed.
This right joint resolution in
and of itself what establish an
independent redistricting
commission it puts this in front
of the voters of New Mexico so
that they themselves can make
that choice.
And at this time madam chair if
you bike I'd like to take you
through the bill this is an
appropriate time to do that or
do you want to do public
testimony first.
yeah that'll be fine
Representative go ahead and
explained the bill okay.
Thank you.
The new new language starts on
page two of the bill.
We're adding a new section of
the constitution.
To establish the by August
fifteenth we have.
A redistricting commission shall
be established on those years
that we have a census and we
have to do redistricting.
Section B..
Number of commissioners there
should be seven no more than
three at home should be at the
same party and then there are.
A detailed explanation of the
restrictions and prohibitions
approach and be a commissioner
this is a little more strict
than the citizens redistricting
act if you put them side by side
so no one no commissioner can
have changed party registration
within five years preceding
employment.
Cannot be or have been an
elected official within ten
years.
Shall not have been a can I
that.
Or campaign committee a
political action committee a
registered paid lobbyist for
five years preceding the
prohibitions are pretty strict
and we had a lot of debate in
the creation of this bill there
were some and I will count
myself among them who said no
elected official ever should
serve on this commission so we
found our way to this mid point
we welcome questions and
commentary on that section.
But the commissioners charge is
listed there on page three shall
be committed to conducting the
redistricting process and an
honest independent and impartial
fashion.
Section see it goes through the
process.
The state ethics commission.
Solicit solicit accept and
evaluate.
Applications.
The state ethics commission
shall select at least thirty
eight they could select more.
And they will make sure that
those are representative of the
various geographic regions of
the state I'm.
One one of the issues we saw
with our citizens redistricting
act is that we had folks
appointed by different bodies.
Senate pro tem house Majority
Leader minority leaders.
These different bodies making
appointments and these powers
don't necessarily communicate
with each other.
So as they made their
appointments we didn't
necessarily have the diversity.
In R. C. R. C. that we had
expected.
To make sure that we have that
kind of diversity in the
independent redistricting
commission the state ethics
commission will make sure they
are in the pool of nominees no
more than twelve will be from
the same political party that's
nine twenty three.
And they will give those
nominees that nominee last to
the legislature.
And that that point the Senate
pro tem and minority leader the
speaker of the house and
minority leader they can strike
names from that list.
To to applicants from there all
parties and together they can
they could strike names from.
the unaffiliated or minor party
applicants.
And then at that point the state
ethics commission appoints six.
From the remaining pool and they
are focused on that geographic
racial and gender balance among
the appointees.
Due to political parties with
largest number of registered
voters each and then two members
who are affiliated with other
political parties are
unaffiliated.
That makes the six.
And then from the remaining pool
the ethics commission shall
appoint the seventh the retired
District Court judge.
We're court judge or justice of
the Supreme Court to serve as
the chair.
So that is how the commission
would be created section.
Explains how Macon Caesar doubt
with section G. how
commissioners can be removed and
section eight.
Outlines the redistricting
principles that the commission
shall use.
There there I'm not sure I need
to take you through them in
great detail they're very close
to what the C. R. C. Hance.
And what we are currently doing
there are a couple of
differences.
Number nine to the extent
feasible the commission will
seek to preserve the corporate.
May seek to preserve the Koreans
existing districts.
That's a little different.
Section nine addresses public
comments.
In testimony.
Section J. the commission is
prohibited may not shall not use
or rely upon partners and data.
Or consider the boating
addresses of incumbents that's
also a difference.
Hey again.
Requiring public hearings
throughout the state.
Section is funding.
Either way we do this the
legislature has to fund it.
Is staffing.
So as well.
Section of PED is a little
different.
I'm gonna draw that to your
attention commissioner shall
disclose communication with
outside persons organizations.
And again there was much
discussion and the creation of
this bill about simply
prohibiting.
That kind of communication.
We settled on disclosure to make
sure it's a transparent process.
Q. is succession and when the
commission is closed closed its
work.
The details of the bill.
Probably more detail that he
wanted madam chair but we are
hoping with thorough discussion
in this committee we can end up
with the piece of legislation to
move forward because the people
of New Mexico deserve a better
process we need to save.
The millions of dollars were
losing in court cases and having
court star Max and we need to
remove the inherent conflict of
interest that we currently have.
With legislators drawing their
own districts.
And with that madam chair will
stand for questions.
Great thank you Representative
you said you're ready for
questions.
Yes we are great okay before we
go to questions let's open the
pull it to the public
if you like to raise your hand
and support of if you like to
raise your virtual hand in
support of how straight
resolution nine or in opposition
you have the opportunity to vote
now.
And we'll keep that open for
another fifteen seconds or so
and we'll take it
Comments from members of the
public that would like to speak
in support so be like to speak
in support go ahead and raise
your hand and we'll call on you.
Okay so we are closing the poll
and we have twenty four.
Folks in support and one in
opposition so ninety six percent
and support.
And I will first go to Robert.
Read again you are now and made
it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Alvarado in last
year I had the privilege of
serving on the New Mexico
citizens redistricting committee
as an independent voter an
appointee of the New Mexico
state ethics commission I stand
in full support of an amendment
to the New Mexico state
constitution creating an
independent redistricting
committee energy to vote for it
do passive house joint
resolution nine the reason New
Mexico citizen redistricting
committee was a huge success and
a shining example for have the
difficult task of drawing
legislative districts can be
done in an honest independent
and impartial way by New
Mexicans with different
political perspectives I think
Representative Figueroa and Eli
have submitted a great
resolution that retains all of
the successful elements of last
year's redistricting act while
also making some critical and
necessary improvements most
notably that the maps of the
independent redistricting
commission become binding rather
than being submitted for the
legislators consideration as
they were last year which is I
agree with the Sanchez is an
inherent conflict of interest
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Dick Mason.
You are now unmuted.
Okay.
Chair members the committee my
name is Dick Mason of chair the
action committee of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
I'm here to speak in strong
support HA are nine.
I want to thank this committee
regarding settlement is so and
on H. B. two eleven I gave into
this that led to the passage of
the twenty twenty one
redistricting act that was a
huge step forward for New Mexico
but now it's time to take the
next and final step forward to
creation of a truly independent
redistricting commission that
will once and for all women they
didn't hurt conflict of interest
as legislators developing their
own districts I provided you
with this league of women voters
advocacy statement that has been
developed over the fifty one
years of age has been advocating
for redistricting reform in
legislatures and the court rooms
the first paragraph of that
statement says it all the league
of women voters of New Mexico
believes that responsibility for
redistricting should be vested
in independent redistricting
commission with membership that
reflects the diversity of the
population.
Yeah and I'm does just that and
we're Judy given to do pass
thank you for the opportunity to
speak in for all that you do for
New Mexico.
Thank you Kathleen Burke you are
now in muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
I just would like to start out
by pointing out that again we
there were ninety six percent in
support of this measure today
and only four percent opposition
it's very good news for us I'm
Kathleen Burke I am the project
coordinator for fair districts
for New Mexico here today
representing fair districts and
the forty statewide
organizations who have signed up
with us to plead to you our
desire for improved unfair
redistricting process.
We Representative now fifty
thousand New Mexicans we are
project of the league of women
voters of New Mexico and funded
by the Thornburg foundation New
Mexico funder.
I will assert to you again today
and our work bears out that fair
districts is a non partisan
organization.
This is not a project attempting
social engineering of any sort.
But rather seeking justice and
fairness for the people and
voters of New Mexico and the
removal of the blatant conflict
of interest.
This is redistricting committee
created by the redistricting act
while a great step forward for
New Mexico broadest only halfway
as most of us experience during
the pretty grueling special
session and after.
Your dedication to moving New
Mexico forward and away from the
days of gerrymandering with
which we have been beset since
statehood are noted and
appreciated.
Sarah districts for New Mexico
takes this moment to remind you
that there is a better way.
Some might rightly say the CRC
was a half measure.
It was the progress we knew we
could achieve at the time given
a short time frame within which
to work and the pressing need
for workable reforms and twenty
twenty one.
The next logical provided steps
are to move on from.
Thank you I just want to remind
everyone that we haven't to
limit two minute limit so
if you can keep your comments to
to limit that would be great two
minutes Jeez okay Elaine seminal
you are now in muted.
Good morning chairman
representatives I'm a resident
of Santa Fe County and victim of
voter suppression our districts
were heavily gerrymandered in
twenty eleven and the nails
hammered in the coffin of
democracy in twenty twenty one
with partisan approval of Matt
do we will not be able to run a
candidate in a fair competitive
elections moving forward.
Neither will native Americans
nor Hispanic voters of
Bernalillo and I filed a
complaint with the DOJ to
request an investigation.
Because I didn't believe that we
could come to an independent
Legisla- piece of legislation we
need to take redistricting out
of the hands of incumbents and
restore our ability to have fair
competitive elections I support
the approval of this
redistricting for an independent
redistricting commission thank
you very much.
Thank you France's Gonzalez you
are now and made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the board and also community
members my name is Frances
Gonzalez I am from their New
Mexico rural southwest I'm also
sure co Apache and I wanted to
say just a couple things is of
the with the C. R. C. that we
had going on throughout the
state it was really important
that US tribal folks had a voice
the rural area had a voice I did
come from the CD two areas that
was gerrymandered before and now
it's a more of a fair laid for
us we're able to give input in
participate I'd like to see more
of of people from the south part
of CD to the C. R. C. I support
this legislation to become an
amendment for us voters to have
a voice to be able to vote for
something like this everybody's
already said everything else but
I just want to say I support a
do pass I just the committee
members for a do pass strongly
support this and we move forward
and I look forward to voting on
this as an amendment as a voter
thank you.
Thank you.
C. M. Sperber Committee clean
you are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Michael
Spurr Burke McQueen I'm a
resident of Rio Arriba County I
remember if we take our
democracy and the secretary of
the a lot of the progressive
caucus of the Democratic Party
of New Mexico.
Both of those organizations are
proud to have participated in
the fair districts for New
Mexico project of the league of
women voters and for the reasons
that have already been laid out
by the sponsors and other
commenters we stand in strong
support of this bill voters
should choose their legislators
not the other way around thank
you.
Thank you Sharon Berman you are
now and it.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair and committee members I'm
Sherin Berman and I am the civic
engagement and policy manager
for New Mexico First and local
nonprofit nonpartisan
organization that builds
consensus on critical issues
facing our state.
As Representative figure of it
figueroa noted
There was a task force that came
together in New Mexico
redistricting task force our
organization New Mexico first
organized and convene that task
force and as the representative
sponsor noted the task force
came up with a consensus based
platform of recommendations many
of which were included in the
redistricting act passed in the
twenty twenty one session.
And
Creep she pretty much said
everything I would have said and
I just wanted to and acknowledge
that the task force called for
this content consists
constitutional amendment and
that the rationale behind it was
that greater independence from
the legislature increases public
confidence in a fair open and
impartial process we've already
heard that there isn't always
confidence in that and we we
believe this is a very strong
Move toward a positive outcome
we ask that you support this
bill thank you very very much
for your time.
Thank you Jeff sales guy you are
now and muted.
Jeff you'll have to and you on
your end.
I'm sorry thank you.
Chair and the members of the
committee New Mexico needs a
relevant public participation
oversight to assure assure fair
and more transparent
redistricting process.
This can be achieved with
redistricting commission
independent legislature this is
fair and more transparent
process will help avoid the
expenditure of millions of
dollars in court costs is this
happened in the past between two
thousand one two thousand eleven
the redistricting cycles and up
in courts which costs the state
more than six million dollars.
Fourteen states have independent
redistricting commissions with
another for states considering
them and another six states have
some public participation
oversight because of the
national publicity about
gerrymandering and the Supreme
Court decision to leave
redistricting reform to the
states people are now more
engaged than ever in the
redistricting process and will
expected to be fair and
transparent more than ever it's
up to our state government here
in New Mexico to help ensure our
democratic process voters need
to choose their representatives
not the other way around.
I look forward to helping a
whole fleet for this to move
forward to establish an
opportunity for the citizens in
New Mexico to establish through
their vote statewide voter truly
independent redistricting
commission on the twenty twenty
two general election ballot
thank you very much.
Thank you at the necklace to
Dulu you are now and muted.
Good morning chairman committee
my name that the increased to do
on on the political director for
the Atlanta progressive caucus
and vice chair for the
environmental justice caucus and
we are in full support of this
This particular joint resolution
we would like to see us
protecting our democracy so
that.
Like trying to protect our
environmental rights to clean
air water and land we can be
safe when there is a change in
administration so we're not at
their women Marci so please vote
eight to pass to H. J. R. nine
thank you.
Thank you Deborah content you
are now and it.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee Dever Condit here
with that common cause New
Mexico first of all I'd like to
think representatives Figueroa
and and you live for bringing
this bill forward we are in
strong support of HDR nine the
recent creation of the citizens
redistricting committee was a
big step forward for creating
fair districts in New Mexico but
we also learned that there's
room for improvement the passage
of HJR nine will guarantee New
Mexicans maps that are being
created in the open transparent
way and that the those creating
the maps represent a diverse
divert Representative diversity
of New Mexico a common causes
also conducted a poll that
showed seventy percent of New
Mexicans surveyed wanted
independent redistricting
commission and we hope that you
all support this resolution
thank you.
Thank you John house you are now
and it it.
Good morning madam chair person
committee members and other
participants I'm a Santa Fe
County resident and I
represented both indivisible
Santa Fe and Representative us
New Mexico in the fair districts
New Mexico coalition.
the decennial process of
redistricting in many states
says for over a hundred years or
more been perverted politicize
to be benefit parties an
incumbent collected officials in
power at the expense of the
voters that practices we have
known as gerrymandering as we
all know here in New Mexico the
previous to legislative
redistricting efforts resulted
in lawsuits that cost New Mexico
taxpayers millions of dollars
though the citizens
redistricting commission improve
the process because it's
authority was non binding.
We the problem continues and so
here we go again.
With a new lawsuit the permanent
solution to this perennial and
democratic practice proposed by
this legislation has already
been adopted in fourteen states
both blue and red states it
appears to be the best and most
practical solution to this
problem.
American democracy is under
siege at present more so than at
any time since the civil war.
It is the legislature's duty to
combat this effort and eradicate
undemocratic practices wherever
it can I therefore strongly urge
the committee to issue a do pass
for age J. are not thank you.
Thank you current record you are
now and muted.
Sorry about that try again.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Kirk record
on the director of the through
advocacy ministry of New Mexico
with her advocacy also advocates
this morning on behalf The New
Mexico conference of churches
I'm here this morning to state
or strong support for HDR nine
we supported legislation last
session that created the CRC and
we follow the work of
redistricting task force over
the summer and fall of last year
we were specially pleased with
the open an honest process the
strong diversity participants in
cross partisan participation we
believe that a permanent C. R.
C. would make tremendous strides
in terms of equity fairness
transparency and confidence in
our state's redistricting
process I urged support for HDR
nine thank you for this
opportunity to speak to this
morning.
Thank you Paul Gibson you are
now and it.
Thank you on a wheel chair and
committee members my name is
Paul Gibson I am the co founder
of retake our democracy I want
to thank the bill's sponsors for
introducing this bill I'm it's
badly needed
anyone who was participants
observed the the special session
would concur that what happened
was these maps came from after a
very deliberate community based
process to come up with
nonpartisan maps the legislators
simply couldn't help but Tinker
on there so much self
preservation and party
preservation balked at the.
Even just a slight movement of a
barrel of a boundary R. a
district boundary they could not
resist the temptation to
negotiate the these changes and
that's just not the democratic
process and it also was so
device to the every every change
was challenged by the other
party saying that this was all
the participants.
Gerrymandering and this is an
opportunity to put to to remove
this from the legislative
process and and and make it
truly independent and that's
something that we badly need the
everybody has mentioned the
lawsuits and the.
And so forth and that's
something that we absolutely
need to avoid and could avoid by
having a commission do this on a
regular basis thank you very
much for your our time and we
but we strongly support to pass
on this mission on this bill.
Thank you.
Emily hard again you are now and
muted.
Good morning all I am a
relatively recent permanent
resident of New Mexico I support
this for all of the reasons
already stated and also because
in a time of national crisis
about Alexion legitimacy this
will add our hope for the future
of democracy both in New Mexico
but also in the United States
thank you.
Sharon Kunkel you are now and
it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
chairman cocoa of Albuquerque I
am executive director of the New
Mexico foundation for open
government notice fog for short
last year during the special
redistricting session I sent a
letter to lawmakers expressing
our concerns that proceedings
were taking place in close
fashion to the extent that an
independent redistricting
committee would prevent secrecy
in the redistricting process and
increase transparency and public
participation fog supports HDR
nine thank you.
Great thank you that concludes
the folks that would like to
speak and support are there
anyone is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
M. so please raise your hand.
Okay seeing then we will go to
the committee members
Representative Chasey.
All of the efforts here.
I want to say that I was very
impressed with the work of the
state Garcia and appreciated
having all that work done and
the hearings that were held in
the information that that
Committee provided to us as
legislators and I also.
Believe that everyone who's
advocating for page J. R. nine
is very principled and his or
her support for.
So
I wanted to point one technical
issue and that is that
Which.
They are there is.
That the
article four section three of
the constitution really
authorize the New Mexico
legislature to reapportioned its
numbers so there should perhaps
Senator tension to that article
inspection is this proceeds.
You about.
There's been so much talk on the
reason to do this for one of the
reasons is that we would not be
spending millions on lawsuits
does this close the courthouse
doors to those who don't
appreciate what has happened
with the redistricting.
Madam chair madam chair thank
you for an excellent question.
And the answer is no
Maps can be taken to court.
At any time an independent
redistricting commission will
not stop them from going to
court
What seems to be happening and
the data that we have in places
where there are independent
redistricting commissions that
are functioning is that the
court cases are often dismissed
are lost and therefore less
expensive you know the cost
isn't there so they're holding
up well.
And I don't know if either Mr
fares or Mr judge Kennedy would
like to add to that or if you
are satisfied Madam chair
representative madam chair I
could
one thing that you know I think
it needs to be pointed out is
that's not an academic question
R. in the last redistricting
process what we haven't talked
about is the C. R. C. could not
reach a consensus with the
tribal interests so the
legislature ended up having to
do that if that were to happen
are in a process in this country
it have to be in court
and that's a I mean that is I
have to say that is a concern
that I have because frankly the
problem with that it with the I
was the house chair of the house
maps frankly the biggest
decision that had to be made was
to work out a consensus with the
tribal interests Act and the
committee just ran out of time
it was their fault they just ran
out of time and that is
something that I want to point
out to the committee that caused
me concern and continues to
cause me concern but I do think
that's the kind of issue that
could end up in a court so what
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Figueroa for
letting the jump in there thanks
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative the land
that's an excellent point and
one of the issues with C. R. C.
versus an independent commission
is the independent commission as
a deadline a solid deadline by
wind maps must be done the C. R.
C. have a deadline by which
their map should be recommended
to the legislature but the
legislature still had the power
as we know to change them so
organizations and groups like
the tribal consensys knew there
was that later deadline and they
work right up until the very
last minute.
It to come to that consensus
The hope is that with the
deadline built into the
commission the whole state
understanding that is the
deadline that all groups and
organizations would pull
together prior to that deadline
probably work to the very last
minute that's what we do and get
it done.
But answer to.
Madam chair and madam chair the
question.
Yes things can still go to
court.
I guess what my my point on that
now turn Representative Figueroa
is that.
We had testimony from a number
of those in favor of this
constitutional amendment who
said they thought the
C. R. C. was a huge success and
frankly I did too I was very
pleased with their work but
that.
In the house of representatives
which one of the recommended
maps.
Exactly and simply overlaid the
historic.
Tribal.
Consensys.
On.
And if we had no role.
That could have happened and so.
I I I worry about the concept of
the binding.
I also worry about the fact that
in our.
Current structure.
Not necessarily a function in
our structure the legislature is
weak we have a very strong
executive we don't.
And then there's the judicial
branch which unfortunately
doesn't have as much power over
its budget as it should but.
The legislature's quite weak and
we are now entrusted with doing
redistricting and this takes it
away completely so.
I don't agree with the
characterization that we
couldn't resist tinkering what
we did is in the house is we
took the opportunity to.
Put in place the historic tribal
public agreements and I guess my
question for you
Representative Figueroa should
there be no partisan
consideration whatsoever from an
independent redistricting
commission.
Madam chair and representative.
Look for the page of the bill I
believe it sections H..
Page six item for work.
Nope sorry not item for.
Still looking but there is some
partisan data that has to be
considered in order to make sure
we are complying with federal
law and the voting rights act.
Okay I was I was kind of looking
to see about that because.
When I went.
Want to point out is that you
know I I've been through three
redistricting madam chair and
representative Ralph three would
district and sessions and
been around for the losses that
followed for the legislative
seats in
Both two thousand and one and
two thousand eleven so.
The two thousand eleven
redistricting.
There was an election in which
there was a change in leadership
in the house of representatives.
And.
I'm wondering.
So let's just say you have a
state that is sixty percent
democratic and forty percent.
Republican and just for the
right now I'm just not going to
talk about declined to state
just I know that's not part of
the that's certainly part of the
question but this is just for my
example but the maps are drawn
based on streets rivers county
lines.
And.
The performance of the districts
in the final not this binding is
actually forty sixty instead of
sixty forty so to me it seems
that.
Actual partisanship.
Should weigh in at some point
because you could end up it we
are not like Texas or North
Carolina where maps are so
clearly during the and these
maps that went to the
The and I think it was a
Princeton
experts yes there these were not
gerrymandered maps and yet
people are still saying we're we
are gerrymandering and frankly I
haven't seen it out because the
twenty fourteen the leadership
change in the house which is
what happens when voters.
Do their part actually it lacks
more people.
Their votes for democratic.
Cannons then Republican
candidates but because of the
lines the Republicans have the
majority in the house and was
not huge it wasn't like we're
talking about.
Years of thousands of those but
it was in the house.
So
I just want to point.
That.
There probably is a role for
partisan consideration at some
point because you don't want to
just in front as an actual
major.
Representative madam chair thank
you madam chair and thank you
madam chair a couple of points
page seven J. one is where there
is reference to partisan data so
I did it did find it and is
there and and as you say it
doesn't have to be considered to
a certain extent because we have
to make sure we are following
federal law.
But with respect to
the president gerrymandering
process project which I believe
you refer to the date that you
went Garcia Garcia maps and said
they hit the mark there was also
another further independent
evaluation of partisan data one
six different measures and also
set yes they hit the mark
The problem is we don't have the
evaluations of what we ended up
with there has been no the
Princeton gerrymandering project
project is I believe still
looking at it will be coming out
with a report on our maps but
because they were changed.
We don't have that data yet.
The goal of this constitutional
proposal is to elevate some of
the things that we accomplished
in the C. R. C. to the
constitution so that it is more
permanent and more protected and
that is extremely important with
respect to the to the tribal
consensus that came in after
that deadline we have to
remember that we're looking at
here that was strongly
influenced by our pandemic in
our time line was so so short
our our tribal nations had so
little time to confer
and yes that may happen again
please god no but.
We're building this
constitutional amendment on with
the time line that gives them
much more time to get that piece
of the job to.
Thank you so much Madam chair
representative figure on
increase your your answers to my
questions I already on.
I.
One.
I kind of hate to go from
feeling and my feeling is that
this was once a successful
effort and immediately changes
so with that madam chair I yield
the floor.
Thank you representative
Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Figueroa and
representative Ely for
presenting this
I to as a freshman was delighted
by the the the CRC process you
know it was my first time in
like Representative Chasey so I
I heard a lot of stories about
how difficult is going to be the
lawsuits and we're probably
gonna see that at some point
But for me it felt like a very
connected engaged process and I
I I thoroughly enjoyed being
part of that redistricting
process so I appreciate this
legislation in front of us today
I do have some questions around
it so a quite a few of them I I
hopefully hopefully won't take
too much time but I wanted to
know Madam chair representative
for that how many states have an
independent redistricting
committee.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative we have a to
fifteen states have a truly
independent with primary
responsibility for drawing maps
and I believe there are six more
that are have some kind of
advisory commission which is the
category we fall into now with
our currency Garcia statute and
then there are I believe I are
states that have a backup
Commission that comes into play
if the legislature doesn't get
the job done but I'm going to
ask Miss ballast to weigh in and
confirm that I am correctly
giving you that information.
Madam chair representative zero
that is correct that we tend to
think of the models of the
redistricting in our country
falling into three categories
one being the independent
commissions and they've there's
multiple strategies for those
the independent a advisory ones
like we have as one of our folks
that did public comment observed
some people think of those as
sort of the half happened some
folks negatively will call as a
half a loaf others will simply
say it's a partial measure it
gets us part way there and what
you all approved a year ago was
a strategy that got us part way
there through the advisory model
and then the third approach is
what New Mexico used to have and
what some states like Texas
still do which is a structure
that says that the redistricting
process is image is controlled
entirely by sitting politicians
so those are the three
categories we're presently in
the middle one and the
resolution before you recommends
that we follow that we adjust to
become a fully independent
commission pulling the that
political systems and more out
of the process.
Thank you madam chair missile us
I I appreciate that I'm how did
how did you arrive at that ten
year time frame of the ticket
for for the qualification if
you're an elected official or or
neglected of and anytime I want
I understand.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative well
that was heated heated argument
and strong feelings on all sides
and I will say that I I.
Come down on the probably more
conservative side on this and
then I would say no elected
officials ever should be doing
this
And there are folks that pointed
out that's that's a little
extreme.
Elected officials have a lot of
knowledge and if they're far
enough away from the process
they still have contributions to
make.
But it was it was serious debate
nurse concert.
Thank you madam chair
representative I I don't want to
open that can of worms again for
you and make you relive that
process on this committee I just
wanted to get a sense of of what
how you arrived at that is the
state ethics commission required
to nominate folks from each
other nominated candidates for
the commission from each county
I noticed that there were you
know at a minimum thirty eight.
Folks would be nominated.
On a county by county basis or
regional.
Madam chair representative that
is not county by county it is
geographically diverse that's
the language that you use.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
I'm I I read a memo from the
Brennan center for justice and
they they recommended that this
kind of redistricting committee
should be bigger than what's
recommended in in this
legislation your line to to
fifteen and and while I really
truly loved that this year C.
process I think
I think with you know with the
number of people that served
there it there was you know some
challenges and making sure that
all voices are heard it is there
a reason why we're you know not
making this bigger I'm sure
there's a reason why otherwise
it would be in the legislation
but I just relied like to use
your about why we're making this
a smaller commission as opposed
to one you know we're in a big
state we've got a lot of
geographic area a lot of drive
time and I I want to make sure
that we have the representation
on that committee that that we
need the commission that we
need.
Thank you madam chair
representative and I'd like Mr
Ferris to take a crack at this
question.
Madam chair and Representative
Ortez
you know I I'm I'm here really
just to to to speak about the
experience of the C. R. C. this
that this year C. operated.
Well I think with with seven
seven members I am aware that
that other states have larger
larger commissions in the one
one thing to keep in mind
perhaps as as you're thinking
about options for the the
creation of of this potential
agency is the the larger a
Commission grows in terms of
membership there certainly
benefits as as you mission with
respect to an increasing
representation and and and
diversity but redistricting just
as you all knows is extremely
technical it it involves the the
participation of of contractors
of experts of demographers of of
computer folks and there's I
think there's also a
countervailing concern that the
larger a commission grows the
more the more that the the folks
in the driver's seat are are
actually the the contractors and
so maybe that's the that's the
countervailing consideration to
think of thinking about the size
of of come of commissions like
like this so I just I just offer
that for for your your
consideration.
Thank you madam chair Mr Ferris
at.
Missiles would you like to also.
I I do have concerns madam chair
that that is too small we we
really need to think about how
we can make make that commission
you know as diverse as possible
I know I know that's one of the
conditions for for choosing for
choosing a candidate to
participate but I think that we
we didn't have the diversity
that we need on the CRC and and
I think that the process of
engaging community made the
comments and and the maps more
robust but it took a long time
to get there I think so and we
had and wasn't complete when we
got when we got those maps so
that's that's my that's my
biggest concern about this but I
I am grateful that you're
putting it forward to us and I
appreciate I appreciate it thank
you that's that's all me.
Thank you representative
Representative frame.
Thank you madam chair
I would like to go through a
little bit of this.
Madam chair and representative
figure or if we go to page three
we speak about.
These are potential
commissioners being registered
for our.
Of the you know for ten years.
On page three line twelve we say
though this could be I'm it can
be a commissioner after five
years and I'm wondering why
we're not using the ten year
standard.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
we're looking at that second
group it's kind of a sap
category.
And
many of the folks who've spoken
to S. and public testimony this
morning and those are all
lobbyist good government groups
are also lobbyist so they're
kind of a secondary group as
opposed to being elected
officials are related to elected
officials and in our currency
Garcia we didn't even have the
five year limitation so this was
strengthening aunt but trying
not to put it over the top in
prohibition there are a lot of
passion it folks
who are.
You might want to be part of
this work and we didn't want to
limit it too much for example
you notice in that category we
also have a candidate so
somebody who runs for office but
didn't win is not never held
office only has that five year
limitation as opposed to the ten
our elected officials.
Madam chair and.
Representative Figueroa thank
you for the answer but I think
if you're trying to make it
totally is and then you should
use a ten year for for all but
I'll move on to the next one
madam chair and representative
figure are so Page three line
seven teen we talked about the
ethics commissioners who.
For how or the ethics
commissioners are appointed or
elected.
Madam chair and representative
I'm I'm gonna have the executive
director of the New Mexico
ethics commission answer that.
Madam chair representative rain
have an answer that that the
governor appoints the chair of
the commission
currently there are four
legislatively appointed
commissioners said the the
leadership in both chambers in
both parties yes Representative
H. appoints a commission or so
that's the the speaker of the
house the Senate pro tem the
Senate majority of the Senate
minority floor leader and the
the this the house minority
floor leader so those those four
individuals have an appointment
on the commission and then
currently in the constitution
does for legislatively appointed
ethics commissioners appointed
to additional thanks commissions
for a total of seven the there
are constraints in the
constitution the there can be no
more than three Republican
commissioners and three
democratic or three democratic
commissioners at any one time
the the commission necessarily
works in a bipartisan way
there's a concentric parliament
or all action by the committee
ethics commission to include
these these very appointments on
the unit and redistricting
commission would have to gain
the consent of two Republican
commissioners and two democratic
commissioners.
Madam chair and thank you for
that explanation but I think
there is why he's one of our
problems we're trying to make
the.
This process non partisan in you
just had politicians select the
individuals who will generate
the list
We move on to the next one.
So madam chair and
Representative Figueroa we go to
page four and we look at
warrants for through Citrix okay
so the speaker in the minority
floor leader can go ahead and
say we can strike to more people
what this with us.
Well they have to mutually
agreed to strike that.
And
but let's assume that either one
of them wants to strike a person
because they perceive them as
holding a political interest if
you will in the end being on
that.
So if they disagree then.
No one is stricken.
And perhaps maybe what it should
say is that each can strike one
from the total list so that
there's not an agreement you
know
That's just a.
A suggestion you know to try to
figure out you know to make it
impartial if you if you will.
I don't know if you have a
comment on that or not or I can
move on.
Madam chair representative it's
an interesting.
It's interesting idea but let me
ask you for clarification are
you suggesting Madam chair
representative then that
Each group can strike three
instead of two.
And then we believe the mutually
come together instructed more
peace.
Okay madam chair and
Representative Figueroa so
Do you want to strive to from
their party.
But on.
H. for you're looking at the
total number remaining.
And the they can strike up to
two well they have to agree on
those to strive.
What I'm saying is you probably
ought to give each one of them a
you can strike one person
without having an agreement.
From the total with staff that's
my suggestion thank you madam
chair thank you Representative I
think about it you can extract
one from the unaffiliated group
no consensus required thank you.
Out of the whole group there may
be a third one.
That they want to strike in
their party that's there.
You know there's just saying out
of the hotel would be a all
remaining.
You can strike one.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think I've got
that in my notes.
Madam chair and Representative
Figueroa so let's go to page I
would allying nineteen and we
have an aggression District
shall be equal are you locations
as practical and then we go to
line twenty one or twenty two
we're talking about legislative
districts in showpiece of
spiritually equal in population
so we're using two different
standards and of course I think
the congressional standard.
Is the one to use you want that
districts is equality issue here
but all what you respond.
Why you think we should have two
different standards.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that's a really
excellent question and that is
what is currently in R. C. R. C.
and that is also currently
considered one of the basic
principles are a best practice
of redistricting the question
all people population is
practical is federal and the
other has more leeway because
they are smaller
and misspelling can you talk
about that for a minute.
and it might be this might need
to go to the judge to but that
that is standard practice and it
is in our State Garcia.
Madam chair members of the
committee that my understanding
is exactly the same as what
Representative zero it just
indicated however judge Kennedy
may have something additional to
at.
Are there
Madam chairman and members of
the committee of.
Rachel districts being able to
population is definitely one of
the all the primary tenets of of
what of what everybody wants for
the states you may recall that
The one of the requirements
talked about plus or minus five
percent being no maximum
variation plus or minus five
from that out from either side
of the line is not necessarily
ten.
this particular last year
because of the late census
because of the undercounted the
senses that was predicted and
and other things we included the
plus or minus I am not more than
ten as recommendations and
Generally speaking the the
voting rights act the most
constitutional education talks
about plus or minus five being a
maximum deviation
and just because that's kind of
been saving up a little bit
madam chair and representative
being the
this is about party
registration.
the first it was one of our
recommendations from the task
force first that is a.
Voting history in party
registration not be considered
to draw a district however once
the districts are being checked
for of for for partisan balance
partisan not partisan data can
be used and that's that's
something there also Madam chair
representative Rehm with regard
to qualifications for people who
are on the.
Wirth who would be on this year
or would be on the commission
that is not you know that's
something that can change if you
take a look at the rules
governing the people who are on
the on the independent
commission Michigan the rules
are voluminous and tight
and details for people's
involvement politics are.
are really strict and that's not
to say that that's not the state
of New Mexico.
Now and and the legislature
could change those requirements
as well as tied them off or
altered or alter the but in
terms of having districts are
particularly congressional
districts that are.
Reflected people population that
is certainly a goal within
within pretty tight parameters.
You madam chair and judge Judy I
agree with you but I think you
know we should use that similar
types of standards for our.
Legislative districts also but.
Are
know I I I think making them as
close to equal.
Is the proper rather than you
having the plus or minus five
percent you know the ten percent
variance if you will
you know I think we could tie
that up some.
I don't know if you've got a
comment.
Sure madam Madam chair
representative Rehm of.
The.
The first the first thing about
the qualifications for people on
the commission I would I've I
was the person who who looked up
the the Michigan requirements
and suggested them to suggested
to the committee of those
drafting this resolution
and it was with the
understanding that
that if you're gonna get it you
know if you're gonna get tight
rules this is a really great
example
and there was a consensus
process coming up with this
coming up with this resolution
resolutions are a are certainly
subject to now subject to
amendment in terms of a
congressional districts being
equal in size in the task force
we were talking at some point
looking at districts plus or
minus two and a half percent.
you're getting things to getting
things to the point of saying
all now we're going to be one
more voter over to other
districts you can't do that but
But generally speaking the you
know the constitutional
limitations from litigation.
give us parameters and
five percent seems to be the
outside of what's permissible
two and a half percent is what
an awful lot of courts of have
hinted would be their ideal and
to depart between two and a half
and I requires justification.
And
And that's you know that's
that's certainly the way that it
goes the other thing that I can
say just sort of looking is that
committed and this goes back
madam chairman to.
To serve an original concern
about litigation is litigation
when it comes from a
constitutionally dictated
commission that has developed
its own rules and for instance
some of those rules and
certainly be and again one of
the Mexico first task force
recommendation was to consider
racial ethnic linguistic and
cultural diversity of
issues of if it's you know the
C. Garcia had twenty five
hundred people show up for its
meetings
and from all over the state and
had meetings all over the state
and had it had more time I think
that the you know I think of
both native groups and and
others would have had to you
know a better a better chance
for for more input we run a
truncated schedule work C.
Garcia was this last year
but generally speaking making of
you're getting you know getting
all these things aligned up
is easy.
For.
For shorter lawsuits and more
directly out of and and
narrowing the issues
The the independent commission
seem to do better in terms of
shorter loss due to the cost
less money.
Other words the the lawsuits are
are seem to be presumptively
regular whether the actions of
the commission's instead to be
presumptively regular as long as
they follow their own rules and
the rules are well established
and and
and regular on their face
and then you have to show that
there was something in the
wrong.
with the.
As opposed to regular with the
commission's actions.
Thank you madam chair in judge
and
I I just think that it's the
opportunity for us to tighten up
the rules and use the
standardized re we don't split
up precincts you don't get that
one person out so no I agree
with that madam chair and
Representative Figueroa so I
want to move to eight seven I
will start off with one for with
professional work opting
district plans to redistrict
seeing commission shall not
number one use rely upon or
referenced partisan address such
as voter is street for party
registration yeah.
And I contend that that is
exactly community of interest.
And I almost think that certain
should be taken out but number
one second Sir.
Artisan data portion should be
taken out in the remaining
questions remain and there that
would say provided that the
voting history elections may be
considered to ensure that the
district I am complies with us
federal law because we know that
lock it also treats so I think
we we want to say Mr Khan point
to the court's decisions I don't
think we need to first point you
are I think the first portion is
absolutely communities of
interest.
You have them.
I don't know if you have a
response on that are.
Madam chair and representative
I'm the response would go back
to something that judge said
about the order in which these
things are considered.
And this language insurers the
partisan data it is not
considered first and creating
the Max is considered at the end
of the process when we have maps
that have been created that we
double check them against the
partisan data to make sure they
comply with federal law and
That's why the languages written
in that order with those two
parts to ensure that it happens
at the end of the process and
isn't a primary consideration in
the creation judge if if you
need to weigh in if I if you'd
like to expand on that.
And and everyone I just like to
ask that you keep your responses
as brief and concise as possible
we're moving on an hour and a
half on this bill and we have
another bill and we need to get
to the floor at eleven thirty so
please out of respect of the
committee's time make your
comments real brief thank you.
Madam madam chair thank you very
much and and like I said at the
beginning my last comments I've
kind of been saving if you up
that's not the case right now
Representative ream generally
speaking in terms of of of of
dry district's communities of
interest have to do more with
with communities and they can be
up to the Economic communities
racial communities at the
console on and not political and
as I and as I said before I'm
not considering the disk the
political make up of the
district also restricts the
ability to consider and
compensate
and and in the drawing of
districts and then political
balance becomes a factor later
if there's if there's any
concern about that.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative right.
Thank you madam chair judge
sure.
Madam chair and Representative
Figueroa was two H. eight let's
go down to of white eighteen
section P..
And commissioners are to
disclose are any outside
communications trying to
influence them but they are made
public and I have a problem with
that and I think the
that they should be I think if
you go along twenty a new story.
Outside of the new should put
shall be disclosed in the next
public meeting.
After receiving the
communication and then we strive
the remainder of the wind.
And the commission shall keep a
record of these communications I
think those are real important I
and I know we're getting on time
and I I think you ought to look
at this as a.
Amendment.
Particularly if there's any
legal challenge to it you know
the communication could be
Very important but I don't know
if you have a comment then if
not I'll move on to the last
Madam chair representative you
have hit the intent of this
section that it be disclosed
publicly that it be part of the
public record that is the intent
so I hear you're recommendations
that you don't read the language
is clear not on that issue thank
you.
Madam chair representative
Figaro so.
when I look at look at the end
of this I see that the maps
generated
But you know the legislature
doesn't have to support any of
the maps generated.
You know there's not a
requirement and what we saw in
this last session is that the
two of the maps we're not
generated by the commission in
one map that was generated the
educational map of was amended
you know.
You know here at the legislature
but you know the.
The one twenty miss out.
Is ten years ago when I was here
when we did redistricting I
looked at there's gotta be a
better way because we had
challenges
to our redistricting plan and so
I started looking at
redistricting commissions and
they had challenges to their
plans and I'm talking about
court challenge so the
legislature can or cannot do
their choice of select those
plans yeah we saw this time.
That
are you know we won and chose to
other nice to see you shaking
your so maybe I missed something
your Madam chair and
representative I would direct
you to page seven section K. the
legislature does not use these
maps at all under the
independent redistricting
commission that we're proposing
here line seventeen the
commission simply files that
maps with the secretary of
state's office and they're done.
In that respect it is entirely
different from the C. Garcia.
Okay.
Anyway I madam chair just a
Follow up by it this doesn't end
up taking the politics out of
that is I've kind of noted and
it doesn't prevent future
lawsuits so.
I I think you have in the public
involved in the process is a
good idea but I just don't see
this as a solution an absolute
solution to you know what we've
had in the past thank you madam
chair that's all my questions
you.
Representative Representative
Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative when you
first brought them this bill to
us that a couple years ago your
last year I I was very
skeptical of it I think that the
process works and I think that
that our constituents really
liked it and so I wanted to make
sure to to comment on that and
and make sure that
that you knew that
I think though that we we can
tweak it a little bit and so I
just wanted to start just a few
comments because I know that
we're very short on time you had
mentioned that you're still in
the process of gathering some of
the data of what you know what
we just went through with the
process why are you not waiting
for some of the data returned
before submitting the bill.
Madam chair and representative
that's an excellent question and
I think it's because this is the
bill that we wanted to introduce
essentially in two thousand
twenty one this is the bill that
meets the task force
recommendations and removes the
conflict of interest regardless
of how the maps evaluations come
out from the independent groups
that are value waiting them
right now regardless of those
results we still have this built
in inherent conflict of interest
that is problematic and we are
resolving that problem I'm and
timing.
We've all still a little beaten
up by the process that is so
very recent but we have things
to learn from that process and
we don't want to wait it took a
long time to get the ethics
commission created for example
if it's going to take us a long
time to get this independent
redistricting commission created
we want to start now because we
have known for at least two
years longer than that that our
process need to fix thank you.
Thank you madam chair and I
appreciate the the contact
is there gonna be any type of
bills in
Accountability for that
commission
because a I feel at times that
you know there's there's not
necessarily a path if if
constituents aren't happy with
the direction that the
commission is going.
Madam chair representative yes
on page five section G. there
are some accountability the
Supreme Court has control of
that removal process so things
can't go truly a rack and the
whole point of this commission
is so that the public has that
voice that's why we want the
resolution to go to the people
so that they can say yes this is
what they want or no they don't
but indications are that they do
in strong numbers.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and you know
one of the
The majority of feedback that I
got from my constituents and my
district is the.
The they felt that Dona Ana
County or southern New Mexico
did not have representation in
the sense of it did not go far
enough south and so is there any
consideration at doing regional
type of representation
What a stop there madam chair at
present if.
Madam chair representative page
three various geographic regions
are required to be included.
Thank god and I knew that was in
there I just want to make sure
that you have the opportunity to
say that because I think that
was the heaviest criticism that
I did hear from constituents
especially in dynamic County to
me directly so thank you for the
ups in the bill to clarify some
of that and that's all I've got
for today thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative.
Is the goal of this
constitutional amendment to
secure.
A commission composed of.
People who are largely outside
of the.
Or discerned political arena.
Madam chair and representative
the goal is to remove the
inherent conflict make sure it's
not the legislators trying their
own.
And then.
With that as the eagle do the
best we can in the other areas.
So so the goal is not to remove
part of setting.
Politics from the process is
just to remove.
Those that have been elected
from the process.
If I understand your answer but.
Madam chair representative to
reduce the partisan influence to
reduce the influence of elected
officials ability to draw those
lines and to reduce the partner
Senate Joint.
You
chair representative by aspect
for sure what the goal is
because.
I think we can remove.
In a much stronger fashion.
The partisan influence from from
this commission.
I who's.
Capable of serving on that
commission.
I don't see that this.
The words on the page.
Remove that it takes a small
step out.
But it doesn't.
Get you very far down the road
so for instance on page three.
Why nine we're starting online
nine.
Commissioner.
Shall not have been a candidate
for public office.
Your employee or contractor of
for a candidate campaign
committee or political action
committee or a registered paid
lobbyists for the five years
immediately preceding the
opening of the selection
process.
In my mind that's a fairly small
sliver of folks who are
otherwise actively engaged in
partisan politics so the goal is
to try to get people who are
really not.
Engaged in partisan politics.
That language needs to be
greatly expanded.
Because.
I don't know about the.
The federal I'm sure that the
congressional candidates and
senator candidates have an
employee.
I'm not sure any of us have
employees other than maybe.
The speaker but I certainly have
never had an employee for for
for my campaign.
Wouldn't have enough money to
pay some attention to it.
So so you know if we're really
trying to capture
or or removed from consideration
people who are actively engaged
in partisan politics.
There seems to me that you just
don't reboot candidates.
Just obviously some candidates
lose the the they're they're
they're not even part of the
process or they may even be
shown by their already
But we remove candidates but we
don't remove the people that are
actively engaged on their behalf
in getting them elected.
We're not removing the chair of
the Democratic Party of the
chair of the Republican Party
thank you serve on the
commission.
We do remove.
Employees if any of us at
employees we do remove of the
people supposedly on a campaign
committee and I don't know how
that is
It is defined
You know.
Yes some people may define it
broadly other people right just
say oh I'm a volunteer on I'm
not on the committee.
Certainly ordered why actually
committees may be more formal
but
it just seems to me that there's
a much you're you're you're the
goal is to.
Try to get a group of people who
are interested in public service
but not engaged in partisan
politics this means be expanded
to accomplish that because this
I see is of so we're going to
get.
The same group of folks that we
got last time to participate is
commissioners.
Yeah I think most people
recognize that I don't know all
the all the commissioners but I
can tell you Michael Sanchez and
Ryan gentle OC we're certainly
involved in partisan political
and in Bevers and they were on
the commission and so we were
we're trying to do something
more I would suggest that you
greatly expanded us to
really get to.
People who want to serve the
state.
That are really not engaged in
partisan political matter sh.
Let's talk a little bit about
the judge position
We have several retired judges.
They have to go through
retention elections
Representative go through an
election for the first time
since we've been a retention
election.
I suppose that a retired judge
choose not retired for at least
five years may not be capable of
serving as out the intention.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative yes.
So we would only be looking at
judges who have been off the
bench for
you know quite some time to
serve in that role and if I
repeat the bill correctly.
It's not the.
Elected officials who are in
leadership positions that make
the selection to the commission
it will be.
A selection by the ethics
commission it I read that
correctly Madam chair
representative.
And representative that is
correct the ethics commission
creates the pool there are some
strikeouts and then the ethics
commission
up points from their remaining
pool.
And you mentioned the strikeouts
new went into some detail on
that we're Representative bring
my only comment there on page
four line for.
It seems to me that.
The speaker.
The house minority leader
president pro tem of the Senate
minority leader.
if we really want to remove.
Those people who are known to
be.
Really partisan.
You want them to strike
applicants from the opposite
party not their own party.
Madam chair representative what
would you think about that.
Madam chair representative.
I do not disagree with that
And I would look forward to
working with you on on some
language there.
Well it be quite simple one four
last word strike zone and but
opposite.
That's about the sum posted so I
could think of well.
So the state ethics commission
appoints the six commissioners
from this pool of thirty eight
that is then drawn down possibly
to.
What maybe thirty apple.
Twenty eight would be the
minimum.
and then they they make the
appointment there's no
requirement is there for the
state ethics commission to
appoint based on geographic
diversity at that point is
This.
It is line thirteen page for yes
there is a requirement for
geographic racial and gender
balance.
One thirteen.
So so but I have to ensure some
geographic balance or.
Chair all right I have a I have
not the that did not jump off
the page when I read it I'm
pleased to see the I hope for
the ethics commission which.
Do that when they do it
page five and you went into some
detail with Representative Rehm
all messed up.
I agree that.
Our primary goal with
redistricting and I think the
primary goal of redistricting
nationwide.
Yes to.
Try to adhere as closely as
possible to the concept of one
person one vote.
And I I I hope that you share
the the goal with with me.
But.
What we saw happen last month I
guess about two months ago
We have an entire quarter of the
state.
That is over represented.
We have a.
Most of those districts are six
and a half close to seven
percent.
Under the optimum number in the
house I think the students about
so it.
And that was allow because of
the direction we get a.
The commission in drawing the
maps.
However in the history of New
Mexico or at least the.
Recent history in New Mexico the
legislature's always dealt with
the five percent
deviation.
In the up in this constitutional
amendment you're proposing
you're you're proposing to have
the ten percent deviation.
I think what we saw this last go
round shows precisely that that
that provides for
maybe a.
An ability to get away from our
ultimate goal which is one
person one vote and so I agree
with Representative worrying
that that we should either
stripe paragraph two and then
strike the working brushed all
line nineteen and just sorry.
One districts shall be as the
ball bobbled population is
practical or we could say
districts this week will
population as
Authorized by of federal law
with respect to the federal
positions and shall.
Deviate no more than five
percent which is our old.
Yes
For the state.
There's no so I'd like you look
at that and and because of ten
percent is never been done and I
believe it's justice Kennedy
syrup or a judge Kennedy said
That.
It could be an issue that that
could be challenged the you know
the I thank you so five percent
was the normal thank you and
the.
New start.
Doing that wide variation would
basically of.
Gets us off track.
I think.
With respect to the other issues
those things have been covered
All right.
I would sure like to see some of
those changes made
What.
Where is this headed to next
for we're just so first you may.
Madam chair representative this
is first committee so it's going
to judiciary I believe after
this.
and we would like that
opportunity to make some of
these changes we're getting
great feedback from this
committee.
Okay well that that so that
answers.
My questions you have my box and
I hope the they'll be some act.
Work on this to maybe address
some of those issues and the
what forward to seeing.
Maybe revise to introduce thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you representative
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative figure are
for bringing this bill forward.
Can you explain to me.
We're in this bill.
There's a saying that it has to
be.
Inactive that the maps be used
that are drawn by this
committee.
Madam chair representative page
seven.
Seventeen through twenty.
What.
The maps are.
Filed with the secretary of
state and therefore cut become
the maps for the state.
And madam chair and and
Representative figure are so.
What keeps.
Us from being.
Coming to the same point as we
came with the maps from the
citizens redistricting as you
know my district was one of the
only district in the state of
New Mexico that proposed bill
was brought forth to.
Change my district boundaries.
What what would keep.
Any of the Legislature whether
due to Senator the house
introduce bills the chains these
maps.
Madam chair and representative
that is why this is a
constitutional amendment as
opposed to a bill specifically
to prevent that event so if this
goes before the people and they
both for an independent
redistricting commission then
the commission Droste maps and
senators and representatives no
longer have the power to draw
maps it moves the authority.
So I'm chairman and
representative so you're telling
me that.
Once this comes into play if if
this bill was passed and become
a a a an amendment to the
constitution.
Those maps could not be altered
in any way after they are filed
with the secretary of state.
Madam chair representative that
is correct unless there is a
court challenge and the court
chooses to redraw the maps if
the commission created map loses
but the legislature would not be
in that process.
So madam chair and and
representative who could file a
court challenge to.
Madam chair representative I
believe any interested party are
legal system allows all kinds of
challenges and the judge might
might and correct me if I'm
wrong but.
It will be the judge then that
rules whether the case could be
dismissed or whether it has the
ability because the Max violate
a law.
Okay and and thank you for those
answers and and I look forward
to this bill.
And more debate on it as we go
forth with that thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair we have a
lot of feedback here to work
with I'm gonna ask for the
chairs
Permission to roll do some of
these amendments and bring it
back perhaps Friday and Monday.
I'm thank you Representative
that's fine we can go ahead and
roll house joint resolution nine
today and just let us know once
you have the opportunity to work
on the bill we can bring it
back.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee for robust
thoughtful.
Debate.
Thank you everyone we are going
to proceed to house bill one
thirty five we do have a
committee substitute and
Representative Johnson will be
Cherry because I'm the sponsor
of house bill one thirty five
and I just want to remind
everyone that we need to get the
floor so I know we have some
folks that are lined up for
public comment we did it
minimize the public comment to
one and a half minutes so I just
ask that folks do as short as
they can
if you know you don't need to
repeat what other individuals
have said before you you can
simply state you know for the
reasons previously stated I
support this bill and with that
madam chair I will ask the
experts to please raise their
hands so we can promote you to
panelists
and I'm gonna turn it over to
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and at
this time go ahead and
introduce your co sponsors your
expert witnesses and introduce
your bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you again my co sponsor is
Senator Ivey Soto but I think
he's in rules today so he won't
be joining us but I do have a
councilman Philip had as from
the public of non bay he is the
former governor that's been
helping with this expert all
along I do have and Rogers she's
the lawyer for the public
Ackerman.
And Jacqueline yelp page she is
a executive director of the
Pueblo of this letter as.
it quote program as well as the
president of the New Mexico
tribal it was consortium and I
think we now have all of our
experts on thank you very much
for raising your hand madam
chair I'm just gonna find a
brief opening and then allow
councilman Pat just to make an
opening as well as well as Missy
Elche and our other folks will
be available to answer any
questions if needed.
thank you again madam chair and
committee members house bill one
thirty five is the Indian family
protection act it was previously
known as the state it was Indian
child welfare act
I think a lot of folks know that
the federal act is there and
right now before the Supreme
Court because of of lawsuits but
really what we've been doing in
terms of coming to bring this
bill has been a work of tribal
leaders for several years now
it's really been a push by the
all public council of governors
that directed that New Mexico
tribal it was consortium to come
up with the bill I want to say
and twenty seventeen so this is
been on on going efforts last
year the bill that we introduced
I did pass the house but
unfortunately it failed at it
excuse me I didn't get it
committee hearing in the Senate
so
over the last year we've been
working so hard with tribal
leaders tribal a glut workers
tribal lawyers as well as
various advocates to come up
with the bill that we have now I
can't tell you the countless
hours that so many dedicated
stakeholders has have put into
this bill and with that madam
chair I'm gonna pass it over to
councilman Pat as so that he can
make a statement as well thank
you.
And we are going to good morning
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
again my name is Philip April is
former governor and current
councilman of the Public Enemy.
In brief the federal Indian
child welfare act also known as
it was an act to protect the
best interest of Indian children
and to promote stability of our
tribes our customs and
traditions it was passed in
response to the widespread
removal of individual drained
from the families and
communities it will have
provided critical minimum
standards of protection for
Indian children families and
tribes what we are witnessing
take place at the Supreme Court
threatens who we are as tribal
people and undermines our tribal
sovereignty.
The premise of the State Indian
family protection act is based
on the lived experience of our
front line tribal workers and
their desire to not only
codified federal it well but to
go beyond it like many other
problems nations and tribes the
problem then be altimeter
resources and we are not always
able to retain beagle
representation on our
implications therefore I relied
heavily on my tribal it will
chair to advocate for tribal
children and families who find
themselves caught up in the
state child welfare system such
advocacy is aligned with our
tribal customs and traditions to
ensure states are complying with
it well on cases involving them
the children I recognize all
tribes have have the same
opportunity to participate and
many get up various levels to
provide input on a draft bill
the perspectives of our tribal
workers tribal families and
others lived experience for
centered in this process.
Follow NMAA is forever grateful
to have given an opportunity to
provide feedback or
recommendations to protect our
culture our tradition our
language our communities our
families our children and our
children's children and those
yet to be born.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
I do ask for full support and a
do pass of house bill one thirty
five thank you.
Thank you madam chair and I will
go to Jacqueline else.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Jacquelyn else
from the Pueblo of this Lara
director of this latest social
services I'm president of the
New Mexico tribal Indian child
welfare consortium and then take
represents the nineteen New
Mexico pueblos to Apache nations
Ramon Navajo and is that a
duster and I'll pass the taxes
we are tribal it will
representatives who are on the
ground working diligently to
preserve the culture traditions
and identities of all Indian
children who are protected by
the Indian child welfare act
through advocacy education and
collaboration with state
agencies.
Mexico's twenty tribal nations
have the sovereign rights powers
and laws to handle matters
involving their members
including that their ability to
protect the health safety and
welfare of their children.
Tribes are the experts in the
community and have challenges
with specific issues with ECWA
the need and development of the
Indian child.
Indian family protection act is
centered on the lived
experiences of Indian children
and families previously or
currently in the state system.
The provisions and protections
of the Indian family protection
act go beyond federal ECWA for
the purposes of holding the
state accountable for compliance
with the JCPOA and to ensure the
safety and well being of our
Indian children and families
keeping children as close as
possible to their culture
extended family and tribe are
extremely protect are extremely
important protective factors for
the cultural well being.
Our children are the ultimate
benefactors.
Sections of the Indian family
protection act support that if
plus safeguards our children's
right to be our tribal leaders
in years to come whether they
are traditional healer a
governor other they are our
future leaders they will be
representing the families and
their children's in their
communities they will teach our
language and traditions to
younger generations however as
beautifully beautifully stated
by Veronica one of our young
people they cannot be what they
cannot see.
Our children will be our
protection and survivors of our
tribal communities without these
protections protections that are
unique to tribal nations to act
we preserve the Indian family.
Maintain extended family
relationships and promote and
provide cultural connections I'm
participation for children in
state care we as Indian people
cease to exist.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for your
attention and opportunity to
come before you along with my
colleagues I stand by for
questions.
Madam chair we're we're we're
ready to stand Mike for
questions thank you now we will
conduct a poll and those who are
in favor or opposition may
substitute house bill one thirty
I can now go.
Please begin the call.
Okay I believe the call is
complete I can't tell on my side
I see at fifty five and support
three in opposition and we will
now go to public comment and
comments and we will begin with
Supporting comments.
And Amanda I will leave it up to
you to and then
those who are making comments.
Madam chair if it's okay I don't
mind doing that I hope that full
opportunity on my end.
Secretary Trujillo you are now
in muted.
Thank you Representative Lewis
good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Lynn
Trujillo and I serve as the
cabinet secretaries in regards
to permit we stand in full
support of house bill one thirty
five this act is an important
step towards ensuring that our
native children are protected
and our native culture and
families are respected I want to
acknowledge and thank that many
tribal leaders advocates and
tribal attorneys and especially
here Representative Lewis for
eight the everyone's tireless
efforts we strongly urge the
committee to issue and you pass
that house bill one thirty five
thank you.
Gilda he'll you are now unmuted.
Thank you Representative Lewis
and chairman.
And members of the committee my
name is guilty he'll the
executive director of the in
whether any public council as
well well as a former governor
the public to suki and president
of the national Indian child
welfare association and we
support the House one thirty
five with the testimony was
given by councilman Paris and
former governor Parris N. Y.
Joly Jacqueline Welch and we ask
that you support and give it to
pass thank you.
W. secretary Galia you are now
and muted.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is that
I am deputy secretary for the
children youth and families
department and on behalf of
secretary the hell in the entire
department we stand in strong
support and stand ready to
implement this bill as soon as
it is passed we Jr passage of
this bill thank you.
Secretary Scrase you are now and
muted.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee I've been here as the
secretary of the Human Services
department I work very very
closely with Barbara Vigil as
you know are working and the
settlement agreement with Kevin
asked but the real reason for
doing this that is not the
settlement agreement itself but
this is the right thing to do
which are very appreciative of
all the tribal leadership
Secretary jury on and the many
many others to join us to work
together to come up with a bill
that truly will serve and
protect that native American
children in New Mexico thank
you.
Kurt Riley you are now and
muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee I just want to thank
Representative Lewis for all of
the her efforts in getting the
bill of this far I am from the
public documents again my name
is Kurt Riley I am the former
governor of the public last
month and I've had for staff
first hand experience in
bringing native children back to
our community this bill will
ensure that that happens for all
native communities within the
state in the future so I
strongly support passage of this
bill thank you.
Charlie you are now and muted.
What.
Good deal by madam chair and
committee members my name is
angel Charlene I service the
executive director of the
coalition to stop violence
against native women and a
citizen of the public and I come
here T. as the mother and auntie
and a person whose own family
has been impacted by the system
separation.
The placement of Indian children
for far too long has not looked
to our tribes nor our tribal
families when they need for
shelter arises for our little
ones best practice calls for
placement with the child's
family and extended family to
meet their unique needs when
that is not possible resource
families can offer support the
coalition is currently working
on a project to engage Indian
resource families The New Mexico
a quick consortium and current
and former tribal leadership to
understand the recruitment and
retention needs of Indian foster
families when engaging with with
CYFD.
We are in active partnership
with CYFD because we want to
improve the systems that serve
our families and increase system
accountability we do this
because it is time to destroy a
legacy of Indian child removals
the session New Mexico has an
opportunity to strengthen the
CYFD practices that keep our
families together for
generations to come thank you.
Karen weight loss you are now
and muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what what with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and while we have not
read the committee substitute we
stand strong support this
legislation we thank the
sponsors particularly here
Representative Lewis for your
efforts on going on this
legislation.
We like that this mirrors the
language in both the federal
Decalogue and reflects language
in the cavernous settlement
children need to be replaced
with family if possible and if
not with family and culturally
appropriate placements this law
is the pathway to ensuring this
happens again we thank you for
bringing this legislation.
Thank you Mason you are now and
it.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
I'm sure the action committee of
the league of women voters of
New Mexico and based upon the
league of women voters US a
United States resolution on
racial justice and called for
the league to support
legislation addresses past
injustices
to read.
We stand in strong support of
and HB at one thirty five thank
you.
Heather Yazidi callin Jeannie
you are now and muted.
Good morning good morning on a
chair members of the committee
my name is heather Yasaka
Jeannie I'm from part beat New
Mexico I'm also a member of the
Navajo Nation I'm a policy
fellow with both features as
well I'm here in support of H.
B. one thirty five the Indian
family protection act when we
say our children are sacred we
mean that in our ceremonies
their roles that adults cannot
perform.
Those rules can only be done by
children because of their
innocence their healing laughter
and they're growing minds are so
powerful.
The Indian family protection act
protects that way of life in our
ability to continue to teach our
children how important they are
to us if a also strings
strengthens our relationship
between the state and the twenty
three tribal nations of New
Mexico it will build up the much
needed quality services and
accountability of everyone
involved in dealing with our
children we need to take care of
our children
I thank you Representative Lewis
for sponsoring this legislation
and I ask you to support H. B.
one thirty five.
Connery chinos you are now and
muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Khan
rich you know and on the rest of
this for the post of Aqaba and
house and we are full support of
eight three one three five as
amended for some really want to
think of Representative Lewis
for her intense efforts in
refining the original bill over
the interim now it's much better
bills.
Both the props to represent can
fully support this bill provides
the import protections for
currently recognized tribes and
their people and their children
and if an act I tribes the the
tools to ensure.
The survival of our families and
children going into the future
also recognize the importance of
maintaining cultural ties which
from Representative of the to
interpret COVID so.
For the reasons madam chair
members the committee I really
encouraging up full support of
this bill thank you very much.
Madam chair do we have another
public comment.
Should we lose madam chair.
Representative Lewis.
Amanda.
I think we're having technical
difficulties just bear with us a
few minutes.
And then do you have the
capability to call the next of
public comment here yes.
Marshall.
It.
Good morning chairwoman go out
the help of.
My name is school you can't John
behind now New Mexico high on
the edge their ego and their
clients I am a member of the
Pueblo Phakamani I am a me to
act a mother grandmother
daughter and sister I also
service the child welfare
specialists from my tribe and
service the new and then to vice
president I fully support the
Indian family protection that I
know the importance of keeping
our children safe and within
their homes and communities to
flourish and grow I also
recognize the years and practice
of systemic racism and how it
place within the child welfare
system and the generation and
pack it has made on our tribal
communities.
If PO will hold the state
accountable one and then child
this in their custody and
ultimately find the tribal
nations the opportunity to
protect the children multiple
ways cultural ties are important
to our children's existence our
children our state could be into
deserve to be protected on all
levels if they're caught up in
the state systems I'd like to
thank you Representative Lewis
for bringing this important
legislation relation forward and
urge members of this committee
to support this vital piece of
legislation thank you LA.
Right now one unit.
He is.
When you're ready to place.
Where are you we.
Chris.
Let's go ahead and move on.
Tom your now and you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee.
I am done I can Tana it tribal
members from the coach T. pueblo
reservation here in New Mexico I
work for just to keep Pueblo as
that what case manager I fully
support house bill one thirty
five I recognize the
generational impact it has made
our tribes we thank you madam
chair for bringing this
important bill Ford and urged
committee members to support
this vital piece of legislation
thank you so much have a good
day.
Chairman of the all public
council of governors governor
Mitchell you are now and muted.
Actually you're not quite a
needed Amanda would you make me
co host again I apologize for
the interruption I think we're
having internet issues at the
capitol.
Okay Mister chairman you're now
animated.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is mark
Mitchell I am the chairman of
the all public council governors
who represent nineteen close up
and down the Rio Grande and one
pueblo in Texas in el Paso the
instead of bills or pueblo and
we stand in full support of this
bill and all all the comments
that were made as well thank
you.
J. to centrally notice you are
now I needed.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Jay Sondhi honest
registered lobbyists for the
Navajo Nation ops the president
as a vice president lines are we
want to think chairman Louis for
bringing this legislation
forward we stand strong support
of the Indian family protection
act.
India you should see a letter of
from the president's and
respuestas analyzer that has
been sent.
The Navajo Nation.
Has been working with our fellow
tribes and pueblos within the
state of New Mexico along with
CYFD and Indian Affairs
Department and we feel this is a
very important piece of
legislation and we ask that you
vote in favor we just of the
committee voted favorite house
bill one thirty five thank you
madam chair.
Judge Begay you are now and made
it.
Good morning madam chair
Representative Chasey
Representative Eli
Representative thank us and
members of this committee I'm
judge Katherine B. again with
the District Court in Bernalillo
county I'm here to convey the
New Mexico judiciary's full
support for the Indian family
protection act house bill one
thirty five this bill is vital
to the men and children their
families and their tribes the
bills purpose is supported by
the judiciary because because
because it will raise the
standard.
Activist nurse and child welfare
cases and truly make this double
standard.
The judiciary stands ready to.
Partners with administrative and
procedural implementation and we
ask Miss committees member yes
on house bill one thirty five
thank you for your time this
morning.
Elena Ortiz you are now and
maintenance.
Good morning chair committee
members and guests thank you for
the opportunity to speak thank
you Representative Lewis
programming that the phone works
my name is minority and I am a
registered lobbyist for okay we
may lead a problem.
We pay pueblo Santa Clara duty.
And trump Department house bill
one thirty five which recognizes
and honors the sovereign powers
of pueblo tribes and nations to
make decisions regarding their
children.
And for this reason and those
stated earlier we encourage and
support and passage of house
bill one thirty five thank you.
You are now and muted.
All.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is that
actor on I'm the social services
director for the couple of Santa
Ana and here on behalf of
governor Jared Sanchez and the
public Santa Ana we fully
support house bill one thirty
five and we urge the committee
to pass this piece of
legislation thank you.
Robert Apodaca you are now and
it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee this rob up
with doctor representing
walkable and that he could be
Apache nation the we also stands
for of house bill one thirty
five and we are to committee to
support as well thank you madam
chair.
You are now and muted.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is
Clarissa salt I am a DNF mother
and true believer of cultural
identity and everything it
encompasses I was raised to be
proud of who I am and where I
come from it is important that
all children have a balance will
be strong again and struck also
ties it matters because of my
children and for all native
children I say this because my
niece was in non native foster
home when she was a baby until
she turned for Senshi was taken
she was cut off from any
cultural existence she did not
know her language her culture or
the teachings and ceremonies due
to the separation we cannot
monitor or teach vital
ceremonies for each of her
milestones growing up
fortunately with my family's
joint efforts with Navajo Nation
echo workers we successfully got
custody of jade after a four
year battle we were blessed to
have her back with us she is now
an eight year old third grader
full of light laughter love
innocence and beauty today she
continues to learn her cultural
identity it is important all our
native children to know who they
are and where they come from I
strongly support H. B. one three
I encourage you to vote in favor
thank you.
Tonya Lewis you are now unmuted.
Tonya you have to and then on
your end.
What the hell.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Tanya Lewis I'm from the public
that the I am a member of the
New Mexico social workers
association for all the reasons
already stated behalf of the
national association of social
work New Mexico chapters of the
American Indian social work task
force we stand in strong support
of house bill one thirty five
and I we urge all members to
about.
To pass this critical bill thank
you Representative Lewis for
your continued dedication and
advocacy on behalf of our native
children and families.
Thank you.
Salazar you are now and meet at.
You have to a new on your and.
Okay good morning chair members
of the committee my name is Jack
Salazar and I'm an indigenous
leader apple teachers I stand in
support of H. B. one thirty
five.
Engine family protection act
matters to me because I could
have benefited from it I was
adopted at six months old has
pulled away from my native
family and my culture my whole
life I've been longing for
something today I am thirty one
and I still have a hard time
reconnecting with my people and
making up for years of loss
cultural experiences.
Through the years I have
triggered reconnected my native
family sometimes I feel like
it's too late and many times I
felt like an outsider because I
didn't learn our data native
tongue nor did I follow cultural
practices as a child I support
state I have paid because I have
three children that deserve to
know their roots their culture
their native culture into Sir to
claim their native identity I
start up I strongly urge you to
vote for Indian family
protection act one thirty five
and honor right to our heritage
tribes and nations thank you.
Curling you are now and muted.
I hope I'm pronouncing your name
correctly Carling yes you'll
have to on me on here and.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Carlene up holiday and I'm
part of the Navajo Nation I want
to shed light on the voices of
children who go through the
system I was taking from my
family and placed in a group
home the only thing that kept me
going was receiving a letter
from my family I have cringed on
that letter like nothing else
today is a reminder of how much
my family loves me even though I
felt so alone prosecutors talk
about being a certified
providing shelter food and
giving child a lot of
unfortunately that is not enough
I was placed into foster homes
one group home not one of them
could make me feel love and
whole like my family does
indigenous children have roots
traditions and connections that
cannot be taught during my
placement I attended a Navajo
class only made me miss the more
miss my family more I would come
home and not be able to share
anything I learned or get help
with this time is because no one
understood our culture when you
truly love a child you want
that.
You want what is best for them
and for indigenous children that
means having the opportunity to
be our whole selves with culture
tradition and people you belong
to I support H. B. one thirty
five because I can't stand the
thought of someone feeling the
way that I did.
Please vote yes on H. B. one
thirty five and protect our
children.
Malesia Toledo you are now and
muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
maliciously though and I'm
a leader were both teachers and
whether any student I am from
the public let him isn't is the
key it was important to me
because I brought my daughter
home she was once where she
longed to be after unexplainable
treatments foster care which has
never been the case in the
beginning because I never saw
that one of my children it's
really gives me hope to bring
back my son.
Thank you for children and their
extended families because cities
are adoption outside the
traditions language in tribes
from the first time I heard it
there where only being federally
recognized.
Because it's a conflict that
still going on page jurisdiction
I was thanks
my custody case therefore I urge
you to vote in favor of H. B.
one thirty five thank you for
your time.
Christian are you are now
unmuted.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is
Christian record I am from
Albuquerque New Mexico I am
shy and a raffle Kyla New
Mexicans and I'm a leader with
both features I was blessed to
grow up in a state for beautiful
up close and ate American
culture I was taken from my
family by CYFD when I was in the
first grade I was uncomfortable
because I was forced into an
environment and I was surrounded
by strangers nobody looks like
me spoke like me and cultures
are completely different I even
had to wear the same clothes to
school the next day.
I was afraid of not knowing when
I was going to see my siblings
who are also separate separated
into foster homes and my parents
again it's vital our families
stay together during tough times
the state of New Mexico should
allow extended family members or
tribal affiliations to work with
the CYFD when our children are
expected to be taken from their
homes and placed into foster
care we carry a lot of language
that only those who live within
our upbringing and traditions
can fail our children deserve to
receive to receive safe care in
our homes.
Our children deserve to receive
safe care and homes that carry a
similar heritage to their own
please vote in favor H. B. one
three five thank you.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee trial ahead
with the administrative office
of the Courts AOC stands in full
support of house bill one thirty
five and we're ready to work
with justice partners and we
thank you chair blue for this
important legislation AOC is on
board.
You are now and it.
Representative you'll have to
and then on your end.
I apologize Representative I
apologize Representative I'm
Representative Bobroff for the
Pueblo of Laguna.
And I'm pleased to communicate
to to you.
Chair and to the many folks who
worked on this that the pueblo
lagoon is is is in support of
HB one thirty five.
It is been at a challenging
process to build a bill that is
strong and effective that will
protect Indian children in
Indian families
in the Pueblo appreciate the
hard work of of so many people
to accomplish this and we think
that the the bill is a is
necessary critically necessary.
Given the risk of being
overturned by the US Supreme
Court
and we think this is a.
Good.
Way to move towards greater
protection for.
The the families and children of
the public do not so thank you.
Cristo curly you are now and it.
Yes.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee yeah Chris
Hurley intention yeah I mean
initially commission wishes to
make cutting of the state I
don't want to get the best
knowledge
good morning my name is crystal
curly again I'm the director of
indigenous life please where any
Navajo women led nonprofit based
in McKinley county and we
strongly support H. B. one
thirty five
we believe that through.
These oppressive policies that
have been in place our
indigenous children have
suffered have continued to
support from all of these
policies.
And encourage our.
The committee members to support
H. B. one thirty five.
The arc of New Mexico you are
now and it.
You'll have turned me on your
and.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Christopher Lori I am a
registered lobbyist for the ark
of New Mexico as well as our
public policy officer we stand
in strong support of this house
bill one thirty five masquerade
you pass by this committee I'd
also like to thank the sponsors
of this bill thank you.
Jacqueline on the docker you are
now and muted.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jacqueline R. doc I am a
resident of Albuquerque New
Mexico and I am in full support
of house bill one thirty five
for all of the previously stated
reasons thank you.
Erica Sanchez you are now and
muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica Sanchez I'm with New
Mexico can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care to
improve their transition to
adulthood we stand in full
support of state Indian family
protection act thank you.
Madam chair that's everyone for
support.
Thank you now we will hear
comments in opposition.
If there are any.
Thank.
Dominic good coaching sorry you
are now and made it.
Dominic you have to and then on
your and.
There we go.
All right sorry I'll restart
good morning madam chair members
of the committee is a very
sensitive topic this is based on
our children are people of the
future.
And my name is Tony got spent on
the in the governor for a bottle
of Amos.
And we fully support house bill
one thirty five.
Is significant to keep our
native children harmless within
our communities so they can
carry our customs down the road
to practice a way of life so
they are the future.
Before I go home and I like to
me was a call.
An opportunity opportunity to
make a difference in this world
and you don't then you are
wasting your time honors.
So please vote yes on house bill
one thirty five.
And this is public payments
thank you.
Thank you Lucas Frank your now
and muted.
Lucas you have to and then on
your end.
I apologize as.
Good afternoon members of the
committee my name is Nikos
Franken attorney here in
Albuquerque but more importantly
on the crowd it will foster
parent.
My wife and I have had I it will
foster placements of over the
past four years I generally
support this bill ninety five
percent to five percent I don't.
Is section fourteen and and and
the amendments to thirty two
eight dash four dash twenty
seven.
Those changes will remove eight
what prosecutors right to
intervene in a proceeding
involving a kid the kid in their
care that presents two problems
the first is the child will lose
important advocate in court
proceedings into it'll treat it
will foster parents differently
than non it will foster parents
for example I have a child in my
care in their native under this
law I would not be allowed to
intervene in the court
proceeding yes there non native
I would I think that on fairness
in treating people differently
is going to.
The ability to recruit it quote
posture families there aren't
enough there need to be more you
should treat them the same as
other foster families that's all
I have thank you.
Marci star you are now unmuted.
I would like to say I agree with
me Mr Frank as well my name is
Marcy star I'm a member of the
Choctaw nation of Oklahoma I'm
echo foster parent to its had
many native children in my care
and I'm also an adoptive parent
of five children from tribes
different than my while I
support this bill and the
reasons for it I believe that
there are portions of this bill
that will potentially harm the
children and especially the
youth and teen thanks to protect
by delaying and even denying
permanency I'm aware of a large
number of children who are
placed in state care who are not
with families with their
families or even in a quick
implant foster home there are
families who for various reasons
are unwilling or unable to take
a child into their care
resulting in the child being
placed into a non relative
foster home my five children
fell into that category I fear
what would have happened to my
children if they had been had
been placed into a non native
homes because if this bill
passes as it currently is I
would not have been able to
intervene and I would likely be
forced to languish and and then
I age out of the system I would
ask that if this bill passes and
appropriation be made to recruit
and retain more night of foster
homes I would also as that in
appropriation be made so that
children who are placed in
foster care able to take
advantage of culturally
appropriate opportunities I
would like to see more native
mentors from each tribe in
pueblo recruited and be assigned
to each non relative foster home
that cares for native child.
Thank.
Alyssa Davis your now and muted.
Hi I am thank you madam chair
members of the committee I was
just
I use advocate for foster
children all foster children and
I am in support of this bill us.
Maryland back you are now and
it.
Hello.
Well am like the and former
speakers I am a former foster
parent and I did have multiple
native children in my home I am
not in a quick referred
placement I don't oppose this
bill like Mr Frank that I
support ninety nine percent of
the spell there are just a few
issues that I have with that and
like the star said I hope that
someone can consider an
appropriation to recruit and
retain more native foster
families I'm not I need a foster
family but for whatever reason
I'm if a tribe declined
jurisdiction or placement of an
eight of child that child was
placed into my home and I'm not
a native placement luckily for
me I was able to seek culturally
appropriate I'm supports and
also if there's children removed
more culturally appropriate
placements including the Navajo
Nation but in the meantime that
child being placed in my home
for even a brief comment wasn't
additional trauma that wasn't
necessarily necessary so I would
ask that the committee please
consider an appropriation to
support recruit and retain
native a proposal in front of
her native homes to support them
because the more native homes
that we can have as options
which would be a corporate
placements the more that our
children will find permanency
much quicker thank you for all
your hard work on this
committee.
Madam chair that concludes the
public comment.
Thank you committee members.
Representative Eli thank you.
Madam chair madam chair so I do
want to ask you about this if
what foster parent thing I
interestingly enough for years
ago it it was not native
American children but my wife
had a cases recorded involved
foster parents and I actually
wasn't foster parents it was
placed with child with the
family over a period of years
and the law was sent developed
to allow those parents to have
some input into the best
interest of the child without
running afoul of any statute so
I was curious when I heard Mr
Frank talk
what's your response to that was
because it does look like
the echo foster parents are not
allowed to intervene and at
least expressed their concerns
in a court hearing and I was
just curious as to what the
response that wasn't there was
any thought of including that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I think I'm
at let Donnell and answer this
question but just an overall
before I go to her I want to
remind the committee that this
is really or the kids the
stakeholders in this situation
are the Indian children you know
although we really respect and
appreciate all the foster
parents out there that are
willing to take in the children
really the intent and the
purpose of this bill is to
ensure that native American
children first to go with family
they also deserve you know
notification to tribes so that
in that family isn't available
then you have extended family
you have people within tribes
and tribal communities so there
is a hierarchy in place but I
just want to remind the the the
the members of this committee
that the primary individual of
concern here is the Indian child
and Donal into you want to add
on to that or Jackie.
What's the bank though hope will
white guy institution amended we
might session shot trying to
stop where last year good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Donna
answers you know and I am from
the couple's Act money I am also
currently director of the office
of tribal affairs with CYFD east
office of the secretary thank
you for the opportunity to be
here with you today it's in our
in response to the question that
was posed by Representative Eli
the goal again like
Representative Lewis has stated
does not to have a pool of
maintenance resource homes
available the goal is to
identify family extended family
clan family and other tribal
family CYFD is committed to
working with our nation's
problems and tried to identify
placement and in accordance with
those placement preferences and
take into consideration tribal
custom and law this ensures.
Excuse me this is ensuring that
department is actively exploring
relatives actively helping them
through the process and actively
assisting relatives to overcome
any challenges tribal families
maybe experience in the process
often makes the departments
licensing process difficult and
discouraging for me to families
to complete so we are working
very hard to work with our
tribal partners in ensuring that
are native families are able to
complete that process and
working with them also to retain
them thank you.
I'm Madam chair madam chair and
expert I I want to be clear
about this I'm not trying to get
in the way the goal of this but
the the thing that causes me
some concern is if I look at
page one of three of the bill
when we're talking about you
know placing native American
children yes there are plans for
their members that makes perfect
sense to me but that's in a this
is an abuse and neglect
situation where at least and I
don't know that this was
intended at least it looks like
the amendments to thirty two a
dash for just twenty seven.
If you're talking about abuse
and neglect it would seem like
you would want to hear from the
foster parents I'm not
suggesting that the goal isn't a
great one bye I don't know if
that was intended in terms of to
get to that goal
you don't want your foster
parents particularly in abuse
and neglect cases so I was
curious about that and that's
section fifty three A. R. which
specifically excludes where it
says that does not involve an
Indian child I'm just I was
looking at that thinking why why
wouldn't you want to include
them in a discussion about abuse
neglect cases and I'm not I'm
I'm I'm advocating but I think
the same goal I just wanna make
sure there's no unintended
consequences this.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Jackie do you
want to answer that.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative Ely.
We as the tribes are sincerely
grateful and appreciative to our
foster parents who have opened
their homes to provide care.
The intent again for ECWA is to
keep the child with their
parents.
Foster placements are intended
to be temporary and I I feel
that the state needs to do a
better job of emphasizing that
with foster families because the
focus on keeping the child with
their family starts at the early
proceedings of the case so
ultimately.
By making that initial
connection with placement with
family will eliminate that bird
and for state foster parents to
be in that situation where and
intervention.
By a foster family is necessary
because ultimately this is a
decision for the tribal family
the tried and on behalf of the
child so it doesn't mean that
that foster family that's in
need of relative will also have
that same opportunity to
intervene we want to hear what
is happening with the child's
father in placement but we're
missing the step before we even
get to an intervention and if
court right now is not being
implemented or following it
being followed.
With the true intent and the
meaning behind it and that is at
the very beginning of these
processes these early stages are
imperative to ensure that
connection is made and not
delayed where we are having to
rely on a non native or for
placement I'm sorry and I non
native out of home placement but
rather focusing on the family
and those connections this law
is not doctor foster parents or
their their right or even
ability to intervene we always
want to look at the safety and
welfare of the child the tribes
and families have that right to
do that and they are very
capable of doing that we just
want to make sure that those
protections are put in place at
the very beginning of each stage
of the case and not waiting
until a permanent C. or
intervention proceeding is
occurring Mr chair what let's do
this I I I it because the
judiciary next.
Madam chair and representative
before I before we move on I
like and Rodgers to address your
specific question Representative
Eli okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The section fourteen.
Is not take away the right of
any person to file a motion to
intervene indicates.
Report upon finding that they
have an interest in the case and
meet this requirement of our
rules of civil procedure from
allowing them to intervene and I
think it's crucial
that foster families understand
that and realize they can do
that and there's often times
time I echoing what exactly not
just that.
Your parents may have very
important information for the
court to hear.
What this is doing though is
making it clear that in these
court proceedings these
individuals that are set out in
fourteen be definitely have the
right to intervene this is been
questioned over and over again
in cases throughout the country
so it is.
Differently saying.
Clear and explicit these people
have the right to intervene or
to apply to intervene it's
really permissive intervention
file a motion
and but that the tribe has the
right to New Jersey.
I'm as far as the foster parents
yes pursuant to rules of civil
procedure they can file a motion
to a degree and nothing This act
stops them from doing so.
It and madam chair madam chair
this is I'm trying to find it
does this go to Judiciary next.
Madam chair and I representative
Ely it doesn't it had its first
committee and health excuse me
health health and Human Services
and then this is the second
committee.
well maybe what we can do is I I
don't I don't want to slow down
I I just what what I'd like to
do is is get with madam chair
madam chair chair and see I I'm
worried about I do understand
the goal I get where you want to
go I think that's right
I've heard from your experts I'm
concerned about the language
particularly in that statute as
to how that would be interpreted
on that it may lead to some
unintended consequences what it
sounds like and because I got
distracted by law hearing today
I did get a chance to kind of
study the bill while trying to
do is is get with you before it
hits the floor if that's okay
and then we'll work it out that
way I think that's probably the
best way to do it.
Madam chair and representative
you know I I'm happy to meet
with you and I welcome that
discussion thank you and and
madam chair I think everyone's
been a little bit busy including
the new secretary Vigil and she
does have your hands up if you
could just provide her an
opportunity to talk I'd
appreciate it.
Thank you go ahead Barbara.
Madam chair and members of the
committee and all those here
today I just want to offer my
availability to Representative
Ely to speak on the concerns you
may have about the bill.
In an address these questions
and ensure him that the
information provided by Mr
brought jurors since you all are
is accurate information and
address any concerns you may
have.
And madam chair and just madam
chair our welcome to the cabinet
position and I look forward to
talking with the chair and with
you thank you so much.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you committee members.
Representative Gallegos.
Moviepass.
Madam chair second the.
Your.
Just gonna let you know your
might be needed I can see with
your mask on for.
How would you pass motion by
Representative Banco and the
second by madam chair blue and
at.
I'm having technical
difficulties
Please call the roll.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
You.
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair blue.
Amanda I'm I believe you skipped
Representative Gallegos and
maybe try.
Representative Chasey again.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Chasey.
Madam chair blue.
Yes madam chair Johnson yes
great.
Thank you then that we're madam
chair Lewis you have if you have
a committee substitute house
bill one three five thank you
committee members.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair and thank you committee
members I appreciate continuing
I know we just got called to the
floor and I just want to thank
all the folks that called in and
provided testimony we really
appreciate your participation
today thank you madam chair
that's all I have.
Thank you madam chair thank you
everyone have a great day.
Thank you.
