outlay process by embracing
oversight and and support.
Establishing new and improved
budget systems for state
recruitment fund and the
governor's food farming hunger
initiative and we're as Debbie
in Debbie's own words public
service is a family tradition
where is and we're as after
almost fifty years of tireless
and steadfast Public Service she
has undoubtedly earned herself a
happy and peaceful retirement
Debbie Romero for her exemplary
service countless achievements
and unwavering dedication to the
great state of New Mexico signed
and sealed at the capitol today
Debbie Romero please Debbie
staff.
they would please stand Debbie's
husband Bob Perregaux.
She has granddaughters
Let's let's have the girl stand
up though they are okay there we
are I didn't see in.
And her daughter.
Me tell you judge your entering
into a great family the public
service and and again Mr speaker
I just wanted to recognize my
McKinley and thank you secretary
Romero for a all of you years of
service to the state of New
Mexico and to every community of
the state through here tireless
Gentleman.
Gentlelady from.
I just want to acknowledge my
cousin Debbie who's married to
my cousin Bob.
And there are so many break goes
in New Mexico I don't know I I
addition to the political family
she was a role metal actually
from Santa Fe and
she I just.
I just want to thank everything
all of the work that you've done
to move the state forward Debbie
of you are a gem and you always
have been.
The gentle lady I was wondering
if there is a relation there
with these but I goals and that
but I go.
And and there is gentleman from
Lincoln Representative Vincent
of the four service is taking
cattle grazing allotments in the
Sacramento mountains away.
First day prioritize the spotted
Judging by the amount of these
that I've seen consumed here at
the legislative sessions at some
of the meal at some of the
With the continued federal over
reach New Mexico is going to be
forced to import me.
Mr speaker.
to taking over the grazing
allotments Mr speaker I just ask
that hopefully we can stop the
drugs on the grazing allotments
thank you thank you gentlemen.
Mr speaker I would like to wish
my grand baby her first birthday
today a very Happy Birthday to
Senate McKinley in McKinley
The state to have the birthday
to you Happy Birthday dear
little sadly have either the
The gentle lady phone son the
favorite person is supposed.
Mr speaker I'm so pleased to
rise today to recognize agreed
Ribbon school by the U. S.
department of education and
members of the incredible team
at a second moderate recently
traveled to Washington DC to be
proud to recognize our New
Mexico Blue Ribbon schools this
is the excellence for students
that we are all striving to
foster and replicate for the
progress in closing the student
achievement gap.
So from the New Mexico house I
would love to thank the leaders
celebrate this achievement we
have some guests on the rostrum
that I'd like to introduce.
I'm welcome to Santa Fe public
schools superintendent Larry
The principle of a second my J.
drive deterred de mais near
school.
Welcome to the house to our
Santa Fe public school leaders
and I've got a certificate that
I've presented that Mr speaker
recognizes a secular Madre
elementary school were as a
secular Marjorie elementary
school is a small school
community in Santa Fe that is
dedicated to all students being
technology engineering art and
mathematics and engage with
computer science opportunities
and whereas in twenty twenty two
a second Madre elementary school
was recognized as a national
public schools and whereas in
twenty twenty to the national
Blue Ribbon schools program
recognized two hundred ninety
Blue Ribbon schools recognizes
high performing schools that
have school excellence can work
to close a student subgroup
achievement gaps and whereas the
national Blue Ribbon schools
elementary school was recognized
as an exemplary high performing
school which means that a second
Monterey elementary school
students are among the state's
highest achieving scoring in the
recognition ceremony held in
Washington DC therefore be
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the recognition given
Ribbon school award signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe.
The gentle lady from.
objection it is so ordered.
The director of federal action
necessary for placing House
memorial six the.
receiving also the Blue Ribbon
school one of three here in New
Mexico I have special guests
here with me and I would like to
And Mr speaker could we have the
clerk at least read the title of
the memorial we're going to read
memorial commending Texaco
middle school for earning a
twenty twenty two national Blue
Ribbon school designation
whereas the national Blue Ribbon
schools program was created in
nineteen eighty two by then
New Mexico schools honored by
the twenty twenty two national
Blue Ribbon schools program and
whereas Texaco middle school was
recognized recognized for the
honor by the United States
striving for and attaining
exemplary achievement.
And we're as the New Mexico
schools were nominated by the
designation to the extensive
work of the schools educators
and staff and whereas Texaco
middle schools instructional
practices are supported with
technology and every student has
with students to create a
respectful atmosphere for
learning allowing students to
thrive socially academically and
personally now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
of this memorial be transmitted
to the principle of Texaco
middle school.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
just like to add that Texaco is
a very small school and the
their accomplishments at my
understood.
Over four hundred twenty schools
applied for this every single
year and with three schools in
New Mexico and Texas goes only
one on the eastern side of the
move that house memorial sixty
what do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the house
let the record show that the
rules but called and all members
are present voting in the
We are on final passage of house
memorial sixty one the vote is
now open.
today to also acknowledge of
school and that is located in
house district twenty that also
received a national Blue Ribbon
award
first I'd like to introduce
school administrator the staff
I.
If you could stand and be
recognized.
excellence is truly a wonderful
school in house district twenty
and I'm really pleased that
they're receiving this national
recognition I had the
distinguished campus and I'd
like to note that the school
Albuquerque school of excellence
has a culture of high
environment for our students in
Albuquerque so thank you very
much.
Thank you Julie.
and in Santa Fe congratulations
to all of our national Blue
Ribbon schools here today.
Make a motion has the most
because I move that thousand
million forty three gaming from
the speakers table and then the
and Be made the next order of
business no objection it is so
ordered that the record reflect
memorial thank you Mr speaker
estimates speaker will the clerk
please read the memorial.
to read.
eight twenty twenty three New
Mexico consumers for justice in
the house of representatives
well as the New Mexico crusaders
for justice was founded in may
twenty twenty one to help
families to the tragedy of
family members to come together
for positive change to their
communities and role as the New
Mexico crusaders for justice
supported more than nine hundred
families throughout the state
families of victims of violence
in the state as the New Mexico
crusaders for justice sponsors
and host support group meetings
violence and the families of
these victims.
And we're just The New Mexico
crusaders for justice is
currently nominated for the
federal bureau of investigation
director's community leadership
award honors individuals and
organizations for extraordinary
twenty twenty twenty three the
designated as New Mexico
crusaders for justice today in
the house of representatives.
a as the most because of the
recognizing.
One of the honorees
and I'll call on my colleagues
twenty started on could you
please stand.
By Senator.
defender of justice for the
victims of homicide and violent
crime estimates because.
attended as the most maker of
the year and the high school and
that the school New Mexico and
work for the United postal
service for over two decades and
four children and the US Jacob
Nicholas and Elida.
This amount speaker
Fifty miles speaker there is no
greater pain for a parent.
The Bernie a son or daughter.
And he said joined Joe settled
that on.
And selling Sanchez to co found.
The New Mexico St for justice
This has since made it her
mission to help families and
guide them through the process
of dealing with losing a loved
one to violence and how to be
family members to homicide and
violent crime.
Senator please remain standing
I'd like to now as the amount of
speaker
Thank you Mr speaker it's my
pleasure today to be able to
recognize Sallee Sanchez
also one of the co founders of
New Mexico crusaders for justice
I Mr speaker I get to recognize
someone who it heck my.
Has my mother's maiden name.
my my mother is idea Selena
would find something that needed
to be done and would just throw
herself into it and that's
exactly what Sally did
field where she's learned to be
a learn accounting skills and
she now works as a senior staff
accountant and office manager at
her current job.
Sallee is also the grandmother
of state to seven grandchildren
Sallee son Antonio was murdered
on December sixteenth twenty
twenty.
Mr speaker Sallee joined.
Post at the but that'll and
Eliseo total to found the New
Mexico crusaders for justice
because of the lack of support
just a not a a long list of
support resources for her or for
her daughter's.
The New Mexico crusaders for
have lost family members to
violence and by a homicide and
violent crime Mr speaker if we
could even though Ezzell is not
here if I could have the members
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Kind of acknowledge on another
one of our attorneys
Representative the
representative from Bernalillo
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
so those jobs Santa Otero could
you please stand.
Thank you.
kirke before Joe said I was
born.
She was a student at Santa Fe
high and attended Grand Canyon
university Senator was employed
by different companies in Santa
set is married to Chris Otero
and they have two children
Melanie con el and three
The death devastated her family
but the grief did not paralyzed
her actions.
Joe Senate joined I wish or
violence end of support.
In what can be a long time for
victims families.
You know if we just think about
checklist for families that
attend the support group help
knowledge of center or Terrel
side and violent crime thank you
Mr speaker.
the crystal Justice and I will
be able to
Representative mark Duncan to
introduce a one of those members
crusaders for justice.
And if you please stand.
veggie Randall Shorty.
Shiprock New Mexico she grew up
in parts of Colorado before
becoming a resident of curling
New Mexico.
Benji was a preschool teacher
for twenty eight years Benji has
three children Christian who
July twenty first twenty twenty
from the journey into Farmington
New Mexico Zachariah's body was
found July twenty fifth twenty
twenty in the nineties New
crusaders to cover the northwest
part of New Mexico because she
wanted help others get through
the process when losing someone
she is our angel in our part of
the world Mr speaker and I'd
Also as as the most Baker
recognizing the young lady
Representative begin and
torrents Representative skin
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Will Hernandez groping in New
Mexico a small committee sell
the Las Vegas New Mexico she's a
Mexico university studying
business and theater wide to
Lawrence Hernandez a sister and
and now a great aunt Melissa
graduated from west Las Vegas
highlands university in two
thousand four where she
performed with the New Mexico
highlands jazz band
Representative band and my dad
to look at those unless you have
Mexico highlands in two
thousand.
Over ten years as a social
studies Spanish music.
Works with the New Mexico
During the presenters for
justice after enough and Josh
will was wounded at a young age
of seventeen on December thirty
first twenty twenty one loss as
For just is that along with our
family establish the chapter
losses to Mexico in November
of the agency considers and
Justice have helped to cope with
such a tremendous loss chins on
Thank you gentleman from San
Miguel and and
as the most because a I just the
body to do these incredible
ladies.
most pressing please please rise
members of New Mexico considers
for justice as I call your name
should be recognize we have seen
Laura brown you also Landel the
lotus and Senator entity Sanchez
Pamela Martinez the viral
It is with great.
Valerie James Annika science
help bring a different
foundational of space here to
New Mexico to make things better
for all of us for our children
for our grandchildren into the
future thank you.
up on the rostrum could be
seated.
Is the most Baker with that I
stand for questions on the
memorial is there debate on the
memorial.
The presenters are provided as a
little Katie chaining to have on
your desks.
Many of the state.
That basically provides for a
victim advocates in our law
enforcement agencies throughout
our state as to house speaker
and a.
Gallup New Mexico park.
And twenty seven year old
gentleman by the name of Mr us
to.
The incident where the culprit
was pistol whipping the clerk.
In the in Gallup estimates
because we have no victim
advocates.
So that family of that fifteen
year old you.
Is kind of going through.
Keep pursuing justice regarding
the death of our son.
The other hand is the most
Baker.
The state department has seven
victim advocates.
pistol whipping the clerk is
being provided.
It's kind of a pathway the
family understood our state is
justice for.
For their loved one yes the
difference is the amount of
speaker between plan for
spending agencies that have no
put five hundred thousand
dollars into victim advocate
program in our state that went
to the Farmington Police
Department that went to the Los
crucis police department that
Mr speaker this year we only
have a hundred forty thousand
dollars in house bill two.
For victim advocates.
Provide adequate victim
advocates.
Throughout our state and I'm
hoping is the most bigger than
in the conference committee of
house bill two.
yeah
I would like to ask for
unanimous consent.
the house present what in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered we are on final
passage of house memorial forty
three and the vote is now open.
Unless noted to reporters in
this event is that the state is
kind of a share the there
support for this outstanding
organization and also for house
bill twenty one that is the real
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports.
To see no objection it is so
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to miss
Bennet for House labor veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill to
of a federal committee report on
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
system for house bill two ninety
nine of those in favor say by
the same time.
nine as amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation editing pass
Representative small chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're not
All those phones may be as are
going to put up to.
Mr speaker you appropriations
and finance committee to Mr
referred house bill two fifty
seven as amended has had it
under consideration point in
two fifty seven as amended all
those embarrassing of us and I.
This was a test of a committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker I appropriations and
recommendation that a due
process respectfully submitted a
that small chair Mr speaker move
adoption granted optional
Federal committed for the house
transportation public works and
government programs committee
eligible is a yes I would
reported opted.
Mr speaker appropriations and
finance committee to Mr Medford
house bill three sixty as
amended has had it under
consideration point same as
embarrassing if I was in high.
Those those may be just our
committee boarded up to.
Mr speaker appropriations and
committee for now with three
sixty three as amended all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Posibles may be as of a
the recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted a that
small chair Mister speaker
reduction reduction of federal
committee report on house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee subs for House
Suppose may be as having
reported up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too was referred house bill two
fifty has had it under
consideration point it with
recommendation that do pass as
referral could report on house
bill two fifty illegitimacy if I
was a nine.
The schools may yes of the
committee reported opted.
to pass sentence refer to the
provisions of finance committee
Representative Matthew McQueen
chair of the reduction of
federal committed for the Senate
board up to.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
was been referred Senate bill
twenty six as amended has had it
under consideration report same
amended all those information
about the same time.
Posibles may we just have a
committee for about this.
because I am from Albuquerque a
thing to names of two schools
here it might not be correct so
I'm gonna have you all wave at
me thumbs up thumbs down because
school McKinley middle school.
Assumed a high school capital
high school pointed as soon
So that they can use it is in
the house welcome to the house
everybody.
tell you about the Santo who is
with me today because name is
Dale Stroud is a sophomore at
UNM where he's studying in a
double major in political
you for twelve and that you has
been very engaged and am excited
about women in the trades and
making sure that women are
Representative Hochman milieu
thank you Mr speaker so
yesterday everybody may have
seen the cute little biscuits
family business they've been
open for over a hundred years
and in my humble opinion which
may not be on the percent
objective I think they're the
thank you to Selena's for giving
us a little taste about
yesterday thank you generated
I'll make sure my mother doesn't
watches webcasts and hear what
she does from Salinas my mother
is named Selena and they call
her Sally Borrego today is her
ninety sixth birthday I would of
loved to have her here with me
New Mexico she is an Ortega with
Ortega weaver's her sisters were
some of the take a family and
she married my father Ross
after that she and my father
opened the business for thirty
years and they sold southwest
jewelry and arts and crafts
heartfelt Happy Birthday to my
mother Selena Sallee Martinez
but it is.
Birthday the the years
Happy Birthday to you thank you
Mr speaker.
This is the primary go to that
order of Business third reading
of legislation soon objection it
is so ordered members well I
will call your attention to
three and house bill Twentynine
and then we'll break for lunch
and committees and come back
this evening for a little bit
more third reading.
seventy of final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker house
bill one seventy insurers that
billing is consistent with the
to see no debate deleted close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill one seventy do
now pass we are on final passage
of house bill one seventy the
vote is now open.
Gentleman from current about the
with a new Roosevelt and some
again Representative somewhat
are you ready and item number
twelve.
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker house bill
two fifty three relating to
gaming changes the operating
hours for nonprofit organization
licensee and with that we stand
for questions Mr speaker.
Seeing no debate.
And his thanks for just walk
into internet you're exposed
before because we thank you Mr
and I have van develops hall
from gaming commission.
See no debate the gentleman
close.
we are on final passage of house
bill two fifty three as amended
the vote is now open.
Loser close by one of sixty six
in the affirmative zero and the
legal ready and item number five
yes Mr speaker I'm ready however
I think my experts are somewhere
else but we we can we can again.
debate amendment or substitution
generated explain the bill thank
you Mr speaker house bill
seventy six provides the
administrative office of the
emergency clause as well and
with that I'd like to to use my
experts Mr speaker so this is
chief justice Shannon Bacon and
thank you Mr speaker labials I
yield to the lady from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
and lady and the only question I
had about this in Judiciary and
I just want this on the record
center at UNM School of Law
might suffer some from the loss
of the staff that will be going
to the judicial education center
I just wanted to be sure to the
absolutely no impact on that
center at the university
the webcast lives for ever seen
all for the debate generated a
close thank you Mr speaker at
this at this point I move that
house bill seventy six with an
emergency clause do as imminent
as twice amended with an
What is a plant native of the
sixty seven in the affirmative
urinated house bill seventy six
asked was amended in emergency
incentive for placing House Bill
Twentynine as amended with an
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
Matt pops is a needing the to
kind of health workers in the
morning and part of our state
and is a twenty year veteran a
practicing as a physician
Fortunately as the mouse speaker
the presenter Baba is running a
little late as the most because
One read to the cheese and gin
Angela best speaker so just
center House Bill Gates New
Mexico as the speakers the mouse
because this will be the first
of its kind in northeast New
Mexico state house speaker one
treatment center.
House speaker the treatment
center serving opioid patient
population in the seven county
area of northern in northeast
From San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield.
House speaker members graciously
to the gentleman from someone.
Thank you Mr speaker I just have
in terms of when the first
release of settlement monies
came into the AG's office in
twenty twenty one within a
fusion of two million yes
speaker and glad to tell the
is the amount of speaker
gentleman from someone and I on
the other hand the initiative in
terms of this integrated
residential drug treatment
consummate the needed amount to
the to start construction is the
most bigger.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to commend the sponsors
tenacity and sticking with us
until he can get over the finish
amended within that margin to
close to pass final passage of
house bill twenty nine as
amended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
five in the affirmative during
the negative house bill twenty
nine as amended we have an
emergency clause has duly passed
this house the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Gentleman from billion thank you
Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at one
thirty in room three zero seven
afternoon at one thirty and we
will be needing that in room
three seventeen members
signaled.
The gentleman from committee and
stable Representative Alcon
look at is this all.
Being the gin pole and lady from
twenty eighth the last day of
the month.
Change your afternoon committees
will see you at five PM the
house or Senate races and the
five PM this evening.
