Mr chair.
Representative Chasey.
Mr chair I ask unanimous consent
that we resolve ourselves into a
committee of the whole house and
Senate for the purpose of
receiving an address addresses
from the members of the New
Mexico federal delegation
senator Ben ray Lujan and
Representative Melanie A.
Stansbury.
A joint session of the house and
the Senate.
The joint session of the house
and Senate will come to order.
If there's no objection.
The committee of the whole house
and the Senate will come order.
Members and guests who are
joining us today I'm just so you
please stand for Representative
Serrato leads us in the pledge
of allegiance and please remain
standing fall Representative
small leads us in the salute to
New Mexico flag.
You may be seated.
At this time I would ask that
you please help me welcome some
are guests who are here with us
in the chamber guest of senator
Ben ray Lujan we have his
family.
Is beloved mother Carmen on.
Senator Brandon raelynn sister
Jackie.
Partner done he.
This is surely one.
State director on a role metal.
Constituent services director
Pamela Garcia.
Operations manager buddy abate
the.
Deputy communications director
at all in service.
Mentoring liaison committee
Donna.
Representative Stephens on us.
Representative David Parkinson.
Representative Nick my SS.
Representative every child is.
Joining us today against the
Representative Melanie Stansbury
Nora Morris vice president of
how do we check out all the
Asian.
City councilor city Rio Rancho
drive to resolve COVID.
The international association of
firefighters local two forty
four million Timmons.
President of the mainland grand
on the up of the.
Those old men Crawford.
Jack what is.
Mr rose.
More rules run throughs don
Lopez.
Leader in health equity
Albuquerque academy media
Musaeus.
We don't health equity
Albuquerque academy normally.
Student leader and how that
could be Albuquerque academy's
of feeling.
Student leader and how they
could be Albuquerque high school
Marley Fisher.
The county hospital
administrator Christina
Gumbel's.
Mexico formalized a rural
director of government affairs
Tiffany Rivera.
And senator Ben ray Lujan sister
shown in one.
And now it is my honor to
recognize today's first speaker
for like to welcome senator Ben
ray Lujan grazing New Mexico
Senator to join us here in the
state.
The governor.
Thank you very much for that
very kind introduction and Mr
speaker to be with you in.
With all of our leaders today.
On a day like today you think
after ten years.
These are to be here.
And address each and everyone of
you.
The moms here.
To be surrounded with friends
and family.
That's what this body is.
Incredible leaders from.
All over New Mexico.
Every small town feel.
The county big city.
Those of you that.
The agency seconds.
They have a secret recipe for
part of being December
thirtieth.
Tribal leaders.
You make sacrifices to make big
things happen.
And I'm reminded of that every
day.
When I visit mom and those of
you that have gone to visit my
mom at our house know that.
There's a little room the moms
dedicated to my father.
Who.
Committed his life to making a
positive difference for people
all across to Mexico.
And it's ensuring those stories.
The friends and family that
would come and knock on mom and
dad's door.
On a Saturday afternoon.
Because they wanted to visited
there Representative.
Speaker of the house and.
Mom and dad when state can you
please make an appointment to
come back next week or we'll see
you in a month.
They would through the kitchen
table.
For a Cup of coffee.
Sit down and have a meeting we
were all asked to leave.
Because the conversation was
between a constituent.
And that.
To address challenges that led
one space in their daily lives
and a big part of what we do
together.
Is navigating those challenges
when it comes to constituent
casework.
One at a time.
One person at a time one family
at a time and what we come
together and especially with the
frame the time frame that you
work on legislative initiatives
together I think most people
don't realize the work that you
do year round.
Those interim hearings that you
have all over New Mexico talking
about ideas and hearing from
more constituents and building
up a strong record to take
action.
But you come here to take action
on was provided ideas and some
there's unanimous agreement on
others.
We have different approaches to
get their.
But in the end we're here
because we want to make a
difference.
The family that I was raised in
on that small little farm Mister
speaker.
I'm so reminded of a day and I
think I share this with you a
few years ago after I was
elected to the U. S. house of
representatives I came home.
After the fall.
And we're going into a season
where the cows had been there
and you know what house do
accumulated in the barn.
And it was time to clean up.
And so I thought why the heck I
I got elected to the house of
representatives I got out of
this this year.
And dad my brother drove county
with the cities with the family.
But when my dad confronted me
and confronted me at less.
I said why just got elected to
the Congress I'm you know that.
Cultural.
Two years to the Honda center.
In your boots are outside.
Go down there start cleaning.
But like my father all is living
by example do let me take the
top layer off by myself.
And those of you have had a
chance to visit with than those
of you that live on a small farm
know that it's not the first
layer that builds character.
It's ones that's god.
That the character building
begins.
That was there to help me with
that as the speaker of the house
as a representative reminding me
Hey you're still the youngest
setting you have family
responsibilities and I know that
something that we all agree upon
here we work on issues it's
about family whether it's our
immediate family point are
greater New Mexico Family and I
want to thank you all for what
you do day in and day out I look
across the room now and I'm
reminded of visits that I've
been fortunate to have a
conjunction with the many of you
in our districts across the
state taking on issues
Representative whether it was
you and Doreen as we're trying
to navigate this issue where
there was berms that were built
the flooding taking place but
the BLM is not maintaining them
we can fix that and I know we
will because it's your
leadership that brought us
together to shed light on what
we can do for communities.
And families in need help with
it seems that everyone was
turning their back to them.
Thank you.
And I want to thank you for
setting the example on how we
can do things better when we
were in Las Vegas in New Mexico.
And it was Representative small.
Thank Castellano.
Senator when you all just.
Representative Chatfield.
We came together we had a
conversation about the negative
impact that the fire had on the
water system in Las Vegas New
Mexico the entire city was about
to be without water and it was
state legislative leadership
that said we can do better here.
We can come together we can work
with our colleagues and we can
set aside of funding create a
fund to assist when there's
natural disasters across New
Mexico and I want to thank you
all because you recently passed
that idea that started on a
little path next to a major
water way and we know that's a
policy comes together you should
apply to that one that's a good
one.
Putting people first
understand the challenges that
they're facing representatives
on what I still remember when
you and Senator Woods helped
welcome us for one of those farm
bill round tables down and think
Clovis to bring families
together to hear from producers
themselves on what we can do
better and it was that
leadership that paved the way to
market legislation that we've
already worked on.
That's what these great ideas
come from and how we can get
things done Senator Ortiz Pena I
did was at a grocery store that
I saw you last and the we know
that those grocery store visits
for all of us you're not just
going in to maybe get a few
things the family needs.
You're also going to do K. were.
And if we're if we're anything
alive you price said an extra
thirty to sixty minutes when you
go to the store thank you when
we go to church but only after
church.
Are you sitting and chatting
with constituents about needs
that exist in their daily lives
like we did in more and so I'm
again I I still remember on in
my state director who's here
walk side by side with local
leaders down in Rio does so
after we had that terrible fire
but it was the flooding that
created more of Roshen but the
federal agencies we're not
willing to work with the local
leaders there to make a profound
difference and I appreciate what
on it if.
So what's walk a little further.
Who's supposed to be about a
half mile tractor did to five
six my.
Until the federal agencies got
to test.
Might be a model that is I know
many of us live by where I
remember it was governor king
that would often remind is
locked up in a bar don't let him
out to the solve the problem.
You know there's different ways
for us to get together and solve
challenges there's different
ways for us to bring back
stability.
One of the greatest ways to
treat loved ones with.
Respect and dignity.
I think I left a Senator Campos
and senator Munoz from that is
if we had lost Vegas as well.
You know something powerful
about something I learned from
my dad here.
The friendships he had across
the aisle.
In the caucus.
With everyone here at the doors
that keeps us safe.
I see state police officers on
the rostrum.
The details that are around this
capital that fight to keep us
safe and across New Mexico.
Those that keep this place
looking good and clean.
Or that nourishment where maybe
if you skip something van you're
headed to the capital you can
pop into one of these little
areas and visit with the
incredible cooks.
If you they've assembled you
treat everyone respect and
dignity.
The committee staff working
together constituents.
Because when we do that we can
returns ability to these
conversations we can have
respectful disagreements when a
disagreement needs to be had I
know those are challenges that
I'm faced with in the United
States Senate and with the US
house of representatives we work
together to find.
A bridge to get across that
divide.
What I've been fortunate to do
is work with someone like
senator Tim Scott.
Work with senators Rick Scott
Rick Scott by the way when he
was the head of the Republican
responsibility to win back the
majority in the Senate he and I
worked on a piece of legislation
where it was surprising we had
to stand up to the auto
manufacturers in America because
we said based on technology that
has come out of the department
of transportation there is work
that can be done by auto
manufacturers in America
especially the talk about
economists cars self driving
cars.
To include technology in those
vehicles.
To end impaired driving deaths
and accidents.
If a car can drive itself.
Why not include life saving
technology so that we can and.
Thousands and thousands ten
thousand people who lose their
lives every year.
To impaired crash.
We got it passed by the way the
surprised many because it was
one of those partnerships where
many folks and I think it to
come together when senator Ted
Cruz and I worked on legislation
to our friends up in the north
eastern part of New Mexico to
change the way that we could
travel on those rules and bring
a major arterial into the north
eastern part of New Mexico that
will create more job
opportunities open to more
commerce increase safer roads it
surprised many that it was Ted
Cruz than a junior senator from
New Mexico that partner to get
that done.
You can find agreement as you
all know when we many of you
I've learned from I'd study I
watch.
Set the example and how to get
that done and we need to find
more ways to achieve that.
There's an immense opportunities
I know that you are working on
and many of you that I have
talked to and try to find ways
to make this happen.
Every one of you that have
already been working on the
capital outlay initiatives
across New Mexico I want to say
thank you investments in road
and bridge water wastewater
mutual domestics bringing major
solutions at an important time
in our state.
But there's also another tool.
The bipartisan infrastructure
project.
That we passed in the Congress
signed into law by president
Biden.
When I was down in reserves the
with the fire chief was having a
heck of a time because where he
lives of one of those canyons
there's no connectivity we try
to do our best with getting
these mobile companies to bring
these communications on wheels
right to get them where we can.
Increase connectivity areas for
stark.
But they're lucky if they can
get a signal radio to radio car
to car to be able to stay in
touch with the chief of the fire
department that's not right.
This bill creates an opportunity
for us to connect all of New
Mexico in rural towns up in
these downsides down canyons and
it's going to keep us all safer
not just to talk to your
grandparents and check on their
livelihood.
What telehealth more
opportunities for students small
business leaders as well this
will be transformative and I
know that we will find more ways
to work together not just to
invest in more roads and bridges
water and wastewater again
keeping in mind those mutual
domestics across New Mexico a
once and for all eliminating the
digital divide in our beautiful
state we together on that.
I know there's so much more that
you are working on.
I'm not going to lean in to tell
you how to do it or my thoughts
we trust you to do it to help
people to do the right thing to
find that common ground and I
learned about it every day when
I was down in Lee County we're
visiting about the orphaned and
abandoned oil and gas wells
which is also included in the
bipartisan infrastructure bill
it'll create more jobs across
New Mexico and help us in more
rural communities but we didn't
stop there myself and Senator
Kramer we were the partners in
helping get this included into
law this year we've re we I want
to see re authorize we worked on
a program to expand.
How much coverage there will be
because of the bill that we
worked on was built on no data
we now know that there's more
need.
We still came together to make
these investments for the good
of the country and to provide
more and more solutions.
Look at a year ago.
By your by the stroke.
And I want to close with this.
Clearly it's good to see you as
well so congratulations with the
responsibilities.
There's a lot of new perspective
that I have.
Not just on policy but.
This in life.
I was already doing a lot of
work when it came to bring
house.
I'm doing my diligence to do
more.
The number of people that we
lose to stroke every year is
often because we don't know the
symptoms.
What happened to me at six in
the morning I woke up and it was
a little dizzy.
My explanation was gets more
rest do you need to close your
eyes.
Unfortunately called my doctor
my chief of staff my sister
Jackie was here today.
Chairman of your mom's at six in
the morning I don't know why.
She was able to get me to a
paramedic unit Santa Fe County
fire department.
And that paramedic and the EMS
EMS providers by the way who
need more support across New
Mexico so let's find ways to get
that done.
They provide elected by them
looking at me in that unit that
they got me in on all the
region's cleaner vehicle that
morning but the jumped.
Instinctually into lifesaving.
Maneuvers.
I'm alive today because of my
sister Jackie the paramedic the
EMS providers that help get me
to the emergency room the
general the neurologist and
doctors and nurses
a traveling nurse by the way
Tyler who has changed my
perspective on a lot of policy
The folks to prepare the food
there that came in to check on
me and I became friends with
them that would keep that room
looking good as as fresh as he
could be kept when you're in a
hospital room around the clock.
More people should have
opportunities like that no
matter where we live what zip
code how much money we make
we've got to figure this out
said every quarter of New Mexico
not only are we educating more
people when it comes to life
saving reactions you can have
when you're a little dizzy.
When your face may droop a
little you may have trouble with
I side there's a.
Headache that comes on that's
very uncontrollable you can even
fill sometimes some paralysis
there's an acronym be fast and I
want everyone to take the time
to learn it because reacting
sooner or seeing a loved one who
may be going through something
like that worst case scenario
you get them checked.
Everything's okay.
You both sleep better that
night.
But if they need to help.
Time is not on the side of
someone that is experiencing a
stroke.
Those minutes will save
someone's life so I hope that we
can find ways as well.
Whether we talk about it.
We look at legislative solutions
are advocacy.
But I hope that I can find
partners in each and everyone of
you to spread that word across
New Mexico so we don't lose
another loved one in our state
to a stroke because they didn't
know the symptoms of the signs
that they were going through can
we work on that one together.
Thank you Mr speaker is.
How much I appreciate working
with every one of you with our
tribal leaders with our mayors
who are here with us today.
Leisure and land grants in a
sector as.
The judiciary and law
enforcement there's so many to
think and I apologize to
everyone that I've left out.
We have friends that are here in
the gallery.
Family that are here on the
rostrum.
But the last thing that I'll
share with you is that as I've
learned about this is.
In all that you are doing every
day.
I hope you take a moment just to
catch your breath.
Do what you're sitting there.
Just reflect.
Reach out to their loved ones on
the love of.
I hope you all appreciate the
trust that's been put in each
and everyone of you to be here
today representing voices across
New Mexico.
Appreciate that and chair staff
because that's what matters most
the little things that sometimes
get is going to get the hard
pressure of the heart rate up in
the blood pressure boiling.
We can deal with that later.
Let's find ways to find that
positive side on that outlook
and some folks say oh come on
then you're you're going too
far.
During the smile was someone
that positive I.
My Secret Life.
And price in the life of someone
else.
May god bless each.
And every one of you.
I can't thank you enough for
welcoming my mom.
Back to this incredible chamber
after allowing me to share a few
words with you as well.
up stairs we have a table that
we've been doing some case work
with for families that are here
and on it my state or to be
angry at me if I didn't just
close by saying anywhere that we
can work not just a policy
together but on case work
together if there's a gathering
of some sort in the community we
don't need to speak.
A little corner in the back of a
room is all that's needed.
But that we we can change lives
one at a time as well and I know
we're together on that as well
I just don't want to say goodbye
yes.
I look forward to continue to
learn from you and work with you
off thank you again and
opposition everyone of.
On.
And now members of the Senate
and the house it is my honor to
recognize today's second speaker
from the first congressional
district in the great state of
New Mexico representative
Melanie stands.
Right.
Well good morning New Mexico.
It's a beautiful morning to be
here with all of you and to be
here of course with my dear
friend and colleague senator Ben
Ray.
And his amazing family his
mother is.
In the presence of the spirit of
the late speaker Lujan and to
add to be able to just celebrate
his life and legacy and service
in this chamber.
Lieutenant governor more this
Senator pro tem Stewart leader
words speaker of the house that
feels really good my demands and
distinguished members of the New
Mexico legislature it is truly
an honor to be here with you
today.
And it's good to be home not
only here in New Mexico but here
in the people's house and the
legislature.
Was honored to have the
opportunity to serve with so
many of you here in this chamber
in what is one of the most
diverse the most female the most
LGBTQ plus and the most
progressive legislatures in the
history of the state of New
Mexico.
This chamber is made up of New
Mexicans from every walk of life
and every corner of the state
and you come here every January
because like me you are called
to serve you believe in are
people you believe in New Mexico
and you are here to fight every
single day the you are serving
in the legislature for our
communities Y. V. because we are
New Mexicans and we are strong
and we are United and we are
resilience as a people New
Mexicans are full of greatness
and heart and determination and
this is our moment this is our
moment to seize our destiny to
take the lessons of our
ancestors that have been passed
down across generations and talk
to us across every corner of
this state to defend our rights
to our democracy and to defend
the values that every single
person in this chamber holds
dear as a New Mexicans.
As a people.
We have to know this is our
moment to change the systems
that have left so many of our
communities behind to invest in
our children and their future to
fight for justice and
opportunity to protect our lands
and our waters and to ensure the
resilience of our communities
for generations to come.
This is our charge as public
servants and as New Mexicans to
care for one another to lift
each other up and to ensure that
everyone who comes behind us in
this state has more opportunity
than those who came before us.
As a native New Mexican born in
Farmington and who grew up in
Albuquerque this call to service
is personal for me like so many
people who are sitting here
today because like so many of
our families in New Mexico I
grew up in a family that
struggle to make ends meet as
the daughter of working people
and seamstress and a single mom
I grew up bussing tables and
digging trenches and I know what
it's like to not know how you're
going to make it to the end of
the month are you gonna put food
on the table or see a doctor I
know what it's like to struggle
but I also know that has New
Mexicans we are resilient and I
am standing here today as your
congresswoman because of the
countless friends neighbors and
yes public school teachers who
helped to lift me up along the
way because that is who we are
that is what we do is New
Mexicans and that is the work
that I wake up to do every
single day Serbian our state as
your congresswoman and it is
because of that commitment to
our communities the work that we
do in Congress is senator Ben
ray Lujan spoke so eloquently
about that we have been able to
deliver so many significant wins
for our communities in Congress
from the largest bipartisan
infrastructure bill in
generations to the most
significant economic recovery in
innovation built in generations
to the most and largest
investment in climate action
literally ever in the history of
the United States and our planet
and the greatest expansion of
veterans benefits since the GI
bill.
We are fighting every day to
ensure that New Mexicans in our
veterans who proudly served our
country and our communities can
get the care that they deserve
and have the opportunity that
they were born to have that is
why my office is held over seven
hundred community meetings
across the district since I took
office and worked across our
delegation to deliver over a
billion dollars in federal
funding millions to help with
the opioid and Sentinel crisis
to address housing and food
insecurity and invest in
economic opportunity and are you
because our young people are our
future it's why my guests who
are sitting here on the rostrum
and here on the side of this
chamber are from every single
corner of our district our role
and our tribal communities
mayors and firefighters health
care providers veterans farmers
and ranchers teachers and
students and they you strong
workers who are building New
Mexico.
Joining us from to Julian most
shows Bernalillo Moriarty
Reinoso Sandia pueblo so may see
a video to show attendees
mountains not to mention
Albuquerque which is the heart
of our district.
It is this commitment is why we
fought like hell until the final
moments of this last Congress in
December to ensure that we could
get the early childhood
education authorization across
the finish line so that you all
in this chamber could make a
generational investment in our
children and it's why.
I was so proud as my first bill
in Congress which was signed by
the president just months ago to
partner with Senator lu Han to
pass a partnership and
innovation bill to invest in our
stomach economy and empower
students and communities to
build the clean energy economy
of the future and finally it is
why I fought every single day
from the moment I was elected to
get funding for the toll hardly
community school at the Navajo
Nation and I want to thank.
Vice president chapter vice
president Nora Morris for being
here today we had a beautiful
celebration on Friday with
parents teachers and students.
And what I take away from the
celebrations that we have in the
tears of joy that we have that
our communities are depending on
us and I knew in the moment that
I first saw and heard the
stories of the elders and
teachers and students a tall
Julie how this once government
bill boarding school had been
transformed into a thriving
community school where did may
language culture and history are
celebrated but where parents
have to drive long distances to
work to haul water and as our
teachers are having to evacuate
classrooms as water is coming
down the Arroyo where the school
was bill that we were going to
have to work every single day
and Congress until we could get
funding for that school and I we
did until the final moments of
Congress in December and we were
able to secure over ninety
million dollars to rebuild a
school.
Two
generations to come.
Because we are New Mexicans and
we are strong and we are United
and we are resilient and when we
fight we win.
But our work is not done yet and
you'll I hate to remind you of
this have twenty five days left
in this session to get the job
done.
Together we have to finish the
job.
This means fighting to protect
our rights including the right
to protect our own bodies and
control their destiny to pass
the women's health protection
act in Congress and save toward
abortion rights and gender
affirming care here in the state
of New Mexico.
We miss.
Our democracy and voting rights
in Congress we have to pass the
John Lewis voting rights act and
stand against the election lies
and conspiracy theories that
continue to undermine our basic
democracy and values and here in
New Mexico we need you to pass
the New Mexico voting rights act
to ensure that we do in these
values here in.
We have to tackle drought and
climate change by putting those
federal dollars infrastructure
employment dollars to work we
have to make good on the
governor's promise to code a
five one of the most progressive
climate standards in the country
into law.
We have to pass legislation to
modernize our water laws in
Congress hand here in New Mexico
we really need to do this.
We must ensure that our
communities can recover and
rebuild in the wake of these
devastating fires by getting the
billions of dollars the Senator
lu Han and our entire delegation
help to secure on the ground to
our families and to help
implement the law that you just
pass to get that relief there
sooner.
We must care for and lift up our
community is just as we have at
the federal level through our
historic recovery bills.
We must honor our trust in our
treaty responsibilities to our
tribal and pueblo nations honor
our land grants and are a safety
as and historic communities and
invest in the well being of our
communities just as you all and
our governor have proposed to do
with bills to expand rural
health care to care for elders
to protect social security
Medicare to address childhood
hunger in school meals and
homelessness across the state
and yes to make that largest
investment in early childhood
education ever in the history of
this state.
We have to ensure.
That our children and our
communities are safe by banning
assault weapons and investing in
our mental and behavioral
health.
And we must act on a bipartisan
basis to finally
professionalizing and rate this
body.
Our work is not done yet.
But New Mexico is already
leading the nation thanks to all
of you in your work in this
chamber over the last several
years we are already leading the
nation and early childhood
education the extension of
support payments like the child
tax credit to families across
the state free school meals for
our kids and of course free
college tuition for every single
new Mexican but our work is not
done in our communities are
depending on us you all have
been elected to make that
happen.
So now it's our moment to.
For our communities who've been
left behind to change the system
and to do everything that we can
over the next twenty five days
to ensure that we can change the
future and the trajectory of
this state.
Because we are New Mexicans and
we are strong and we are United
and we are resilient.
So it's time to finish the job
in New Mexico let's get back to
work thank you very much.
Once again the big round of
applause for both of our
speakers today thank you for
joining us in New Mexico
legislature.
Mr chair the chair recognizes
Representative Representative
Gail Chasey Mr chair I ask
unanimous consent that the whole
house and Senate rise and report
progress the joint session of
the house will come to order.
Mr chair Representative Chasey.
I ask unanimous consent that the
joint session of the house and
Senate being now dissolved if
there's no objection.
It is so ordered.
Thanks for.
We had on this.
Join us.
In the that's a good question.
This.
This
A couple.
The.
Basically needed on our side.
Please.
Yeah.
Thank thank you to our
distinguished guests and all of
their guests for joining us
during this morning's joint
session.
We appreciate seeing and hearing
from all of you could please do
us a favor and gently exit the
chambers of the house can
reconvene for business.
Mr speaker.
The house Dennis says until four
thirty today.
Thank you gentle lady.
The house was in recess until
four thirty PM this afternoon.
