People millions if they don't
have the postal.
And Representative just just to
keep it all on the record say
wait until we have a recording
trying to half of side.
Just because we've been to this.
Is there.
Have somebody checking outside
justice can argument yeah she's
been.
Austin checking and yet not
right here.
In the room following the.
Madam Lyster we have technical
difficulties and and in water
yesterday and didn't have.
We spend all morning waiting for
it to do things right same thing
in transportation.
Okay.
Jinxing.
Is the whole shebang thank you
Sir for taking them and I'm
going to give us five minutes
to actually get a drink of water
to do it is rational to that I
integrate will come back and
check where we are in five
minutes please still has few.
Can.
It is.
The program administered by the
department approximately
insurers qualified electors
receiving benefits are offered
the opportunity to register to
vote or update an existing
certificate registration without
duplication so my question
regarding the center presented
first of all are we going to
give extra funding to this
department to.
Over here Representative Madam
chair representative I'm
actually glad you asked about
this provision so.
At the Human Services RT.
Enter at and the are a national
registration act in state law
there are you designated
registration provider is backed
Costas is going on right ten
plus years ago they were under a
DOJ consent decree to comply
with those federal provisions
because they receive federal
funding right so any state
agency that receives federal
funding is sort of a designated
motor voter so what this
language is doing is just
clarifying language because that
one ended up happening madam
chair representative was that
the understood the mandate.
To suggest that they had to find
a paper for every single time
they sent out an update which
every six months but budget so
individuals were re register to
vote constantly and so madam
chair representative finally
this is just saying is that we
can work together with them to
develop a somewhere streamlined
process so that they comply with
the requirements are endearing
without duplication madam chair
members thank you madam chair
representative so the federal
government mandates them to do
this program that's in the
center Representative madam
chair and representative every
motor vehicle division in the
country and every state agency
that receives federal funding is
designated under the national
voter registration act of
nineteen ninety three as a voter
registration provider and as
already required to provide
those that are registration
opportunities okay thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative so I appreciate
that answer and so I just hope
we're not like pressuring people
I hope they're not feeling
pressure to vote when they're
getting budget chair
representative.
I feel kind of like.
Targeting students that the
population manager duty that in
exactly Madam chair
representative I think the point
of working with us to streamline
the process is so that they're
not feeling like every time they
return paperwork they have to
fill out a form construction
okay thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative so
then.
Questions can be brief itself
is twenty four so the next page
over.
Requesting to be added to the
monthly payment for this madam
chair it is that what you have
to say hi if the state that you
want to be on the list what's
the process to get off the list
if you no longer wish to be
Madam chair representative.
I'm so Madam chair
representative you'll be
automatically removed if you if
you move on and if you change
addresses but also you would
just submit a written request
the clerk.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so you can no
longer vote at all.
Madam chair representative noted
I mean.
Yes you could do that but if you
wanted to not always get it out
in the mail you could submit a
request to County Cork saying
rather not to.
You madam chair thank you
Representative and it would need
to is there a specific language
that's requested another
specific language to opt in
their specific language opt out
Madam chair representative will
you know under under the power
power rulemaking that my office
has will just per prescriber
form and you know any individual
wants to they can just you know
get that off the internet and
and and okay thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and my last question is
regarding the native American
voting rights act to sing.
Excluded in this bill so have
you considered Madam chair
representative.
Transportation.
Through the state to ensure that
voters can get to the polls
whether that be at a specific
center within the area or just
statewide I guess in rural areas
have you considered funding to
the state.
Transportation for voters that
may need it Madam chair
representative.
No.
Sure I'm Madam chair
representative I'm.
Not not as such this is the way
we have mobile early voting on
units and opportunities that are
funded specifically and and you
know they don't just go to our
our rural tribal areas they go
to rural areas as well and we do
find that funding so basically
rather than having to pick up of
the and take them to the nearest
polling place the place of that
and we can we could and should
do more of that.
Thank you.
Year and the fly.
I just want to add that this is
the reason why the ballot boxes
are important.
Different government.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I would just.
Let me be involved for or don't
have relatives that come to help
them they pay they get groceries
delivered and things like that.
They may not even.
Please have the address so if
they can't go put it in their
their mailbox to send it back.
Medication is something we might
want to just consider those
people who do the office will
when the of a chair
representative so that's all I
had I hope thank you.
The second.
Madam sponsor one is.
I can compare.
This is a question of my own
around this bill but this
committee has been robust and
thorough discussion.
Everyone's had to get their
questions answered.
Can now move forward with you do
Raul.
Representative on in order to
yes.
Representative law is like to
explain my vote.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am and I'd like to
explain.
Representative Zamora no.
Are you sure Figueroa yes.
Madam chair Johnson yes.
By both X..
I have a six to three had.
You.
M. sixty seconds for
Representative lane is.
Representative were you.
Enter really quickly I just I
appreciate some of the many of
the aspects of regarding the
American I think that's
important sure access however I
don't like this petition
regarding the automatic voter
list seems like a very
burdensome process for a lot of
individuals have to opt out
after the fact especially
regarding the religious concerns
I do at those.
Following.
Relations of thank you madam
chair I didn't think it too much
time forty five seconds.
Representative every.
Madam chair and madam secretary
and he to get wrapped around the
axle fell shall street.
That's the issue.
Thank you Representative thank
you Sanchez.
Move on to the next billing
committee.
The
house is.
Admitted.
Here it's.
Yes.
Okay.
Full
of.
The.
And my experts Steven Curtis of.
Self.
Marks.
Related to this to this bill is
the third time I presented it
because in twenty twenty one it
passed the house as it is with
the exception of the amendment
creating a partnership Fund it
passed it passed both the Senate
committee and then we ran out of
time so I'm happy to be bringing
it back
as you probably are all aware
there's a tremendous move in our
state to reigniting inflation
career technical education pre
apprenticeship programs and
apprenticeship programs and I
think that house bill forty six
as amended the public works
project contributions really
does support that really
encourage us to expand job
opportunities in the trees and
it adds the highway
construction profession to
either setting.
He to the P. Y. that's the
public works initiative of
training.
and so I really believe it's a
win win for everyone else since
that time.
Just give you a couple of
interesting statistic.
I'm encourages you to either
join as an industry your company
to starters for to start in
support your own programs you
pay into your own registered
ship program or if you don't
what
I want public works commission
training but.
What the split among all the
distribution programs to be used
for education and instruction
and in the last year
apprenticeships and grow at the
end of twenty twenty two there
were fifty four registered
apprenticeship programs with
over twenty one hundred
sentences that's an increase in
a year of thirteen more programs
and three hundred fourteen more
famous apprentices so section to
be of the bill removes the
exemption for street highway of
road Hilliard maintenance
contracts with employers
who are doing public works now I
want to add one more thing.
And the.
Here and of course it's not here
but the the bipartisan
infrastructure law now will Fund
you can use that word.
Ownership funds so someone asked
me the last committee why
weren't they included what we
believe it's because it didn't
have that financial advantage to
have the.
I thought.
Thanks.
So it's it's the highway funding
for workforce development it's
bipartisan infrastructure law
section fifteen oh double oh
seven workforce development
training and education gives
flexibility to fund workforce
development activities and it
states that the limited funds
from for large federal aid we
programs can be used for this
purpose so that's a major change
and support for the highway
companies that build our roads
and bridges so with that I'm
gonna ask my expert witness
Stephen Christianity some self
at any remarkable Center
questions.
You thank you madam chair
members of the committee chair
speaker this journey labor
attorney and acts of
and I don't have a whole lot to
add to what was said the
I can tell you that even though
furniture programs are growing
need for adventure programs are
growing faster.
South Carolina two skilled
trades were frankly we don't
have enough workers New Mexico
with the James license to do the
work and
this bill by removing an
exemption that maybe maybe maybe
since nineteen ninety two with
this bill essentially enacted
were federal highway funds could
not be used by states for
workforce development programs
removes that exemption
currently there are the the the
amount of the contribution is
set by the department workforce
solutions and sixty cents per an
hour on a public works project
as I need to do what I for those
the development of the I
contractor any trading Fund this
using a printer program in which
the contractor
It's a participants are there in
the number of those.
And if a certain technical
amendments to the bill that are
just dealing with the changing
of the name of the department
look for solutions and then
finally it does create this fund
with the federal workforce
solutions to allow for
essentially
scholarship type activities to
cover the cost to the minutes
for entry into this program the
hope is that that will increase
access to lower income
families are people of working
age you could participate if you
would.
As in areas.
In a land thank you it's like
going to college program plus a
hundred dollars for your
materials in your books so
that's why we added the
partnership funds to fill and
without questions.
Thank you Representative.
The comments in the room where
we do we have folks who are here
is the work of the house bill
forty.
And we have folks who are here
to speak in opposition.
Well say now let's start with
support and let me ask that you
be super grief we have twelve in
its.
Or so try not to repeat.
But stand up and say you support
by all means starting on my
left.
Chair members of the committee
discussed the issue this within
chemical contractors association
chief contractors association
New Mexico chapter of electrical
contractors association this is
from support of the bill we
believe everyone is to page and
says all over for Sanchez.
And madam chair members of the
committee my name is to retire
and the secretary designate
Department of workforce
solutions we strongly support
this bill the number one
question I get is how to
increase.
Rates especially among women and
getting within the trades and
demonstrating excellent have
verification is one of our
strong strategies.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee my name is Gerald
Gillum service president leaves
International Union of America
sixteen we stand in sponsor for
this thank you.
Yeah just deal of business
manager arm will provide local
for ninety five important
information for.
Four five and we are huge to
support this bill.
There's too much for you I B. W.
six eleven stand strong
supporters bill thank you.
Joe maker United association
local far from I would first
like to thank many of you are
also participated out here for
the trees in that and really got
to figure hands on water
partnership programs look like
just a reminder that for every
dollar according to the US
department of economics and
commerce for every dollar spent
in oppression is a twenty eight
dollar return on public benefits
so with all the road money
coming in I purchasers
infrastructure long.
Really bring up those
investments I supported thank
you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Brian Condit
Mexico building trades council
we stand in full support of this
this is our second or third time
here you can get it done we come
to the conclusion that funding
governorship as I think it's a
potluck in every segment of the
industry is so I strongly urge
your support.
Thank you madam chair members
of the job that you Mexico
federation of labor thirty four
thousand members approximately
twelve and public and private
sector in support of the
semester thank you.
Our own lives with his
not the slightest garbage in New
Mexico Central supports bill
thank you.
All right let's go to the zoom
if you are here to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Start with miss Jenny Jernigan.
Please yourself access with the.
All can you hear me yes I did on
me we can thank you thank you
changer and again with the New
Mexico utility contractors
association and although we do
support apprenticeship programs
and training and love the
scholarship aspect of this bill
we do we are against house bill
forty six because many public
works contractors do not have
access to have to apprenticeship
programs in place and therefore
it would be forced to pay into a
fund that they cannot receive
the benefit from at about sixty
cents an hour sent to an
apprenticeship Fund that will
take away funds for in house
training and other training by
the business due to limited
funds by the business industry
and crafts that do not have
approved apprenticeship programs
are still highly trained and are
held to the same safety
standards as all public works
contractors including state and
federal safety standards many
contractors have in house
training and and House
apprenticeship programs that
will not qualify for the funds
being collected forcing
contractors to contribute to a
fund they cannot benefit from is
wrong we implore the committee
to keep the type a prevailing
wage exempt projects can be
large and last four years as an
example of a new medical
contractor provides the
following a company with two
hundred and eighty five thousand
man hours on public projects
spends a hundred and twenty
thousand dollars trainings is up
I'm sorry that was that was a
minute thank you.
Is there any other opposition in
the zoo.
Okay do we have support and
assume.
Seeing none we go to the
committee madam chair.
Mr Santa to speak there's
someone.
Previous research thank you.
By sending all of Representative
the associate contractors of New
Mexicos all highway contractors
I will repeat with the.
A lady just said all this add on
to that just to give you an
example of how the highway
contractors acted for example of
the people that do distracted of
are subject to the sixty cents
per dollar and there's no
benefit the only translates to
describe people who do the
traffic control signs slow stop
they would be impacted this
subcontractor nori there's no
way to them the only to be an
apprentice to do that I could go
down the road in the several
subcontractors that one
application as well receive that
in addition to of the sixty or
so practice programs really like
eight or nine that really
benefit we construction and so I
think it'll be inequitable that
have basically have to fund
supported by these folks but not
half of the apprenticeship
programs for the so just to keep
everyone is you those two points
but just to reiterate that that
is our issues support is
programs but we think that is a
better way to.
Thank you Sir.
Yes thank you madam chair
committee members of general so
that I.
It's also lobby for the
contractors highway contractors
thank you for hearing us but.
Present system we have I think
works very well Los Alamos labs
was almost seventy laps.
Ricky that's very beneficial
because they they requires very
skilled workers we're highway
workers also requires a lot of
skill but we
we do a lot of work in small
communities throughout the state
we take pride when we go to
communities to do an improvement
role we hire as much possible as
we can local you do business
there are workers stay in the
motels even the restaurants so
this changing this now I think
would be a real deterrent to a
small communities that is rolled
over and point of them and the
white Quinn contractors goes to
work in those small communities
so they get jobs whether the
labour's flag or thank you.
That's been the thank you very
much.
Yes thank you for coming to
speak all right now to
committee.
Sorry for the is.
All.
Was our Representative we.
Madam chair
representative sense.
So
Mr just for intended a
A class at the council state
governments we have a long
before.
The more.
Out of that in the United States
what we need or.
What a society is if you'll look
at a perfect Christmas tree so
the youngest said the part of
the old was six at the top.
What the United States
has is a Christmas tree that
about halfway down stars there
we and we're.
And that is that basically we
just didn't have enough kids.
We have one point seven and I
can't remember whether it was
two point four two point seven
that that you need to stay in
the upper portion.
And so at a National Council of
state was.
Last year.
Presentation that city county
state and federal government and
basically they were finding the
twenty thirty and forty percent
of job positions filled.
here if the state of New Mexico
January first there were five
thousand open positions here in
the state so we don't have
enough kids of that swerved one
of our problems is on this I'd
like to talk to you about a
couple things so let's go over
to page three and we're going
one one three three we're story
came.
That one which.
And from here do do those the
people talking after they have
training or do they not trading
or people.
madam chair and Representative
Rehm they have training.
They may or may not the until
recently federal funds for Iraq
to be used for the state
workforce development things so
with this bill would do to
encourage them to register their
friendship.
which is a process of the state
to register for ship program
with report provides benefits to
the contractor that in the last
eight years wages work projects
so some of these some of the
skilled trades
are they have a program some of
the.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
Rexford them.
What trade are they not training
their people and that they need
to be trying to.
I want to say two things of
madam chair and Representative
read.
In the construction business
they do losses okay however D.
O. T. reimburses them eighty
cents per hour for this losses
so no apprenticeship company
developed an apprenticeship they
would not pay into the P. what
fun and they would still get
eighty cents back for having
their people go through the
course is the other thing is one
of our commentators talked about
route stripers I think there's
anybody that I've ever met I've
met apprentices that came from
that program so once the life
long road straight careers and
so I appreciate it yes dignity
and a career path so it's not
just a job a stripy route or I
always see now you see the women
holding the signs they're not
gonna hold a sign still there
sixty years old they're going to
have a printer ship career path
so they can advance both in
their skills and their their
finances by doing a pressure
packed.
Madam chair representative I
agree with the training okay so
don't take this is I'm anti
trade.
So and perhaps maybe your expert
we have the state what would it
be if I have a construction
company and I did training money
people.
Properly work in the field what
liability would I have.
when it hit enter
if I chairman both chairmen
excuse me.
Madam chair representative range
you would like to think that
injured however the pressure
programs sort of the call
centers include a class but also
on the job training hours and
they provide the path towards
the coveted during his license
the end of the process which
allows
the employee to work these
various skilled trades if you
asked a question earlier about
trades that are involved in the
construction.
If an operator wants Siemens
masons are other labor semi
skilled and unskilled in the
trade center used in highway
construction all of which are.
All four which published their
existing projects programs and
other
Other areas.
After some of the proposed tax
school districts.
So madam chair and stretched for
the.
The the non union contractors
who.
Have Germany.
Four have people it should be
working as during the what
you're telling me is they don't
have jury ma'am or they don't
have journeyman that are
certified R. Madam chair
representative reinvest Act that
did not you project is the same
that you contacted Federal
Register programs that
apprentices and
J. as well.
And madam chair.
Representative.
So it's.
We say it this way so.
If I want to go to see them the
community college there of
Albuquerque and I wanted to turn
that off.
It almost sounds like because
I'm gonna go to that college I
have to the University of New
Mexico for me to attend that.
If what are you doing is putting
and where are we going to go to
school.
And so these non union
contractors and thank you for
the answer have their own
schools their training and their
own people there are beginning
gentleman certifications.
To go ahead and force that group
to pay into another group.
What they already have the
training I I don't think it's
reasonable at all.
And madam chair and
representative one of the things
I think was brought out this is
far enough away so if we go over
to page two.
Forty contractors so.
Okay let's talk about contract
so madam chair yeah and and
Representative or experts so you
have the major contractors who
wins the bid for the job.
Then he hire subcontractors is
that correct.
Representative Madam chair
representative yes that is.
So madam chair of Mr experts so
we're gonna have the contractor.
Paying into this in the year
Fund and now we're going to make
every subcontractor.
Madam chair representative I
think any practices not a you
fund this P. what frontier a
place equally you and not.
Apprenticeship programs that's
the first thing
at I'm sorry a lesser chance
that Los if you.
Press to pay into a fund to you
yes not less okay.
I also find something Madam
chair representative in our
state I am I said that there's
over fifty percent programs
those are not you programs the
city of Farmington for example
has for apprenticeship programs
that aren't you the people up
fund is for apprenticeships and
it doesn't matter if they're you
on you and they're board has you
on you representatives sitting
on it just to be very clear.
And madam chair of
Representative I I agree so
we'll just say here's here's one
college whatever you want to
call do what's called we're
calling to your call.
And then here's another group
that is trading I mean we look
at see if they are then I don't
know that they offer actual
courses and but there are there
are trade school you know and
you've mentioned Farmington
there are trade school but madam
chair and expert I want to go
back to my original question is
so was working at the general
contractor who wins the bid for
for the project.
He's into this year what funds
by this this bill right here is
that correct madam chair
secretary for all contractors
except for St highway ones
that's currently correct under
this bill that would also apply
to St James park it madam chair
and Mr Rexford now he hires
subcontractors to work for him
so those subcontractors are now
paid them as well is that
correct manager secretary being
yes they have the obligations
based on a per then worker our
amount set by the department of
course issues faced by all
contractors and I want to add
Madam chair representative it's
possible that the sub
contractors already have a
pension programs so they're not
going to pay additionally the P.
what program because if you have
an apprenticeship program you
your money goes into your only
program so highway contractor to
make registered apprenticeship
program and then they do not pay
into the P. what program.
Because they have their own
repairs.
Okay so madam chair and
representative we out of the
eight subcontractors because
they already have their program.
And our and our food and more
double pane and we've got the
general contractor and we have
to subcontract.
Madam chairs are Representative
green
There is no double payment is
based on a work our basis so if
the contractor's employees work
fifteen hours on the project it
is sixty cents for fifteen hours
the stock options in place for
twenty hours a day that is also
subcontractors may or may not
the same the General Electric is
here.
Participate in existing
register.
Madam chair representative and
Mr Rexford let's take the.
The scenario that is proposed a
moment ago do the The Oregonian
ask it this way is the person
who strife in the highway after
the construction and a
subcontractor of.
I.
Madam chair representative brain
that could very well be the
case.
On the way that the public works
project this project is that.
And madam chair and districts
for is that person who striving
the highway eighteen in this
file so if you want I
this bill.
Madam chair representative
mainlander this billions of
madam chair and.
Representative I don't think
that's right you know
they have to have a
certification of jury then
whatever the.
Drive the truck the stripes or
what have to have a jury
managers whatever to actually
think that one.
Madam chair really and
Representative G. panels on the
contract we can we can take this
scenario but if we don't know
their status see already having
pressure program if they're just
a local hire we can't really
say.
Certainly Madam chair
representative at a minimum if
you're operating
you know heavy equipment there
is injured are there handing
there may not be true.
Shares
madam chair.
What and representative.
When when I look at Mr Santa Fe
testified I recognize him as the
head of department of
transportation retired I think
he has a real good idea who pays
stripes funds roads when he was
the head of deities so I have a
real problem that what we're
doing is we're going now
grabbing money from everywhere
that we can and we're gonna put
it in the T. with university and
we don't care that you have your
own university or another
university it's all in this pot
you've got a rate to go you've
got to pay this university even
though you're gonna go to this
university I really have a
problem with that.
Madam chair representative there
is an exemption down slowest
hiring contractors were left out
now who we contractors have.
Available to them millions and
millions of dollars federal
government says you can use for
pre apprentice and
apprenticeship programs you like
as a state you system with all
the people doing again this
applies only to public works
projects and P. what Fund.
Device that money back to the
registered of pension programs
you get I think right now it's
over a thousand dollars for
apprentices apprentice it comes
back to the apprentices into the
programs that they represent.
Madam chair representative I've
been down the road contractors
their offices down on Edith you
know I'm trying to remember
about what the addresses and
they have a large tree in rural
and I've gone down there and
they had training in in progress
and so.
They're training their people.
They're they're getting them to
joining them or whatever sort of
creation they need to work on
the roadway.
Because you got federal funds
involved so if they're not
survive they're not going to be
able to work on that is that
correct Mr rex for madam chair
sure being I believe that is
correct the actually the
requirement for certifications
is usually a state the
construction ensures Division
that determines licensure
requirements and madam chair
representative they do get
eighty cents per hour back and
if they had it been
apprenticeship program a
registered pension program they
would still get that eighty
cents fat.
Yes madam chair out and
Representative yes okay but
they're going to pay sixty
percent of those T. white
college so that their of their
people are going to this other
call Madam chair representative
if they have a registered
pension program they do not pay
into a P. what program because
to their own program.
This is an I just have a real
problem and share that what
Well there Clovis.
There's been people killed at
that transition because it
involves her.
It involves transition from a
two lane for a four lane.
And not only is our car coming
into that there's a car
passenger.
And who did I work with to make
that safer so we will have
another death that transition.
Was the striker.
Chair representative you're
correct and I do not want to be
little to work at the.
So I stand corrected in the way
of express myself thank you I'm
sorry madam chair and and and
representative of I think that
was very point and for important
point that needed to be brought
up.
Thank you in in this bill.
That's exactly what this bill
does.
Is it cuts down the little
person.
And it cuts down the contractors
that are getting started and
trying to make a future and
maybe become a big contractor
and maybe become part of the
union.
For the workers to do have a you
behind it stuff but this doesn't
advance.
The small guy.
This advances.
You is.
Big business.
And it doesn't give a chance to
our little business then.
That were so much part of in the
state of New Mexico being so
rule as we are.
In the population that we have.
Madam chair and representative
Representative and and expert
witness.
That's all comments and
questions I think.
Thank you Representative
Representative log thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative gonna hit on
Representative is on lotus point
but I do a couple other
questions so I appreciate that
and you know I think we do value
our workers where they work you
know I think that you want to
make a career out of striping
roads are holding a sign and a
construction site.
Good on you you know anything
anyone who's productive in our
society they should be commended
for putting for that effort so I
I appreciate that comment
Representative Zamora and so I
just had a quick couple of quick
questions about funding so how
much with this this change in
the law how would this change
the cost of current projects
madam chair Representative X.
for.
Madam chair representative block
We did an analysis of one years
of public works projects and.
of person hours protecting those
projects
our conclusion is assuming it
and this is assuming that
everyone has to pay the sixty
sensitive I because they do not
participate in a process of just
like the sort of the most
expensive sort of assumption
that could be made and it was I
believe point three percent of
the total highway funding.
The projects for that particular
year.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so do you an
estimate of per project let's
say.
Well it's I'm sorry Madam chair
representative by workers
it that was based on the total
aggregate of all projects.
For single year
just looking and then if you are
contributions are set per work
hour K. pop so it's not
different from one country to
the other except to the extent
that the
The total number of person hours
involved in the project.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so how much of
that point zero three percent
amount to dollars the
contributions to the left on
that I believe it was a little
north of nine hundred thousand.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and that's total
or is that total for the seven
million dollars almost million
dollars is yes closer to nine
one but I don't recall exactly
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative do you know if
the current budget proposal
includes those costs that would
be does not that nine hundred
thousand dollars chair
representative for road
projects.
Madam chair I'd Representative
like I was going to send
question because that are that
that meant that Adam October
second best contributions from
the employer this is it.
Yes Madam chair representative
it's not doesn't require
appropriation.
The people.
Chair representative.
In terms of the point you know
you you have to bid for current
projects that you submitted when
you did that R. F. P. with the
state.
And that did not include what's
proposed in this bill Madam
chair representative so.
I believe this would probably
put an undue burden on that
employer who was contracted
because that this new figure was
not already included in that
stress Madam chair
representative can you help me
on that okay Madam chair
representative Akhil that this
would not affect current
projects because.
Thank you so it would be for
future projects Station when
this bill passes part of the.
This is for those projects and
madam chair representative it
would depend how contracted.
If they have And pressure
program we're not on if they had
a partnership program and they
had a gentleman with three
premises be supervised you can't
say how much of it because it
would depend on how these
structured or restructure their
business.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I just so we both
planned projects.
That are already in the planning
phase they're not current
projects that they are plans
with this affects them Madam
chair representative Madam chair
representative again it depends
on how the company decides that
they want to registered
apprenticeship program or not.
In in in light of if this bill
passes or doesn't pass.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative by.
Concerns about the extra cost.
Lawyers and contractors would
have to.
Spend and then this could also
affect how many individuals are
on the site that means how many
jobs are we allowing and this
could have a negative impact
especially on these folks who do
want to do this kind of work
regardless if they are certified
or not certified so I just have
those concerns madam chair
representative thank you thank
you Representative
Representative re for a second
time.
Madam chair representative in
New thanks for bringing up that
point what do now said one if
this passes now it's often the
future new study the year
basically what you said is we've
added one million dollars on top
of the road projects for for
whatever year stuff coming here
so madam chair and
representative what is it costs
currently to one that tia was
school per year.
Madam chair representative I'm
not quite sure to stand your
question because the P. what
program the
Public works transhipped
training program is funded by
the contributions into it.
So it it's not I can't say it
has a cost okay madam chair and
representative so the school is
currently your.
Budget overview.
What is their budget their
overall budget for the year.
This information.
All.
Programs that.
Okay I will try to answer that
right Representative chair
representative right you keep
talking about the school there's
not one for Instagram there are
something like fifty four fifty
four registered apprenticeship
programs I can dissipate and if
you want to have their own
budgets I can tell you that the
money coming to the address of
programs is not.
Adequate to fully fund so that
they currently have a
That means that they do it but.
The with respect to five of the
nine hundred thousand adding to
the class again that is point
three percent of the total this
is a it's it's it's a very C.
point zero three percent so it's
a very small percentage of the
total hybrid projects on it and
and that.
And madam chair and
representative they only hate if
they don't have their own
apprenticeship program.
Madam chair and representative
so.
So.
Your.
Why in which over on page three
one two or three for those
companies that do their own
training.
So they already have a.
Yeah so but madam chair and
representative.
So they have fifty four programs
and you're saying they're
running deficits what is a
deficit per year for that
training cost
I'm sure it and Representative
there's another death deficit
that affects state because each
organization whether it's the
city of Farmington which has its
purpose or whoever has their own
program they run their
apprenticeship program and then
the money from those people
participating in public works
programs that pay into the fund
that money isn't divided among
the registered programs so it's
based on the contributions may
they're divided into the
registered programs M. there was
an exemption in the beginning
where one trade group that road
construction companies were left
out and everybody was included
so we're saying in light of our
commitment as a state to robust
ownership programs the fact that
now we've added a huge amount of
federal funding to support road
construction.
Pre apprenticeship and
apprenticeship programs it's
time to include to get away from
the exemption include everybody
for the sake of our whole state.
And opportunities.
And it's a solvable difference
to.
In and how we believe everybody
should be involved in a.
Madam chair and.
Representative what I'm trying
to understand so we're get nine
hundred thousand or almost a
million that we're gonna photo
there.
Is the current schools they're
all certified that you like and
everything are they running
deficits.
More they fully funded Madam
date that I can answer for all
of them I I can only say that
managers increase our that this
is not the only source of
funding for this purpose
so whether or not they ran a
deficit is there's an again
associate general contractors as
our producer programs lots of
mom and pop
shops participate in that
program under this bill eight
even date would not be required
to do what because every
dissipated often for.
I.
I
think we're going to circle.
In need of circling on your
point or so we go to the book.
I think the the.
I think we need to go to share.
That that hold in my hand up for
all I'm sorry Representative
very super fast for second time
everybody down this road thirty
not a second time.
Madam chair elect New.
Representative ran circles
really.
Okay.
Madam chair and and
Representative so you stated
that there's federal money to
cover this program for anybody
that wishes to participate am I
correct in that chair
representative on madam chair
what and Representative what I
said is let's see.
Yes.
The precise test managers as
Representative Zamora there is a
lifting of restrictions on the
use of federal highway funds
occurred with a bipartisan
infrastructure act twenty twenty
two used to be that this is
probably explains why the highly
contractors were exempted from
this with this bill was
originally enacted in nineteen
ninety two because the the
federal funds could be used by
the state towards workforce
development out here so it's it
makes sense now to revisit the
exclusion that was one one
industry group got to exclude
themselves from what all the
other issues are participates so
madam chair and expert witness
if that federal money changes
and then they're not allowed to
do that.
Who's gonna pay for these at the
bottom line is that the
taxpayers of the state of New
Mexico one of paying for these.
Extra cost to building roads am
I correct.
Or any other construction
madam chair secretary of state
Representative Zamora.
Yes
As of all public works projects
they are funded by tax.
is and and madam chair and
representative I see this bill
as as an increase in taxes to
the taxpayers bottom line at the
end of the day and therefore
will be able to support yourself
thank you madam chair and
representative.
Thank you Representative which
you call the roll.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative walk no ma'am
Representative Chasey is yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Lara.
Question yes.
Madam chair yes.
I.
What is the house bill forty six
as amended has health care.
Thank you and committee we are
late so house bill one seventy
one in the building right next
to me.
Thanks.
And it.
If you do it.
That was on my.
Which is
the work station and.
