What is particularly is that we
want to ensure the people access
to health care through a
pregnancy and that's what this
interest will access to should
be again with.
Will stand by.
Good.
From the media I am told and I
consider myself a letter webcast
is backed up so please continue
with debate.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I'd like to move forward to
section four AA.
Inspection for a as I read it.
The Attorney General or district
attorney may institute a civil
action in District Court if the
Attorney General for the
district attorney has reasonable
costs.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to as
I said before I'm not an
attorney but.
If I understand the statutes
correctly.
If the DA.
Is acting as a civil attorney
the DA.
Seeking to enforce civil rights
are no longer entitled to
prosecute Torio community.
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
we when we take the next step of
this the language inside of this
bill reasonable because there's
actually in the criminal
standard.
So.
I'm not sure.
It's very confusing when we talk
about civil versus criminal law
with respect to that and if this
and if.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
district attorney.
Chances to go this route they
give up all of their immunity Mr
speaker and gentle lady I'm not
sure if that's the intent of
your legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jim I apologize if I can get a
little clarity on that do you
mean there
sorry if I could just get
clarification I apologize.
Gentlelady we start the sentence
off with respect to the turning
general or the district attorney
if they choose to seek civil
action based on regional because
which is a criminal.
Bill.
They give up their.
Community.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman so reasonable it
appears in both civil and
criminal under the federal fase
Act funds in that quickly.
I would believe the state versus
Garcia would disagree with that
so I'm gonna continue to move
on.
In section four do we talk about
suits against the government
entities this is not a question
this is more of a statement I
find it interesting that now we
want to and.
In that legislation.
We're a government body consider
another government body so the
state of New Mexico can sue the
municipal agent I'm not really
sure that's working hand in
hand.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
specially when I start thinking
about.
The list of people Mr speaker
and gentle lady that I see
organizations that I see as
supporters of this legislation.
Focusing more of a long.
Very specific central area in
the state of New Mexico does not
and will not probably ever meet
the moral turpitude the of the
rest of the state.
That concerns me significantly.
And so.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
are several other people that
are on the board to speak today
I know to they're all
anticipating a good continued
lively debate I am concerned
about the constitutionality
about several sections within
section three and section four
as are many.
District attorney's.
Many civil rights attorneys and
many attorneys are hoping that
this legislation passes.
Because they're going to.
Have a heyday with that so Mr
speaker and gentle lady thank
you doctor.
There's a lady from Bernalillo
Representative little.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Well the gentle lady from Santa
Fe yield yes Mr speaker I yield
to my the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Forgive my back being turned to
others since she is my neighbor
here.
I this bill is so very important
to me.
In my life I have seen two very
different experiences.
Of gender gender affirmation.
One was hit in.
When I was young was hit in it
was not discussed it was frowned
upon.
And.
The individual suffered so much.
and I saw depression.
I saw a substance abuse later
on.
I saw.
Multiple suicide attempts of
which this guy's scars are still
visible today.
It's a bit tough to talk about
this I had to make sure I put
down some words because it is it
makes me so sad.
Those chars cars I saw came from
shame from scolding and
rejection.
This person felt they had no one
to turn to until much later in
life.
And on the other hand the other
experience.
It was so different.
I just saw a young person whose
gender did not match their sex
at birth.
Over time.
And there was a lot of
experiences that they had.
This young person.
Was able to talk with their mom.
And I understood later with
their teachers and probably
others that I will never know
about.
And in this situation I saw.
Love.
Acceptance.
Thank concern.
By their loved ones.
For this person.
They had to seek out health care
because they could find it
because they did experience some
discrimination.
I'm glad to say that it was
successful.
And continues to be.
Going back to the first person
it's no surprise this person is.
Continues to have moments of
real struggles.
They're working to carve out
their place in life.
And I see the other.
Experience the other person as
happy thriving.
Has furthered their education.
And are working to take care of
others.
They're becoming the person
they're meant to be.
So from what I've seen what I've
seen others experience.
Can you please describe for me
what gender affirming health
care is.
And.
Why it matters.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative.
Thank you gentle lady from
Bernalillo gender affirming care
as its practice today depends on
the individual and insurers that
it is age appropriate depending
on that individual and I want to
say further on that is that when
it comes to kids a lot of times
it's as simple as using their
proper pronouns their preferred
pronouns
that it is using their correct
names
that they prefer and as a mother
with two young girls
I would do anything to prevent
suicide if it's as simple as
using a different name or
different gender and then I and
socially it used to have to
adjust to and I want to say.
For too many kids with fewer
than one in three feel
comfortable talking to their
parents about these issues and
this is a this is a concern both
forget reproductive health care
but also especially read a
gender affirming health care
that it is suicide prevention so
was children it is often
something as simple as using a
proper name when they get older
they may do something else
nothing permanent can happen
until someone as an adult and
even then there's really only
two procedures one of which is
altering your voice as an adult
as a woman with a low register
voice I don't think that's
that's a big shift so I will
just say you know it just
depends on the age and but for
the most part with children it's
listening and listening what
they need so that they we're
preventing drug use or
preventing suicides.
Thank you Representative.
I am also curious as well.
Can you please tell me a little
bit more about hormone therapy
adds health care.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady you know hormone the
hormone treatments all we use
them for everything you know
whether that is birth control
that you know young people are
are given with their it is
menopausal medicines there's a
number of treatments you know
when you have a baby oftentimes
they will give you hormones to
help with that process as well
on you know I just think it's
important that when we're
looking at this and we're
talking about the concern we
have for our children that is
exactly who we want to be
protected against discrimination
because the impacts of children
being discriminated against can
be life threatening for them and
I think it's important to
consider that so hormone
treatment can happen for anyone
and a number of stages of life.
Thank you Representative.
I appreciate that information
I'm glad.
I'm so appreciative of this bill
being brought being brought
forward so that if it prevents.
Experiences like this it will
definitely have been worth it
thank you thank you Mr speaker
there is a debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Andrea.
The speaker does the gentle lady
from
Santa Fe healed thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you the speaker and and
and lady from St form for from
Santa Fe
At the beginning of your
introduction of the of your
bill.
have you made a couple of
statements about how the
introduction of your bill.
would not change anything that
currently is taking place was
that just specifically speaker
was edges specifically
concerning of abortion laws as
they exist in New Mexico right
now or was that also considering
concerning the gender affirming
health care gently thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman it
was referring to I mean I
physically said would not change
folks Google work it would not
change printer notification in
abortion care and would not
change how gender affirming care
is practiced today which I
discuss the lady.
So Mister speaker and and
agility
it would not change from
notification could you explain
that a little further thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentleman
on president of occasion and our
state has been exhorting statute
how that works what this bill
does it insures that it is
applied equally across the
state.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady is so primitive cation as
it is for minors where where is
that in statute Mr speaker
gently.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman we do have citations
you like I can a way to we pull
those up or we can continue the
discussion of two let's continue
debating Mister speaker July the
and if you can one those are
pulled up I would like to hear
the citations some speaker
gentle lady
we have been debating since I've
been here in this body this is
my ninth year concerning
parental notification or
parental consent and the speaker
gentle lady that they don't
exist concerning of portion
miss and gentle lady as it is
today.
There there is nothing in place
if
the child wants to get an
abortion or goes to get an
abortion was taken to get an
abortion by a third party there
is nothing that requires the
clinic to inform the parents
that the child is seeking an
abortion I'm not sure if you're
aware of that but that is that
is the way it is in New Mexico
today would you agree or
disagree with that statement
speaker gently thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen I
believe it depends also on the
age in particular because again
in New Mexico twelve and under
if the if someone is in need of
reproductive or abortion care on
the likely been raped and that
is a crime and their parents and
are notified because there
there's a crime but I I think
otherwise I wouldn't disagree so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
if they were to go to a
hospital.
If they were to go to a hospital
and there was a child that had
been right that is that is a
different situation than a child
who goes to a and abortion
clinics seeking an abortion.
That there is nothing in statute
and there has been nothing in
statute for that to be the case
I see looking at computer Mr
speaker gentle lady you have a
citation sorry Mr speaker thank
you Mr speaker thank you Jim and
there's a few different
citations as of regarding like
sexually transmitted diseases
pregnancy contraception
emergency conditions mental
health
and then and again for fourteen
in over
Mr speaker gentle lady
everything that you just
described does not include.
Seeking an abortion Mr speaker
gentle lady that has been a
debate in this body and this
legislature for eight years at
least and the speaker and gentle
lady
What we did two years ago was
take the statutes concerning
abortion.
And just wiped those statues off
the books so I would agree with
you.
With the statement you made
early on today which is there is
nothing in your bill that you're
caring that would change
anything in statute because Mr
speaker and gentle lady there is
nothing in statute currently
concerning abortions there is a
zero we remove that entire
section of law out two years
ago.
So Mister gentle lady that is a
concern.
Because there are no
protections.
If the if there's if that if a
child were to go into a hospital
and the and the allegation would
be that the child was raped.
That exactly would be handled in
the manner that you suggested Mr
speaker and gentle lady but if
the child is taken to a facility
and there is no mention of rape
just that the child is seeking
an abortion or if the person who
takes them there says that
they're seeking an abortion.
There's not even a question at
the facility as whether or not.
It is that was whether or not
the child was right.
some speaker gently that's why
there's a lot of concern with
not only myself not only just
people on the side of the aisle
but there are many people in
this room who have expressed to
me there's a lot of pressure on
them to
to uphold the bill as it is and
to not
to just just devoted up or down
and the speaker gentle lady that
that that is a concern because
it doesn't address the very
serious nature that you
discussed.
That if a child we're going what
were taken to a hospital.
there was there was suggestion
of right.
The child within be tested for
STDs or whatever other damage
may have been done and the
speaker gentle lady there would
be a whole series of questions
as to.
Was the perpetrator.
Speaker gentle lady in in in the
current law or in the lack of
current law in the bill that
you've presented to this body
once again that is not addressed
at all and Mr speaker and gentle
lady of that is the concern
we're out we're looking at.
ten eleven twelve thirteen year
olds
girls.
All the way up to eighteen but
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
No protections.
A sex trafficker Mr speaker and
gentle lady were to bring
a a fifteen year old to an
abortion clinic.
For abortion.
There is nothing requiring
abortion clinic to find out
anything about the circumstances
of that of that child if it's a
thirteen year old.
And the speaker gentle lady if
that thirteen year old is taken
by
a music instructor a teacher a.
just add an athletic coach a
relative that's maybe living in
the home that very well Mr
speaker and gentle lady could be
the person that did raise that
child.
If that child threatened if that
child is told I will harm your
parents I will forever and
threatened the child and take
them.
To the abortion clinic and they
just go in there saying I want
an abortion
there is nothing that requires
the abortion clinic to find out
the circumstances and the
speaker and gentle lady that.
As as we as as it is defined in
this in your in your bill.
this is called.
Care.
Gender affirming care.
abortion care Mr speaker and
gentle lady there's there's just
a lack of care in this care.
There is no.
Really no protections for the
thirteen year old girl that
twelve year old girl there are
no protections if they are
taking their.
By the abuser by a sex
trafficker by someone from
another state that this this
could be a child on a more milk
carton this could be a child
that is an amber alert child.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
is nothing requiring the
abortion provider to make sure
that the parents are even
notified if the child is alive.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
that is a major concern.
It's been discussed today
throughout debate.
That.
In many instances they're afraid
to tell their parents.
Mr speaker gentle gentle lady
you you've not been here what
I've told my story.
My story is that
My wife and I got pregnant.
To early.
Now after eighteen years old but
too early.
And I tell you what Mr speaker
gentle lady my wife was afraid
to tell her that.
Okay and nineteen years old my
wife was afraid to tell her dad.
And when she did.
All she got was care from him
that's all she got from him.
If you were a child.
And you feel like you've been
thank you done something wrong.
You're gonna be automatically
afraid of telling your parent.
Mr speaker and generally the way
that this.
Legislation is crafted.
Want to tell that parent of that
child is dealing with suicidal
thoughts.
Because there're considering
that they may be the wrong
gender in their body.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
are we what we're doing is we're
further hiding that from a
parent.
We are taking the people who
likely.
In.
The vast majority of all of the
circumstances not the one offs
not when the parent was maybe
the perpetrator Mr speaker and
gentle lady of a rape or incest
for a crime or Mr speaker gentle
lady with that parent maybe and
and use of in there for a little
of abuse but because of those
instances which those children
could be emancipated if they
were really worried about if
there were there was real fear
about that there provisions as
as Representative Lane my
neighbor from that from Aztec in
San Juan County mentioned
earlier there are legal actions
that can be taken for a child to
go if they're literally afraid
of a parent.
The best speaker and gentle lady
most of this fear is fear
rejection.
Fear of of of of of
disappointment from the parent
that's the real fear maybe
getting grounded maybe having
something taken away from them.
But the speaker gentle lady in
the vast majority of all
parents.
Those are the people who care
the most about that child.
And if that child is struggling
with sexual identity or feelings
of of
The
guilt for getting pregnant.
Speaker gentle lady the parents
for taking them out of this.
We're not even informing us that
child were to go and have a
procedure and there were
complications they started
bleeding after the fact the
parents wouldn't even know
what's going on.
The parents would have no idea.
Speaker gentle lady that that is
my concern so I'm gonna ask you
several questions here Mister
speaker and generated and I'm
gonna offer an amendment so
speaker gentle lady.
As it is today.
At a public school.
Canada ten year old child who
has a headache can that child to
get an aspirin.
From the school nurse without
parental consent.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen on it within the
school grounds they cannot to my
understanding.
So the speaker gentle lady this
child.
may be offered.
and help with getting gender
reassignment no blockers
blockers.
Something much much more
dramatic than an aspirin.
that that could happen but they
cannot get an aspirin Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Can a.
A of member of the faculty of
some of of of a public school
take the child off premises for
any reason without parental
consent thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen for clarity
of somebody was taking any sort
of medication for gender
affirming health care that would
also have to have the similar
parental approval that you would
have just like you would have
aspirin it's any kind it's a
reproductive and gender
affirming care are regulated
health care your question
regarding if they can go off
campus without apparent because
again that's on school programs
they cannot leave without
parental.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
let's let's talk about something
off off school grounds.
Can a.
Thirteen year old twelve year
old.
Sixteen year old.
Going to get a tattoo to tattoo
parlor without parental.
Without parental consent.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I I I apologize I
don't understand how that has to
do with the this bill because it
seems like it is an adequate
went to the health care that
individuals are seeking.
Thank you Mr speaker in July
that's fine for the sake of time
all just answer the question
which is no they cannot they
cannot get a tattoo a child
under eighteen year old cannot
get their ears pierced a child
under eighteen years old
under legislation that we passed
a couple years ago cannot go to
a tanning salon.
If they're under eighteen years
old.
They have been forced to much
more dangerous back alley
tanning sessions Mr speaker and
gentle lady
I am.
Concern Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
That we're not dealing.
With an aspirin.
We are not dealing with a
tattoo.
Which buys a parent would be
angry.
At that child for doing it we're
not talking about something that
is a.
A permanent health care
decision.
That I would initiatives Mr
speaker and gentle lady that the
ten year old.
A a fifteen year old Mr speaker
and gentle lady doesn't have.
The critical thinking that it
takes to make that kind of
decision.
Without the parents being
involved.
Mr speaker and and and and
gentle lady.
I'm gonna be introducing an
amendment here Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
That just is going to taken in.
Going to.
This is the the gonna take into
consideration that these are
very very very big decisions.
And.
There is nothing that requires.
That apparently involved in any
of this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Yes a parent could be angry that
a child.
Yes a parent could be
disappointed in child.
Yes.
Parent.
it there could be a little bit a
long time for there's a bit
disruption and and relationship
with the parents but the speaker
gentle lady generally.
The vast majority of parents are
going to be the ones who were
there for the long term for that
child.
A.
A trusted.
Percent at school that's great
Mr speaker and gentle lady but
those trusted persons come in
and out of the child's life.
Mr speaker and gentle lady a
parent or family.
Is there a long term and so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
I've I've
deliver to the
to the speaker and amendment.
That would require that a child.
Yes.
Well consent before the child
could received two could get an
abortion four could get
health care related.
Gender altering
Drugs for.
Medical attention so Mister
speaker I I drop this I sent
this up there the the two to
five number is two two five.
I three nine point two thank you
gentleman we have that amendment
and it is being passed out by
the sergeant at arms.
Like to formally move the
amendment yes Mr speaker I ask
that we move
floor amendment one to house
bill seven as amended and I ask
for a roll call vote.
You've got the role.
Or and rule get the amendment
passed out.
The amendment is online for
those watching at home.
And following tonight's
proceedings.
To me give it a second will it
gets passed out and then you
can.
Formally explain the amendment
although I believe you kind of
did it before you moved it up to
you can explain the amendment
that will go to the sponsor to
see if the amendment is friendly
or not.
The gentleman to explain.
The amendment.
Yes Mr speaker the amendment as
I stated earlier would require
parental consent for minors
seeking general gender affirming
health care for abortion care
and Mr speaker and and gentle
lady.
the purpose of this ammendment.
Has nothing to do with whether
or not a child is able to go and
talk to a therapist.
Or to get counseling a child can
get counseling and go to a
therapist now Mr speaker and
gentle lady on any topic it is
not it doesn't have to be
specific to this comes to this
specific concerns the most
speaker and gentle lady.
This amendment is meant to do
two things.
The first one is to make sure
that a parent someone that's
actually going to be with that
child before.
After procedure and for the long
run that is there for the life
of that child.
Is able to be involved Mr
speaker and gentle lady in.
Health care decisions miss Baker
and gentle lady there's not a
single other.
Area.
Of health care dental.
even therapists generally
outside of the school property
that if that if that a parent is
not involved in because the
speaker generally their
financial responsible for that
the agency speaker gentle lady
it is to make sure parent.
A parents rights are not taken
away a parent isn't surprised
when their child is having some
other issues a mistake provided
the child is actually dealing
with the issues of of suicidal
thoughts a parent needs to know
about that the agency speaker
generated the second part to
this is to make sure.
That we stop the practice of
what's been happening in New
Mexico.
Since we've had this virtually
zero oversight of abortion
clinics and have had virtually
zero any requirements of those
clinics to make sure that if a
child is being abused R. right
by a family member or by a some
sort of a authority figure in
their home or after school or on
a sports team.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if a
child is being sex trafficked.
This amendment merely make sure
that a parent.
Is is notified and gives their
consent for medical treatment SO
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
This amendment is meant to add
some measure of care.
That is throughout the title of
your bill calling things gender
affirming health care and
abortion care this is to make
sure Mr speaker and gentle lady
that there is for that under age
girl.
That has been abused has been
sex trafficked has been right to
make sure that child actually
gets care Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's what this ammendment
does it is a friendly amendment
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for your amendment and
thank you for your thoughts side
I know that we may come from
this from different perspectives
but I do know that we're looking
at the well being of New Mexico
when we talk and what that I
have to say this is an
unfriendly amendment this is not
friendly and for a couple of key
reasons one is that it is the
policy in New Mexico but in
these tender moments children
able to contact to to talk with
counties or of well us or others
they can hear from them and as
we've heard from the American
academy of pediatrics efforts to
include force parental
notification or parental
awareness of what's going on
typically have the opposite
effect and delay care that as
we've talked about tonight can
be lifesaving reduce drug usage
and help the long term Ruiloba
of the perspectives for our
children whether that be in with
gender of affirming health care
or abortion care I also am
concerned the primarily this
bill deals with discrimination
and this would be log rolling by
adding something salicin and a
lot of examples that the the
gentleman Eggsy were crimes L.
ready and they would have to be
reported because abortion care
like all health care is a
sensitive moment and you know
with my own consultation my
doctors they'd ask my husband to
leave the task me a series of
questions should do to ensure
that I was safe and I filled up
having I don't so for all those
reasons but primarily that this
is this bills about suicide
prevention and the safety of our
children I I I have to say this
is a friendly right is there
debate on the amendment to
deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey I thank
you Mr speaker.
Yes the speaker to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo thank you
very much Mr speaker and
gentleman
You know we have looked at this
issue for many years as you say
we haven't had a lot of debates
on the floor but we've had a lot
of testimony over the years and
I have listened to our best
buddies.
Such as the American academy of
pediatrics we have listened to
heart broken parents.
His daughter's died receiving an
illegal abortion because they
were frightened to tell their
parents.
Of their situation.
We have heard of.
Efforts to create some kind of a
judicial bypass for
students who need to seek
abortion have.
And I'm not do not feel safe at
home sometimes the
The biological father of the
child the.
A child is occurring is a member
of the family it's it's a
horrible tragedy.
these children are frightened.
They do as the lady from Santa
Fe said they do contact their
grandmothers there.
And hands there
Other important trusted people
in their lives people.
They do not fail we'll take
advantage of them and.
That is what has been our policy
in New Mexico is to try to
protect those children.
More than.
Protecting the rights of a
potential abusive parent and I I
know.
I'm sure you were and so I hope
I wasn't No Way.
We aren't necessarily talking
about those of us here in this
body we're trying to put
ourselves in the place of
another individual.
Who whose life is is very
different from ours and may not
have the advantages and the the
strong families that have been
available to many of us here.
So we actually place children in
greater danger.
The parents.
Testified when it to us and I
look to some of my colleagues
who have shared those debates
with me over the years and who
heard testimony by parents say
would have given anything if
their daughter could still be
with them that
I.
Simply could not support this
because.
I think that.
What we care about the most is
saving the lives of our children
we don't we want to prevent
suicide and we want to prevent
the loss of the lives of our
children I have
Sessions whose children have
taken their own lives.
Necessarily for these reasons
but.
There is never.
There's never.
Hey that parents.
To fully recover.
That death stays with the
parents forever.
And
It's incredibly sad.
And there are stories.
Like that.
That involves as the lady from
the tiles.
so eloquently explained to us in
her opening statement.
For the
The gentleman who became.
Are provided.
for her.
Almost took his own life he
suffered greatly from many many
years.
Had he had this kind of an
opportunity early on his life
could be very different she
provided us with the contrast.
Of.
Person she did have the support
and aid opportunities in
comparison to the man who almost
took his own life and was
hanging on by his fingernails.
That's what hospitals seven.
Unamended things trying to
address but they.
Price in enforcing restrictions
as proposed by your amendment.
Just simply too high.
Children.
Whether they have a safe and.
Wonderful family or whether they
do not deserve.
Access to safe and legal care.
That's what our policy has been
to focus on improving limiting
people's access to medical care.
We can't force upon the children
and families by legislation the
kind of connections that I'm
sure you have with your
children.
And that many of us have had
with ours.
So for about Mr Mrs Mr speaker
for those reasons Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I understand.
As as the lady from Santa Fe
said you do care about children
I understand her motivation.
This isn't.
The way to address your.
Preferred outcome thank you Mr
speaker the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Mr speaker I move to
table the amendment.
We are on a motion to table
house floor amendment number one
to house bill seven as amended
it would be just in the
amendment will be tabled a vote
of no and we're back on the
amendment there is a roll call.
The vote.
Is now.
Open.
What is about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Yes to table Representative.
Both yes to table Representative
Hochman Vigil yes the table.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes to table
Representative Rubio.
Yes to table Representative
Rubio votes yes to table
Representative Sarinana.
AS to table Representative
Sarinana votes yes to table.
The result is one of forty four
in the affirmative twenty five
in the negative house floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven as amended has been
tabled gentleman from San Juan
back to you.
Thank you Mr speaker I am
disappointed that miss that.
Today as it exists
Abusers sex traffickers will
remain protected by our policies
in New Mexico and parents should
know Mr speaker and and and body
that if there is a child is
going to these things and there
there's depression and
potential complications that
could go along with decisions
they make without their parents
their parents are unable to even
know about it because it'll be
hidden from them so Mister
speaker and and and that body I
I believe this policy is very
misguided.
And it was stated earlier and I
agree with that Mr speaker and
and body that what we're doing
is we are getting children
against their parents.
And I think that's an
unfortunate day thank you Mr
speaker is will debate from down
under percent of small.
Thank you Mr speaker where the
gentle yet lady from Santa Fe
you Hey gladly yield to the
gentleman from the Indiana great
thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I
appreciate very much of this
debate I appreciate the tender
with which it's been carried out
I want to commend you and all
the other speakers and of course
you're co sponsor first and
foremost Mr speaker gentle lady
from Santa Fe I wanted to talk a
little bit about something that
you mentioned during the course
of this debate Mr speaker gentle
lady and that is sort of the the
health care professionals being
able to offer the full scope of
reproductive health care you
seem to suggest Mr speaker
gentle lady that that's
something that health care
professionals broadly generally
desire to be able to offer the
full scope of care thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen yes
that is the case and I've I made
with a couple of statistics on
this as well on there were some
early so research done.
I into K. is where it where
states have banned abortions
later in pregnancy and many of
those cases have turned into her
strategies I personally have two
friends that I value who have
had abortions later in pregnancy
and for those women in these
cases those were tragedies they
would home to empty nurseries
and the however we will get the
health care they needed and have
successful pregnancies later and
having experienced a C. section
we're you know at the moment I
blacked out I didn't know was
going on I was relying on my
husband to to to make sure that
the health care decisions are
being made my best interests I'm
glad to know that whatever
necessary it was necessary for
myself and our our our child is
very successfully going on that
we're able to take those efforts
so I've seen it independently as
we've seen an early research
that can lend up in tragedy so
yes oftentimes healthcare
providers want people to offer
what is available to individuals
so that they can give them the
best possible treatment thank
you thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady and I really
deeply appreciate you sharing
about sort of not only your own
circumstance but Mr speaker
gentle lady your friends because
I to know
folks who who of the faced a
heartbreaking decisions who now
have healthy thriving families
the Mr speaker gentle lady in
that case they they faced an
unimaginably difficult decision
with and they now have a healthy
thriving family Mr speaker
gentle lady the idea that us in
this body elected would somehow
compromise their ability to make
that decision is challenging to
say the least but Mr speaker
gentle lady if I'm in a health
care professionals issues and
the restrictions on what you can
offer your patient in their
moment of need going to that
standard of care that seems Mr
speaker gentle lady at times
perhaps untenable do you think
Mr speaker gentle lady that
health care for.
Those will go to those states
that allow health care
professionals to offer the full
spectrum of Kerr in in some
cases Mr speaker gentle lady
leave those states that disallow
the practice of the offering of
that full spectrum of Kerr thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen in early research as
we seen after the job decisions
where the state started a
checkerboard of of access to
health care and very stages
we've actually seen those who
were training to become doctors
moved to states specifically
that they could practice you
know their full options that
they can provide the best care
and as we've heard from you know
health care providers that they
are looking to offer good health
care no matter what that is
there that is there that's what
they are dedicated to doing that
they're dedicated to saving
lives and so they do not want to
be limited in how they're able
to offer that care thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
appreciate that obviously were
and it would and some early
stages after a sort of a a very
momentous very substantive
Supreme Court ruling that Mr
speaker gentle lady the idea
that health care professionals
would go to states that are
allow those health care
professionals to offer the full
scope of care including
reproductive health care really
makes a lot of sense to me Mr
speaker gentle lady and Mr
speaker gentle lady I want to
touch back briefly there are the
for those health care providers
for whom offering that care
would violate sort of their
deeply held beliefs Mr speaker
gentle lady can you said that
there are protections for those
health care professionals thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman there protections at
the federal level and add on the
state level as well to protect
them and I I won't read them all
but I'll just read some of the
sections that they're in on the
New Mexico uniform health co the
care decisions act the church
amendments the the patient
protection and affordable Care
Act those are all protected to
those levels that if individuals
do not want to provide.
to care because of their their
moral concerns and they are not
required to thank you very much
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
the those protections you're the
the additional work that's been
done in that area I appreciate
you sharing that again once
again with the body sharing with
me because Mr speaker gentle
lady as we sort of look to
recruit more health care
professionals to New Mexico Mr
speaker gentle lady to have New
Mexico be a beacon for health
care professionals and we know
the more health care
professionals will be better
outcomes for all New Mexicans
this seems like a part of that
Mr speaker gentle lady also Mr
speaker gentle lady we have
passed the largest reimbursement
increases in specifically in
this child and maternal health
care area so Mister speaker
gentle lady I really appreciate
that I appreciate the
thoughtfulness with which you
and others have engaged in this
and in this Mr speaker gentle
lady the protections for health
care professionals for whom they
have these deeply held beliefs
that is fully appropriate I'm
glad to know that those
protections are upheld and Mr
speaker gentle lady offering the
full range of practice allowing
health care professionals with
their patients to make the very
best decisions for those paying
patience is so important and I
really appreciate and Mr speaker
I I had a few questions for the
gentle lady from tau's
Yeah as a and and let me ask
these Mr speaker gentle lady and
all of the gentle lady from
Santa Fe of sort of in get visit
with you on this as we look at
some of the other components of
this legislation one of the
thing that stood out again and
again and again is that certain
to you and your presenter seem
to have when it comes to the
absolute risks that
transgendered that that that
that use who
you know maybe questioning their
sexuality what can you go back
through those risk because that
that really.
Sort of seems to be a theme
you've referred return to I
deeply appreciate if you to
dress how you seem so certain
that our New Mexico okay the
kids in these situations may
face some of these foreign this
decisions I thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen as we
discussed you know
gender affirming health care can
be something as simple as using
the appropriate pronouns for
individuals and the you you seek
this out with and you know the
standards of care refer to this
a lot this can literally save
lives eight out of ten a
transgender to visuals have
contemplated suicide those
numbers increase with younger
children and the less than with
one out of three individuals
feels that they can express feel
safe to express those concerns
to their families and you know I
will just say growing up I knew
individuals in college and high
school and in who were
questioning when we were young
and at camp and these
conversations always one on one
with friends that they're
seeking support as all children
do among their peers and among
their friends and so often times
offering just that simple piece
of you know that that we respect
what you prefer can can be a
life changing and and and
lifesaving possibility for these
individuals thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady from Santa
Fe and that that the life saving
really stands out and Mr speaker
gentle lady as I sort of hear
some of what you're discussing
here I sort of harken back Mr
speaker gentle lady to other
folks who may and and earlier
time periods where it simply
wasn't okay to be what they are
Mr speaker gentle lady and I
certainly know and I can think
back to my childhood about
friends that my mom and I went
to visit and Mr speaker gentle
lady the fact that they were
saying sex couples.
Even in the confines of their
homes with close friends it
wasn't something that they
couldn't they could talk about
than Mr speaker gentle lady
these are adults Mr speaker
gentle lady I bring that up
because it seems that we're
making great strides in
recognizing the ability of each
individual person to have
autonomy over themselves speaker
gentle lady and I can imagine
that those same sort of
statistics may have been there
perhaps not to that level that
you've shared here but for folks
who might have felt different
might have felt different than
what was accepted that that Mr
speaker gentle lady the pressure
and that pressure is so strong
especially when you're young Mr
speaker gentle lady that just
having an outlet the affirmation
that we've talked about here
tonight it really does seem to
me like it can save lives Mr
speaker gentle lady in fact it
seems to me I mean I would ask
you this question if we pass
this bill do you think it will
save a New Mexico kids life
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen a hundred percent and
I see that for both those that
are seeking gender affirming
healthcare and those that do not
want to feel discriminated
against should they need
reproductive health care in high
school or should they need an
abortion in high school loser
these are individuals that may
be feel discriminated against I
think a hundred percent this
will save lives in our state.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I think I I
heard earlier in the in the
debate and from the gentle lady
from Dona Ana from Dona Ana
County Mr speaker gentle lady
this isn't theoretical what you
shared I share that same
perspective through the course
of this debate through these
conversations Mr speaker gentle
lady through my own is sort of
history.
Growing up seeing how changes in
what people were allowed to be
what they have always felt and
then they felt they were allowed
to be how that Mr speaker and
gentle lady transformed what
they were able to do in their
lives and Mr speaker gentle lady
if it's going to allow them to
keep living that life if it's
going to keep them Mr speaker
gentle lady from taking their
life then I think it's something
that I'm proud to support today
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady there's further
debate the delay from Eddie in
the Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
yes all the yield to the gentle
lady from Lee and Eddie.
Thank you gentle lady Mr
speaker.
There's a phrase that we hear
what now we didn't used to hear
it but it seems to be the point
of the well my Mr speaker and
that is that abortion is health
care.
Where there is health care.
There are standards of care that
are put in place in order to
protect the person who's
undergoing whatever procedures
in view.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
One of the criticisms I have of
house bill seven is that there
are no protections at all for
women.
They are at risk.
For physical injury and even
death and Mr speaker gentle lady
we need to address that issue
tonight.
Mr speaker I have an amendment.
Which to invest please.
The lady I am told by the court
that you have not signed the
amendment is.
Mr speaker I'd sign three copies
and wish for roll call please.
You've got the roll call.
and about that that is my
signature again no no from the
lady at think a clerk was
concerned because the the name
of being cross out but it looks
like it's all squared away
gentle lady while the amendment
is be passed so can you please
repeat that two to five number.
Mr speaker the number is point
two two five five four zero
point one.
Thank you gentle lady handle you
formally move the amendment well
it is being passed out.
Mr speaker I move house floor
amendment number one to house
bill seven as amended thank you
for the roll call.
Thank you ladies.
It is on the website so we'll
just give it a minute to pass
out to the rest of the chamber.
Gentlelady to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
This ammendment
Does the following on page one
line thirteen and that's the
bill title.
after that would relieve and if
this would insert the words
requiring standards of care for
abortion.
The second thing this amendment
does is on page five Mr speaker
between lines eight and nine.
I propose inserting the
following new section.
It'll be called section six.
It would be enacted to read
standards of care for abortions.
Hey of facility that provides
abortions shell would here to
the same standards of care
federal plied to other types of
surgical clinics.
To be.
Health care providers who
performs abortions shall
maintain the same level of
malpractice insurance as health
care providers who work at
facilities that provide
obstetrics and gynecology
Services.
See a facility that provides
abortions shall have one
emergency care staff and
equipment on site for admitting
privileges at a nearby hospital.
And then finally Mister speaker
the speaker gentle lady this
amendment provides section
subpart D..
A facility or health care
provider that performs an
induced abortion.
On a pregnant woman shall ensure
that the pregnant woman receives
twenty four hour medical care
throughout the procedure and
until the procedure is complete
the fetuses fully extracted or
expelled.
And the woman may safely be
discharged from the facility or
health care provider.
Mr speaker.
I imagine that this will be
deemed an unfriendly amendment
by the sponsor but if we could
just have a a read on that I
would appreciate it Mr speaker
gentle lady.
The lady hold on one second I
I'm reading your amendment and
it's not tracking with house
bill seven.
On the website amendments in
context of House Judiciary.
Hello I just wanna make sure we
are on the right amendment and
on the right bill because the
bill was amended in Judiciary.
Mr speaker of an important that
this amendment was drafted from
that.
We will do leading.
The firm's of the fizzes a
friendly amendment thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
from Lee and Eddie and I I
appreciate your dedication to
the families New Mexico truly I
really do and the care you give
as you Sir but I this is an on
from the amendment because
abortion care is highly
regulated just like all care
on there's been a clinical
guidelines of the federal level
local standards in Mexico
Medical Board nursing pharmacy
pharmacy board Department health
there's multiple places thank
you.
Is a debate on the amendment the
gentle lady from towels Los
Alamos excuse me the generated
from Los Alamos and well in
Santa Fe percent of gentler
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Eddy county
yield I do you thank you Mr
speaker thank you so help me
understand the gentle lady are
you familiar with the medical
malpractice act.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I am
a bit familiar with the medical
malpractice act of this is
providing standards of care for
abortions that's the focus of
this ammendment Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady than we
do agree that abortion care as
medical care and health care
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady in my
opinion abortion is not medical
care of a baby is not a disease
pregnancy is not a disease state
and medical care in the true
sense of the word is is helping
people get healthy and that that
in terms of a baby is not as I
said a disease a tumor or
anything like that I consider Mr
speaker gentle lady that
abortion takes the life of an
innocent child
Mr speaker gentle lady would you
not agree that physicians
perform abortions.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have studied this issue at
length over many years Mr
speaker gentle lady it is my
observation that.
Abortionists tend to be.
The lesser of the profession.
Some people have descriptively
call them the bottom bottom
feeders of the profession
because they live on debt things
Mr speaker I'm just reporting
what what is often thought about
the abortion practitioners Mr
speaker generally I think my
question is why would you not
agree that if they're performing
abortions in New Mexico they are
licensed physicians.
Mr speaker and generally that is
not necessarily true.
Mr speaker gentle lady could you
give me an example one it's
where it would not be true.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
from Santa Fe so there is a
abortion facility in New Mexico
that actually flies doctors in
from out of state.
And
so that that does happen Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady in those
and physicians are not.
Legally licensed to perform
abortions in the state as a your
contention Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady they
are not licensed in New Mexico.
generally then are they licensed
out of state.
Mr speaker gentle lady not that
I know of I see okay so let's
assume this let's assume Mr
speaker gentle lady there is a
licensed physician in New Mexico
performing abortions would you
agree gentle lady that there are
licensed the dispositions
performing in the in abortions
in New Mexico licensed by the
state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
I'm not I I have no basis for
saying they are licensed I do
know that abortions have been
performed by people who were not
licensed physicians in New
Mexico.
Do you have a basis for saying
that there are no license
physicians in New Mexico
performing abortions in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think I just answered the
question there licensing
situation I cannot say.
They're licensed in New Mexico.
The gentle lady and Mr speaker
the reason I'm asking is if
talking about standards of care
so licensed physicians in New
Mexico gentle lady would you not
agree are guided by license of a
standards of care.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so I
think we're going to have to
disagree about this if Mr
speaker gentle lady look at the
amendment what it does is
actually spell out what
standards of care are it's not
some vague term that's tossed
about here and there this
actually says about terminal
read through it again if you'd
like Mr speaker gentle lady that
they show it here to the same
standards of care replied and
other types of surgical clinics.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
are many women who tell stories
about their abortions committed
here in New Mexico and many of
them will say that the standards
of care simply weren't there or
here to for example Mr speaker
gentle lady.
The state that the the room in
which the abortion was done was
dirty.
They often say that the
instruments hadn't been
sterilized.
They will say that they were put
on of a better a platform that
had bloody sheets.
They will also say Mr speaker
gentle lady that it looked like
things were not done as a would
be done in of another surgical
clinic so Mister speaker gentle
lady I don't believe there is a
standard of care that is it here
to in New Mexico gentle lady I
would have to kindly and
respectfully disagree and I need
I want to share a story with
with you gentle lady and Mr
speaker I was actually flying
home from some trip.
And I happen to sit down next to
this lovely woman.
after some conversation.
Told me she was a nurse who
worked at an abortion clinic in
Albuquerque.
And we had a conversation about
the standard of care and
compassion and that the doctors
and the staff felt for the women
who were being treated by that
facility and I can tell you I if
I were a person being treated at
that facility and had that
nurse.
Assisting me I would have felt.
The warmth and kindness and
caring that I can not describe
and that's what medical
providers do and I remember
thinking I am so glad to have
met this person we've been
talking a lot about of abortion
Care and other sorts of medical
care in the state and I thought.
Then isn't it great that we have
such a high quality person and
no doubt she spoke of her
doctors in the positions she was
assisting in the most respectful
and.
I don't know why I did say it
Meiring way in terms of how they
were caring for women in need
and I I just have to Fund I'm
sorry that a few people have
expressed breast concerned I'd
like to hear their stories
directly but in fact I happen to
really feel well informed after
talking with this nurse that we
were doing the right thing in
New Mexico I and I would say I
also asked her what what was
happening now that Texas was
shutting down health care for
women.
And Mr speaker gentle lady she
described how awful it was for
people to have to drive so far
from communities that were
blocking women from access to
health care had to drive so far
they were so nervous they were
if they were having to lose work
because of the distance they
were driving the the the clinic
would help them find hotel rooms
sometimes it was it's it's
heartbreaking to see when a when
a state or in this case our bill
is trying to ensure that people
have fair access to health care
and that's what the bill is
doing Mr speaker and gentle lady
from Lee and in terms of medical
malpractice do you know a gentle
lady what kind of malpractice
insurance coverage of abortion
clinics Kerry.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
know for a fact that there are
people doing abortions who do
not have malpractice insurance
and that makes women vulnerable
when they are injured or their
survivors if the if the women
are die from the procedure there
is really no recourse for these
women and a lot of them don't
realize that when they go in for
the abortion there is no
coverage so that is a fact Mr
speaker and gentle lady and let
me also add that we talk
standards of care.
that and this amendment calls
for this and I think it's an
entirely reasonable that a
facility that does abortions
shall have emergency care staff
and equipment on site Mr speaker
gentle lady that is not
happening in in in facilities
are New Mexico in large part
also Mr speaker and gentle lady.
We also ask that these people
doing the procedures have
admitting privileges at a nearby
hospital Mr speaker gentle lady
we have seen video of ambulances
leaving a certain portion clinic
in Albuquerque with someone put
on board and sent to the
hospital that has happened a
number of times so Mister
speaker and gentle lady I think
you mentioned the word hotels
helping people get hotels what
Mr speaker and gentle lady those
are called hotel abortions and
those are the ones were and this
is part D. of the amendment.
Where there are abortions for
pregnant women reduced to two
four.
And we're just asking here that
the pregnant woman receives
twenty four hour care but what's
happening Mr speaker gentle lady
is that these women are being
injected through their hunting
sharp instruments and needles
and and injection is given to
the baby it's usually potassium
chloride or digoxin and it
creates cardiac arrest in the
baby Mr speaker gentle lady may
not know this but this cardiac
arrest can go on for twenty four
hours or more but these women
are sent to a hotel to have the
miscarriage and they're given
something to put Mr speaker
gentle lady I was not referring
to hotels where the doctors are
returning women to have
abortions what I'm referring to
is a gentle lady gentle lady.
Please continue Representative
will be point please thank you
Mr speaker.
So when we talk about standards
of care it's really not caring
at all that women are given an
injection and by the way it's a
dangerous injection because if
the baby moves a roll this
chemical designed to create
cardiac arrest can actually get
into the women's to issues of
her body and it has been known
to cause death in infants some
women so this isn't a this is a
dangerous procedure and these
women are told to go to the
hotel in but the Mr chairman
there.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't think that's health care
and that's certainly not
entering to a standard of good
health care a woman is in a
hotel room by herself going
through pain and suffering
essentially.
And then at some point she
delivers her baby.
What does she do with that baby.
Instructions are given to this
woman that's not a good standard
of care is how do we dispose of
this baby to the hotel owners
appreciate this being done in
their health coverage we're
talking bio hazards so with
their bio hazards and and risks
but I prefer to Mr speaker
gentle lady that is not it
hearing to a standard of care
that is I believe an
exploitation of a woman.
And subjects her to the risk.
Can be severe injury or even
death that we know for a fact Mr
speaker gentle lady that there
are families.
Of women the women died from
this this abortion procedure and
the families are left
left.
And mourning the loss of one of
their family members because
there are no standards of care.
And Mr speaker gentle lady I
think this is something this
bill needs to fix and this
amendment is designed to do
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
percentage of abortions are
induced by medication.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
have the answer to that.
What well gentle lady what
purport what what percentage of
abortions are performed
surgically since you're
attempting to address apparently
that situation.
Mr speaker gentle lady so the
actual percentages I don't have
that information in front of me
but I can say this Mr speaker
gentle lady that there are
several methods used to to do an
abortion.
where there's a chemical
injection so it sometimes is
designed to burn the baby and
they call those babies candy
apple babies because they're
still lady diligent just I just
want to reflect on the moment
right now and I think that the
question was regarding the
percentage of.
Surgical
abortions I would I would rather
not dive into into space that I
don't think is appropriate for
the question asked by the young
lady from Los Alamos.
Speaker gentle lady COS for the
actual percentages and as I said
I don't have those percentages
I'm not sure that it matters how
the baby is.
Disposed of Mr speaker gentle
lady but there are several
methods that are used.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
If a doctor is performing an
abortion.
For providing medication to
induce an abortion.
We do not agree that drive that
physician is providing medical
care.
Mr speaker gentle lady
absolutely not.
Would you agree gentle lady Mr
speaker that that doctor is
governed by standards of care
over his or her practice.
Specialty.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
answer is no unless we put
specifics into this bill
providing those protections and
standards of care they do not
exist.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady and
what's the basis for that
statement.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
we're talking standards of care
we have to put some meat on the
bones for that we have to say
what those standards are and
this bill does nothing of the
sort and so Mister speaker
gentle lady this bill does not
protect women
they are entitled to standards
of care in my opinion should
insist on it Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady this bill
is about ensuring that public
entities do not and interfere
with certain individuals rights
to receive care.
Your amendment.
Does not relate.
To that provision in the law the
purpose of the law was to ensure
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
local governments for the state
did not interfere with access to
certain care.
And I would suggest to you
gentle lady that this runs
counter to the intent of that.
Our vision.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
this bill does envision abortion
and so yes this is a germane
amendment Mr speaker gentle lady
again I think we owe it to women
of New Mexico to ensure that
they do have this at least in
the statute otherwise it's
meaningless Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady.
There are standards of care that
governed physicians.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Those standards of care applied
to the.
medical care that they provide
Mr speaker gentle lady I
understand that you personally
do not believe it's medical care
Mr speaker gentle lady but the
profession and the licensing
arm of the state for physicians
does we do not agree with that
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
there were standards of care
being it here to and respected I
don't think we'd be saying.
ambulances leaving abortion
clinics headed to it it's taking
women to
a hospital we know for sure Mr
Jones Mr speaker gentle lady
that a lot of women are injured
through abortion procedures many
of them are telling their
stories and speaking out.
And I think we ought we should
honor them by listening to what
they have to say so Mister
speaker gentle lady I believe
the need is great to have this
ammendment in house bill seven
Mr speaker gentle lady just to
clarify you madam the fact that
Because someone may have been
taken by an ambulance from an
abortion clinic to a hospital
that in you for view and is
indicative of that standard of
care is not being applied is
that your contention Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady it can indicate that
we also know from women who talk
about they were the ones in the
ambulance that that were taken
to the hospital because
something went wrong with the
abortion and the woman was
injured we know that for a fact
Mr speaker gentle lady.
And we also know from and this
is true in a lot of places
people who worked in the
abortion industry.
Have had a change of mind and
they've been some of your Mr
speaker I had a question about
an ambulance and now we're
hearing about people who've had
regret.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
connection is that people who
think they're providing health
care if they realize that
they're actually causing
injuries
they they have they have great
concern and regret about that so
there's a connection there Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
aware of other medical
procedures that may cause
someone to need to go to the
hospital.
And and I can give you some
example so for example a
colonoscopy.
Call it would you agree Colin
Oscar appease Mr speaker gentle
lady here medical care.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
think we're running a feel of
what this is about abortion and
about standards of care for the
abortion procedure and that's
that's how this is written.
Standards of care for abortion
for abortion so that that is the
topic of the evening Mr speaker
gentle lady regarding this
ammendment Mr speaker gentle
lady it is and it isn't because
what I am suggesting to you it's
medical care and there are
standards of care that apply and
there are other procedures that
are done Mr speaker that
occasionally I hope occasionally
because the need for someone to
be taken to the hospital for
example of the colon Ossipee
that that goes awry there's a
puncture the person almost dies
or does Dodd Mister speaker
gentle lady and certainly a
hospital is involved would you
not agree that those physicians
are guided by a standard of
care.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so I
could just put the focus again
on what this ammendment is about
and that is when a woman is sent
to a hotel to have an induced
abortion that is not health care
again this is designed to ensure
that if this amendment passes
and I hope it will that women
are guaranteed to have twenty
four hour medical care
throughout the procedure and
until the procedures complete a
fetus is fully extracted or
expelled and the woman may
safely be discharged safely be
discharged from that facility so
Mister speaker gentle lady.
Once again the standard of care
I think it's basic minimum
standard of care is found in
this amendment which would be
the new section six of the bill
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady I thank you
for your point of view but to
the body Mr speaker and gentle
lady abortion care is health
care it is provided by licensed
physicians in the state Mr
speaker gentle lady those
positions are guided by
standards of care and the
required to file standards a
care file file standards of care
therefore this amendment is not
needed.
That I yield Mister speaker.
Further debate the gentle lady
from earlier percent Chasey.
Speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Motion to table house amendment
number one to house bill seven
as amended there is a roll call
vote yes in the amendment is
stable they would have no and we
are back on the amendment.
The vote is now open.
Eight.
Call those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative David M..
Yes table Representative votes
yes to table Representative
Hochman Vigil yes to table
Representative Hochman Vigil
those yes to table
Representative Rubio.
Yes the table Representative
Rubio votes yes to table
Representative Sarinana yes to
table Representative Sarinana
votes yes to table.
Was able to forty for the
affirmative twenty two in the
negative house floor amendment
number one to house bill seven
as amended has been tabled.
The lady back to you.
Thank you Mr speaker and I just
would like to close by saying
that.
I'm very disappointed that this
body is not willing to give in
statute standards of care
protections for women.
Mr speaker I think this is a
very sad day for New Mexico.
And what I've learned from being
here the legislature the several
years Mr speaker is that.
It seems in New Mexico abortion
is king and every measure is
taken by the majority to make
sure that it stays that way so
Mister speaker and members of
the body.
I would hope that some day we
can make progress on this and
given given what they deserve
and that standards of care and
protection Mr speaker thank you
for the time this evening
there's debate the gentleman
from here Representative hi you
are you on New.
Thank you Mr speaker and does
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
yield I yield to my colleague
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you
I wonder.
What has happened with access to
reproductive health care
providers in states across the
country that have banned
reproductive health care thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady as we've seen from
anecdotal situations but also
consistently those providers are
leaving those states because
they are unable to find of the
care that as often times needed
and very difficult to act to
that is impossible to the states
to access for these individuals.
Thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady for that answer I I
ask that because.
The district that I represent is
an extremely diverse district
and now I grant you New Mexico
is a pretty diverse state
overall but my district in
particular has an
extraordinarily high
concentration of people of
color.
And.
I have seen from national
statistics that women of color
are disproportionately affected
medically
women of color have much higher
rates of.
Of maternal mortality they are
far more likely to die in
childbirth I believe black women
are four times more likely to
die in childbirth than other
women across the state so I ask
this because do these abortion
bans that we're talking about
access other kinds of not just
reproductive health care but
other kinds of health care in
general for women specifically
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady yes they do and.
I will do that yes they
absolutely affect all access to
health care that that women in
general seek and what this bill
intentionally with us to do is
there are a lot of difficulties
in getting reproductive health
care when I was is having my
first if I may real brief I to
go in twice a week for just a
tional diabetes just to check on
the baby to make sure she was
doing well and I met individuals
were coming from an hour an hour
plus away just to get that twice
a week and twenty minute simple
ultrasound to check on the baby
that is already in all civil and
prenatal care is a life saving
care so yes that is one piece
and reproductive health care but
if you add that on to annual
checkups in the all the other
and pieces of this it's a
hundred percent does affect
their ability to access care.
So I'm hearing is.
Even outside the scope of
maternity care.
That with the doctors that are
fleeing states because they can
no longer practice reproductive
health care the citizens left
behind in those states are not
only are like hit twice so
especially women especially one
of color they're not only now
lacking the access to the
doctors they can provide them
the reproductive health care
they need they are not only now
lacking the access to that
reproductive health care but now
they are also on top of
everything else now also lacking
the extra attention from just a
female gynecologist in general
so outside the scope of being
pregnant but just lacking access
on top of everything else to
general female health care would
you agree with that statement
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady yes and I would say
that it's compounded by we
wealth bar lack there of.
So then so they're being
quadruple hits because there's
also seems to be an economic
issue that's what I heard you
say that women and who are more
affluent who have access to
funds can always go to a state
where they have they will be
granted access to reproductive
health care but women who are of
or maybe have a lower economic
I don't want to say class but
for lack of a better word a
lower economic tier.
Don't have the access to those
health care providers and also
do not have the access to funds
to get them to a place where
they could access that health
care safely with that is that a
fair statement you yeah I think
it is bigger than utility yes.
Thank you very much sorry Mr
speaker gentle lady I'm
forgetting my.
Rules of order here
So.
This bill.
Outside the scope of being
necessary for reproductive
health care is.
Also just kind of ties into
health care justice in general
Women have to definitely have
access to safe responsible
reproductive health care and I
think that bill definitely
covers that but if this bill
should not pass and we are
really punishing.
All women in New Mexico.
By denying them the doctors who
can give them that reproductive
health care the doctor the
doctors that can give them
generalized health care and
we're also punishing them for a
lack of economic access if they
are not as well off as their
More well to do counterparts
that would that would that be
fair to say I thank you Mr
speaker thanks gentle lady for
the question I believe so and I
believe that it would extend to
all pregnant people who may be
facing this as we all know there
it can be difficult to find a
reproductive and gender from
health care in our state they
can be harder to find it within
your own County at times we
should not have individuals that
are scared that the health
recommendations of doctors make
with their best interest in the
best interest of their families
in mind me somehow make that the
the pregnant person up for a
criminal penalties or anything
like that they should not be
discriminated against in seeking
health care thank you very much
Mr speaker Representative and
also for adding that extra layer
which I certainly did not mean
to leave out is that
this bill not only addresses
pregnant women of New Mexico but
pregnant people which is that
all important all encompassing
gender affirming piece whether
it be treating somebody gender
affirming care by addressing the
by the correct name by the press
pounds but also making sure that
no matter how the identified
that they have access to quality
responsible gender affirming
care which I believe this bill
absolutely does and I thank you
very much for bringing it
forward.
Signally the speaker Mr speaker
Representative.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker this matter having
been under consideration for
three hours I moved to close
debate has been a motion to
close debate all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
The I. seven.
Debate is now closed.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe to
close thank you Mr speaker thank
you body for this discussion on
I know that we discuss a very
difficult and complex issues
about tender moments in people's
lives and I want to make sure
that those are those folks that
are tuning in at this moment
understand that we we respect
the difficult decisions and
sometimes the the decisions the
families have to make together
and you know I leave my home
with my beautiful children I
know you leave your homes with
your families to make these laws
for better and safer New Mexico
so I appreciate that with that
Mr speaker I move that house
bill seven as amended do now
pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill seven as amended.
The vote is now.
Looks about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Benham yes
Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana yes
representative Sarinana votes
yes.
Close one of thirty eight in the
affirmative when the negative
house bill seven as amended has
duly passed this house
gentle lady from early or you're
ready and item number five.
Mr speaker reading the record
reflect that election is set for
placing House Bill important
final passage being taken and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Our democracy throughout the
country it is under threat.
There are threats to our sacred
right to vote in this country.
In this country the franchise is
a birthright.
For it's the rate of naturalized
citizens of this country.
It's not a privilege.
It is our civil right it's our
most sacred civil rights.
House Bill for
co sponsored with the number of
individuals includes important
provisions for our communities
and our state.
We have.
Here the opportunity to put into
statute the native American
voting rights act.
A critical improvements to
streamline and make more secure
our automatic voter registration
system.
The secure automatic voter
registration system makes.
Certainly that election
administrators have the most
current address for voters so
our voter rolls are kept up to
date.
The secure automatic voter
registration system ensures that
rural voters young voters women
native Americans economically
diverse voters and voters of
color all have a streamlined and
secure registration process.
House bill four will create a
voluntary permanent absentee
ballot list.
House Bill formalin has devoted
status privacy and security.
Possible for will also help
restore the voting rights of
formerly incarcerated people as
has been our loss since two
thousand and one.
So that they may exercise their
birthright as US citizen as they
Madam society.
A recent report highlighted over
seventeen thousand New Mexicans
who have paid their debt to
society.
But were unable to exercise our
right to vote because of the
cumbersome process that we have
in place now in the restoration
of voting rights this is wrong.
So this legislation streamlines
that process so that individuals
leading the prison systems can
properly be integrated into our
society.
My expert witness this evening
just on madam secretary of
state.
Maggie Toulouse Oliver my chief
of staff Liselotte will also be
joining us here on the floor and
with that Mr speaker I wanted to
yield to one of my first co
sponsors the gentleman from Dona
Ana.
Are
Caucus chair Representative Lara
killer from the Jana and before
you go folks we had a glitch on
the board we can't
folks from the previous debate
well folks for this to be we're
adding themselves on I I did
call of the land we decided to
drop everybody and then have
anyone wants to debate this bill
push the button again and if you
want to be because bill you're
probably one present but at this
point.
Gentleman from million thank you
Mr speaker thank you John lady.
This legislation has been
created by communities and
leaders from across our state to
deliver important changes for
election code that better
reflect our changing electric
and align with our values to
ensure every eligible voter to
cast their ballots.
In our state like others across
the country is utilizing both my
mail options more and more this
is especially important rural in
New Mexico for a large amount of
our population is more rural.
And to give the body an example
of that is my my mother in law
always asks for an absentee
ballot she asked for the she
likes to take our time with that
she likes to study it she likes
to do her homework about the
candidates were on the ballot
in this by her by her receiving
her ballot absentee through the
mail it gives her the
opportunity to make more
informed decisions and that's
one of the things I really like
about this bill.
The creation of a permanent
absentee ballot list streamlined
supply sings for those who
prefer to vote absentee animal
in eliminates confusion about
the process for voters.
The legislation also statuses
establishes secure automatic
voter registration so that as
eligible New Mexicans interface
with state government they are
registered to vote and any
relevant information is updated
in the system again this
streamlines the process and and
eliminates confusion.
There are not controversial
measures that.
And we'll have real important
impact on our people for more
New Mexico vote we are better we
are better institution that
truly represents and serves the
people of New Mexico I am proud
to cut co sponsor this bill and
urge my colleagues on both sides
of the aisle to support it thank
you Mr speaker.
That is back to the main sponsor
the chasing Mr speaker I would
like to yield to
The next co sponsor my chair
halls government applications
and Indian Affairs of the.
Representative Wonda Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and thank you
members of the body I rise to
support this bill this evening
because I know first hand the
right to vote is central to
participating in our democracy.
And in rural and native American
New Mexico we are all often
systematically cut out of the
process.
Because of the unique and
significant barriers many tribal
communities face it is
imperative that we pass this
bill that includes the much
needed measures that will ensure
our tribes can excess their
right to the ballot box the
provisions in this bill in power
tribes to make elections make
sense for our communities it
requires the state to honor the
political and cultural
boundaries that are tribes set
through precinct boundaries it
allows our tribes to request
that the county clerk designated
early voting locations election
day polling places and drop
boxes on or near our tribal
lands.
And allows members of our tribes
to register and receive ballots
at our tribal government and
other official buildings.
These simple changes.
To the election code will make a
huge difference in addressing
the double standard and in track
and in center I'd in this in.
Franchise native voters thank
you Mr speaker.
Early from earlier thank you.
Mr speaker we're ready for
questions.
Right.
Debate the gentleman from a bit
Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker the kind
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please you Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I'm reading this
bill it's quite a big bill I
would say.
I am just reading it's what
about forty five pages so can
you give me why you're proposing
such a large rewrite of our
election code via this bill Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
this bill proposes to do
primarily is to put into statute
some of the temporary provisions
that we had in place during the
pandemic that led to greater
access to the ballot and the
native American the voting
rights act as as a central piece
to the legislation is is a huge
part of it so we're we're
essentially trying to make
certain that one of the things
we're trying to do is make
certain that people and less
populated rural areas have equal
access to the ballot that those
of us who were in the more
populated areas have.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I appreciate that
answer I think that there's some
changes that we do need to make
I think that the native American
voting rights act within this
bill I think there are many good
provisions that we certainly be
cognizant of and potentially put
into law but I will continue
going through this bill here I'm
looking at section for voter
data.
Page six.
One six three seven.
Says the causing voter data
mailing labels or special voter
lists or any part of the voter
data mailing label or special
voter lists that identifies or
that could be used to identify
specific vote or the voters name
mailing address.
to maybe be made publicly
available on the internet or
through other means so I'm
guessing that this is banded now
and this bill madam Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman yes this is
to protect her privacy.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady would this preclude
in any way a business for
instance that the consulting
business from procuring this
data and sending it to their
clients Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman now.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady since I know that
the state that has to be
political in nature I believe.
What if let's just say I am I I
was an LLC that didn't
specifically say we were a
political consultant but we may
about a client or to in the past
that was a politician with this
still apply would we able to be
able to get this data Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What.
Is scrutinized.
If this is enacted would be the
purpose of the use of the data.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady okay.
So I guess this is Sam with a
special interest group Mr
speaker gentle lady and I want
to get more voters to the polls
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
decide to get voter data from
the secretary of state and then
send the mailers that said
something to the effect of.
Well I see that you have a vote
in the last five elections would
be a shame if your neighbors
knew about that would that be
included in this Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman
although
may not like it it would be
permissible use.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm I'm pretty sure both of us
on like that I I did vote in the
last election I promise I had to
be on the ballot to so that was
scary okay well thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady so you
know I'm just reading a lot of
information here about why this
bill came forward and it's
essentially for voter access
isn't that the case Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes and
as I said in the introduction
it's for access for both rural
and urban voters people of all
colors and and all of the
backgrounds.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I'm just
wondering do we know how many
individuals were denied their
right to vote in the last
election Mr speaker gentle lady
without this bill being passed.
This is John we don't really
keep those kinds of data.
It would be hard to the money
that unless they were there were
some method to have a reporting
system.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I think that that's
an interesting thing that we
might want to look at maybe with
the memorial just to see who was
access who doesn't because I
wouldn't want to make a giant
rewrite of our election code
without having data driven
reasons why but so going forward
here in the bill is talking
about drop boxes it says that
there would be to drop boxes per
county I believe is that correct
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker John one take me
there.
Yes ma'am I am in.
If.
Let me find the page Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady on section twelve I believe
which starts on page.
Twenty seven.
Okay.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
each county shall have at least
two monitors secured containers.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so these containers
I know they're pretty big
counties in our state like my
County Otero County goes all the
way down to chaparral goes all
the way up to where I am in
Alamogordo and Cloudcroft goes
to we may hill so I'm wondering
Mr speaker gentle lady.
How do we make sure that there
is the most access to these
ballot boxes especially in these
extremely rural counties Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman related
question this is the floor not a
ceiling and the secretary of
state's office pays for it so
it's up to the county clerk to
add additional boxes according
to the geographic nature.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady okay so I ask this
in committee but theoretically
could a county clerk put to drop
boxes right next to the front
door of the county clerk's
office and being compliance Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman I would
have said first of all it's not
the spirit of the law but then
secretary of state said that the
sectors secretary of state's
office would not actually
approve that.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady okay so then do we
know who's going to be paying
for these drop boxes.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman the
secretary of state.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady and we don't know off hand
or maybe your expert may now how
many of these drop boxes how
many ballots were deposited in
some of the most rural counties
in the state Mr speaker gentle
lady.
This is been a gentleman we
don't have those data.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I just ask that
because I know that some of
these rural communities they do
have post offices and if you
order a absentee ballot for
instance you can just drop it
off at the post office no charge
so I'm wondering if they barely
have any ballots in these boxes
why would we need to put these
in the extremely rural counties
where they do have a post office
access meant Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentleman again
it would be up to the county
clerk to decide what makes sense
in that county under rule right
now the
County clerks are permitted to
request a waiver from the
secretary of state so.
If the county clerk sees that
are it makes a good argument for
that lack of and need for the
two minimum county clerk is for
you to make that argument.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating one just reading the
billion just as each county
shall have at least two monitors
secure containers so from that
answer I'm guessing that that's
not a salad to me so we change
that and this bill Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker gentleman
now it's our intent that it
shall but under rule now if
there is a good because and the
county clerk makes a good
argument for it that there's a
possibility that that rule could
be waived.
Thank rules.
Great thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady these drop boxes
let's just say it's seven PM on
election day these drop boxes
automatically lock from being
able to get any more ballots
after the polls of close to
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so is there like an
email that's sent to the county
clerk once a ballot is dropped
through the box or do we know
exactly when that balance was
dropped Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentleman now.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I guess
theoretically I could just go
drop a hundred ballots at four
in the morning and there would
be no way to tell other than the
video surveillance that may or
may not be at that Dropbox Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
ballots are retrieved from the
drop boxes Daly.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady okay well that that
just raises some concerns from
me because I was just in there
is a nefarious actor out there
who's harvesting votes from
senior citizens let's just say
at a local community center and
they want to just drop off these
ballots at four in the morning I
wouldn't want those folks votes
to be tampered with or or be
used in any nefarious way Mr
speaker gentle lady so I still
have concerns about that but I
will continue on here regarding.
Voting and access to being able
to register Mr speaker gentle
lady what is your bill's state
regarding registering on
election day to vote Mr speaker
gentle lady could you get me to
that page if you have a.
Yes Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
section five and begins on page
six and all this is doing is re
compiling current language so
there's no changes in the
current job.
Practice.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so.
In the current practice does it
require an identification card
to register on election day in
person Mr speaker gentle lady.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generated can this be military
ID tribal ID or just a regular
ID that's not a driver's license
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman any
government issued ID.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady well I think the in
our laws are here to protect our
citizens and protect our votes
and I think every single person
should have access to the ballot
box I think that every single
person should have security at
the ballot box the their vote
counts so Mister speaker gentle
lady I move an amendment I have
it I'm not sure if the clock
hasn't yet.
Right so I would just like to
move.
House floor amendment one four
discussion Mr speaker.
This is the house bill four.
And I would like a roll call
vote please Mr speaker.
One two three.
Roll call we a roll call can
gentleman as move house floor
amendment one twelve before
gentleman can be so kind as to
be the two to five number at the
bottom.
Thank you Mr speaker the to to I
number is two two five five five
five point one I like that
number.
Two two five five five five
point one.
It is being passed out.
It is on the website will give
it a minute for the amendment to
be passed out.
And then we'll go back to you
gentlemen to explain the
amendment.
Regimen I believe we are very
close to the amendment passed
out what you explain the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
so with this ammendment here
would it four safeguards to
protect our votes in the state
of New Mexico by instituting
voter ID and this is both for
absentee and in person voting so
via absentee voting if you look
at page one it says if you have
a is there is a xerographic copy
that's an interesting word Sir
graphic copy at the request of
the voter additional about put
that forward along with their
information to the secretary of
state are to their county clerk
and then there it also goes
forward to say on election day
you must present an ID this is
government issued this includes
tribal and military
identification Mr speaker gentle
gentle lady Mr just Mr speaker I
guess.
The lady from Bernalillo is is a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker you do need it is
not.
Are you sure delayed.
I am very sure Mr speaker all
right is there debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative no
Arnold.
Thank you Mr speaker and does
the gentleman from Otero county
you hi you Mr speaker I'm just
excited the counties right
physical I'm a pretty good
reader but eighteen pages a lot
so I do have some questions on
your amendment
is it true that voters when they
registered for the first time
they have to present a driver's
license sometimes of a photo ID
and social security number
things of that nature when they
register to vote Mr speaker
Representative thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
yes that's correct to you don't
always have to present I have an
idea when you're doing it online
for instance if you would just
put some personal information Mr
speaker gentle lady okay but
thank you finally Mr speaker
Representative for the answer
but when you register to vote
online you still have to enter.
Some like a driver's license
number.
Correct.
Thank you Mr speaker then for a
social security number side and
Dr Lee it's a social security
number your correct Mr speaker
gentle lady okay thank you for
that for that answer as well Mr
speaker Representative and is
that voter fraud.
Is not already a felony in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady yes it is.
so I think you thank you
Representative Mr speaker and so
voting under a false identity
would be considered voter fraud.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady yes that's correct
okay so thank you Mr speaker
Representative so it is already
I believe it's a fourth degree
felony to commit voter fraud in
the state of New Mexico correct
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady yes the gentle lady
is correct again good job.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative so do you know of
any documented legitimate
prosecuted cases of voter fraud
committed in the state of New
Mexico thank you Mr speaker the
gentle lady yes we have recent
cases I believe in the twenty
eighteen election there were two
individuals in Rio Arriba county
going to prison they were
writing ballots themselves and
writing the their candid
preferred and they were
prosecuted they both were
imprisoned and they were charged
with fourth degree felonies Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker German so under the
current voter ID laws in the
state of New Mexico we have.
Found kat for lack of better
term and prosecuted people who
have committed voter fraud of
the state is that a correct
statement thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady yes that's
correct it has not been many
cases but we do have at least
five to seven within the last
decade Mr speaker gentle lady
and you can find those online I
believe at the heritage
foundation has a very good
website that tracks all that Mr
speaker gentle lady okay thank
you very much for that answer Mr
speaker Representative so I'm
just they need quick scan that I
have done of your amendment I'm
just.
I'm really not seeing the need
for this amendment at this time
given the fact that we already
have laws regarding voter ID
when it's required upon
registration in place and the
fact that those laws have
already proven that they are
effective in the state I am at
this time I'm just not seeing
the need for this ammendment
thank you very much Mr speaker
Representative I yield back my
time thank you thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
yes I I think that anything that
we can do to ensure the security
of our elections is something we
should be focusing on especially
since we want every single
person's vote count but I
appreciate your input Mr speaker
gentle lady is there for the
debate on the amendment.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
We are in a motion to table
house floor amendment number one
to house bill four there is a
roll call.
Able to yes in the amendment is
tabled a vote of no and we are
back on the amendment.
The vote.
Is now open.
What about to close.
Good to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Cadena.
AS to table Representative
Cadena votes yes to table
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes they will Representative
Hochman Vigil votes yes to table
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Sarinana is
to table Representative Sarinana
votes yes to table.
Was closed by a vote of forty
two in the affirmative twenty
two in the negative house floor
amendment number one to house
bill four has been tabled back
to the dealer for the vote thank
you Mr speaker and the thank you
two twenty to ask her to yield
again bill you've got the floor
Sir thank you Mr speaker.
Okay so I'm reading the bill
here I'm gonna go back to the
front of the bill page three.
It talks from line nineteen
through twenty three about an
automatic voter registration at
the end of the day
so Mister speaker gentle lady.
For this.
Automatically register anybody
to vote whenever they code to
get their idea the MVD Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman yes every
citizen.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so.
Do you have no option to not opt
in at the NVD Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle not under this
bill but you can opt out later.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady well you know I just
see that as a problem for folks
who are in certain religions
that I I don't want to name but
certain religions that don't let
them vote six against their
religion to vote I can think of
to at least right now does this
violate their religious freedom
and constituted in the first
amendment of our constitution Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle no because they are
required to vote.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but that individual
would be forced to opt out is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman that's how
that individual can exercise his
or her religious freedom.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but isn't that
putting an undue burden on the
individual based on their
religion that says they cannot
vote they now have to opt out
instead of an opt in Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker John by sending a
prepaid postcard.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally I don't think the.
Any kind of burden should be too
little or too big for an
individual to exercise their
right to vote Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman are
research indicates that the
issue of the religious issue is
not about being registered to
vote it's about voting.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but that individual
do do know which religion that's
with Mr speaker gentle lady can
you name that for me.
The gentleman here not many
religions so I won't but that
there is one written down here
on this research thank you Mr
speaker the gentle lady okay I
won't I won't be that our that I
think would kill them so I
appreciate that I do think that
that's the concern I have
especially with.
Forcing them to opt out I would
rather have it be an opt in you
know if you go to the NBC Mr
speaker gentle lady and they say
would you like to vote when you
say oh sure then you're
registered to vote but if you
say no I think that that would
be reasonable accommodation that
in my opinion but I will
continue Mr speaker gentle lady
let's go toward the section
about the automatic voter list
for them to send you a ballots
do you know which section that's
in Mr speaker gentle lady.
Just give us a moment Mister
speaker.
Mr speaker German section eleven
on page twenty four.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I appreciate that
okay so it's the voluntary a
permanent absentee voter list so
Mister speaker gentle lady.
If I get on this list.
And let's just say I am.
Passed away Mr speaker gentle
lady how long would it take for
them to take me off this list.
Mr speaker and gentleman as soon
as the secretary of state of the
county clerk gets the death
notice
Actually had to do this for my
mother this spring.
And she had never missed
election in ninety nine years of
life and I had to seven the
death certificate to our county
clerk.
Thank you Mr speaker and my
condolences to the gentle lady I
I'm sorry for your loss.
So going forward let's just say
I moved to a different address
Mr speaker gentle lady and I'd
for god to.
Submit my new address to the the
clerk Mr speaker gentle lady
with my balance then be sent to
my old address.
Mr speaker and gentleman when
you changer address you usually
notify the post office the post
office notifies the secretary of
state and then the secretary of
state will make that change on
the voter list.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady let's just say I I
moved two weeks before the
election and I I hope I never do
that but if I did and let's just
say I didn't have time to talk
to the post office where the
ballot go Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman if
you're moving two weeks before
and you're on the permanent
absentee voter list you would
have had a Kerr a notice prior
to the two weeks that the
ballots on its way if you don't
do anything about it it's on
you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady okay so they'll send
me a postcard before the ballot
get sent Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct okay thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
all right so I'm I'm close to
your section I'm gonna go to
page twenty three now.
And it's regarding the Human
Services Department developing
procedures to be approved by the
secretary of state to ensure
that each benefit program
administered by the department
ensures a qualified electors
receive benefits and are offered
the opportunity to register to
vote so during committee I
believe the madam secretary of
state indicated that there's a
federal program that already
offer this is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
full answer is secretary of
state is the Human Services
Department is a registered
now a certified voter
registration center of federal
law.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally so do we send our
applications to individuals
receiving benefits from the
Human Services department Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker No they're given
information about the online
registration portal.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but they would get
an email I'm guessing what they
get any kind of notification in
the mail or or online or via
text message asking them to
register to vote Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
get the notice when they're in
person and they get it in the
mail as well.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady well I just I think
that's a little concerning to me
because I just wanted to appear
as the state saying you know
here's here's your budget and
also here's your voting card or
an ability to vote and register
I just don't want to conflate
those two Mr speaker gentle lady
so I I guess I would just
suggest maybe in the next
chamber if this passes which I I
I I hope it doesn't many parts
of it but if it does I would
suggest maybe cleaning that
language up to.
Maybe just take it out
completely from the the Human
Services department because I
think that it appears to be
contingent upon your voting that
you get budget I know that's not
the case but some people make
inflated Mr speaker gentle lady.
Speaker John.
May I answer that of course it
was going to ask phrased as a
question but the secretary of
state.
Called to my attention the fact
that the Human Services
department is required to do
that by federal law so we don't
really want to remove that.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady Mr wouldn't want the feds
upper neck I appreciate that
answer so I'm gonna go over to
page eleven I know I go I'm
going back and forth but this is
a very big bill Mr speaker
gentle lady so the question I
have it says a voter is eligible
to vote while imprisoned in a
correctional facility is part of
the sentence.
The individual that has not
been.
Charge or is not been found
guilty of a felony the some of
the ability to vote Mr speaker
gentle lady so with that
individual be given the
opportunity while in jail let's
say and there jailing happens
during an election with that
individual then be able to vote
well they're they're in jail.
Mr speaker gentleman the
secretary of state said that the
the this could be offered that
they don't currently have those
procedures so the people you're
talking about are people who
are.
Being held pre trial so they
haven't been convicted of
anything.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so is there there's
a program I'm guessing with the
secretary of state's office too
offer transportation for that
individual to get to the polls
or set up a voting booth are
voting center at the jail Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentleman that's what has not
been set up yet but it can be
set up thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady will I
would see that as if we don't
have a set up already I think
that would be a really good
instance of my from my previous
question saying where have we
seen people not have the ability
to vote this could be something
integrated in this bill Mr
speaker gentle lady would you be
open to adding that.
Mr speaker gentleman we really
don't need it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady well I I believe you
said that those policies have
not been set up yet so how would
we set those policies of Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentleman by rule.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for doing away aware
secretary of state's office has
not set this up by rule if there
so for democracy and inclusion
and and voting access Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman
I've been assured that it's one
of the things they are working
on.
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
I appreciate that answer I think
that's very important we
certainly do want those
individuals to be able to vote.
And I think that there have been
many of really good things in
this bill I really believe that
I think the Indian voting rights
act the native American voting
rights act that is so important
many questions that but I do see
this automatic voter
registration this MVD automatic
registration and beauty and then
also the the.
Permanent list is something of a
huge concern about I still
the concern about the religious
exemption for that one or two
religions that I didn't mention
earlier but I'm sure we all know
so I appreciate the time today
Mr speaker I think that we can
do a lot of good to institute
more policies that would make
our elections safer I do not
believe Mr speaker that includes
unmanned or an on person to.
Ballot boxes that can be thrown
in a hundred ballots in the
middle of the night I don't
think that's something that
secure and I certainly don't
want these rural communities and
the folks in marginalized
communities to be deprived of
their equal access to the polls
by individuals who may or may
not be using the the very
lenient.
Policies in this bill for
nefarious purposes so for that
reason Mr speaker gentle lady I
cannot support a bill that I
appreciate your effort thank you
Mr speaker there's further
debate the gentle lady from
McKinley is and one
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to my co
sponsor thank you Mr speaker
earlier today earlier this
evening I I spoke in support of
this bill so with that said I
believe I have a friendly
amendment.
By gentle lady it is being
passed out.
You can only read the two to
five number on the bottom.
Two two five five zero zero
point one.
The lady is being passed out.
It is making its way up to the
website committee if you can
formally move your amendment and
then wait for it to be passed
out before you explain it thank
you Mr speaker I move house
floor amendment number one to
house bill four.
Well.
And Mister speaker I'd like to
introduce my expert witness Mr
Austin.
Why do we we are key with the
and indigenous justice policy
advocate excuse me my tongue is
not working tonight.
Will generally and for the
benefit of those watching at
home or in the gallery.
That point two to five number
again is point two two five five
zero zero point one could that
amendment is being passed out as
I speak stand by.
The lady that has been passed
down to the gentle lady to
explain the amendment thank you
Mr speaker colleagues if you go
to pages thirty eight through
forty of the legislation this
floor amendment will strike
section twenty two in its
entirety.
So section twenty two is the
provision of the native American
voting rights act that
authorizes tribal absentee
ballot assistance.
Tribal community members leaders
and our advocates are United in
our belief for the need of
assistance for tribal voters who
have difficulty ensuring their
ballots are cast and their votes
are counted.
The provision allowing the
appointment of tribal absentee
ballot assistance were drafted
with input by many tribal
leaders and advocates however
members of my community raised
concerns that this provision and
house bill four needed more work
to ensure that the rights of
privacy of native American
voters are fully protected.
Ensuring the equitable
implementation of this measure
is essential to public trust and
we need more time to get that
perfect so all so that all the
tribes have the same opportunity
Mr speaker.
The lady to lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey is as a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker and the lady from
McKinley in San Juan yes it is.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Is your objection to adopting
the amendment.
See none the St on house floor
amendment number one to house
bill four has been adopted.
The lady from McKinley is and
why you still have the floor
thank you Mr speaker thank you
colleagues the gold here the
goal here was to ensure that our
tribes and elders had the same
access to their vote and ballot
box as those living off
reservation and with the many
different needs and tribal
communities.
It is going to take a little
more time to make sure we find
the solution that works for
tribal nations so I urge the
body to about adopted amendment
thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady we are on the amended bill
and now we go to the next
debater Representative the
gentleman from Sandoval
Representative Martinez.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo we
can build Mr speaker I yield.
What is the current process for
the secretary of state's office
to remove the voter registration
with the sis border.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
secretary of state gets they
review vital records vital
statistics vital statistics data
social security a social
security
master death file.
The.
Been touring notices.
Death notices like from
individuals.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for that how often
does that happen.
Mr speaker gentleman it's
ongoing it's constant.
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
know if your expert witness
still requires the department of
Veterans Services to report in
the military deaths to her
office.
Mr speaker and gentleman we're
gonna have to look that up we're
not it's just not at the tip of
her tongue.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that while we wait for that
answer.
On.
We started a program several
years ago.
At the height of the.
Montoya wars overseas in the in.
Iraq and Afghanistan.
Or we were finding out a lot of
these soldiers were staying on
the voter rolls.
And.
They were getting mailers to
their houses switch.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Especially if it was a recent
death was a very traumatic
experience.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
reason I asked what the current
processes is because I'm
wondering if they're still
requiring DVS to do that.
And how often they actually wipe
the voter rolls of people who
have deceased.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
They wipe the voter rolls daily
and the social security death
list should include those
individuals.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
By those individuals your
talking about deceased voters
for the the military members Mr
speaker and gentleman military
members.
Mr speaker at this time I'd like
to I believe an amendment was
delivered to you.
Gentleman that will you kindly
read the two to five number at
the bottom two to five number at
the bottom is point two two five
I I zero point one.
When I have determined that is
what is being passed out.
Well that happens can you please
formally move your amendment.
Mr speaker I move that amendment
number one to house bill four.
Excuse me house floor amendment
number two to house bill four.
Do now pass and I request a roll
call.
Okay live on when I'm in the
interject into quick so this is
how important women number one
to house bill four.
That's two annual roll call
raise your hands thank you Mr
speaker it is being passed out
now.
It is on the website so stand by
for a minute we'll gets passed
out and then you can explain the
amendment.
To explain the amendment.
Mr speaker gentle lady this
amendment and I I hope it's a
friendly amendment like the last
one.
Simply removes the creation of a
voluntary permanent absentee
voter list.
On page one lines twenty one and
twenty two we would strike from
the title creating a voluntary
permanent absentee voter list.
On page twenty four strike lines
nine through twenty five in
their entirety.
Strike all of pages twenty five
twenty six.
Twenty six twenty seven strike
lines one through eleven in
their entirety.
Remember the succeeding
successions accordingly.
On page forty five.
Line nineteen strike twelve
through twenty three and twenty
five and insert.
Eleven through twenty two one
twenty four.
Page forty five.
Winds twenty one and twenty two
strikes sections eleven and
twenty four and insert them into
their of section twenty three.
The lady from Bernalillo is is
so friendly amendment Mr speaker
I don't think so but then I
asked the gentleman couple of
questions first Sir.
Mr speaker general.
Your purpose because I thought
we were doing something with the
deaths.
And I'm wondering what's going
on here now than what you're
purposes.
Mr speaker gentle lady I was
just curious about the deaths
because we started that program
several years ago.
When the it came to light that
veterans are passing away.
in a military theater and it
would be some time before their
death was recognized by the
secretary of state so that was a
lot of pure curiosity.
Joe in your purpose of this
floor amendment is to do what Mr
speaker gentle lady the purpose
of this is simply to remove the
permanent.
Of the voluntary permanent
absentee voter list.
Mr speaker
The gentleman hi I have to say
that's one friendly.
I want to tell you why.
I have I heard testimony in the
house Judiciary Committee that
somehow this was going to
threaten our elections.
The states that have added
permanent absentee voting.
For almost everything
California Colorado Hawaii
Nevada Oregon Utah Vermont
Washington.
States allow specific small
elections to be conducted by
mail.
For states permit on the on
Alexion's for certain small
jurisdictions.
We had a foreman provided from
the state of Oregon in the
Judiciary Committee said that.
Permanent absentee voting in
nineteen ninety five.
The sun has been in Colorado.
They they'd rather elections by
mail so.
Well we're not necessarily
moving to that we are simply
making that kind of ballot
access available at all times so
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
there might be other debate but
I wanted to let you know why I
considered unfriendly.
Right is our debate on the
amendment the lady from
Bernalillo Representative her
and.
With the gentleman yield Mister
speaker gentle lady of I will
you'll to.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman this
bill as amended has many great
qualities and one of the great
qualities that it's important
for us to look at is the fact
that it does include a permanent
absentee list for boaters to use
at their option so it's really
important Mr speaker and
gentleman to understand that
many voters were living with
disabilities are who are elderly
our our sick injured.
Need to be able to rely up on it
absentee ballot for
participation in our democracy I
also want to say Mister Mister
chair Mr speaker and gentleman
that the use of an absentee
ballot use of a permanent
absentee ballot reduces the
chances that people will forget
that oh my gosh I have all of
these this paperwork that I have
to get in so that I can utilize
an absentee ballot this is
particularly important for
people with disabilities who are
elderly sick or who are injured.
And it's important that they do
not miss an election and I've
been on a permanent absentee
ballots Mr speaker and gentleman
we can make sure that they don't
miss in that election.
This makes voting by absentee a
step easier for communities
across New Mexico and that's
what we want Mr speaker and
gentleman one every person who
wants to participate in that
voting to be able to do so and
this permanent absentee ballot
option is absolutely going to do
that Mr speaker and gentleman I
want to emphasize that voters
should be able to have a voice
in their government.
And whether it's from the
privacy of their home or from
the privacy of a ballot box we
need to make sure that it exists
and if voters to vote by mail Mr
speaker and gentleman they
should have that opportunity
it's in every election if that's
what they choose to do.
Is there a difference in safety
or security I ask you Mr speaker
and gentleman between applying
every year and been on the vote
over right get a vote on the
list is there a difference and I
will tell you that the answer is
no is that one that fits Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Four of the secretary of state
or county clerks to determine
whether or not they can verify
if a person was utilized in this
particular method has died our
should not be using it and I
would say to you Mr speaker and
gentleman the answer is yes just
gentlelady I'm gonna interject
your permanent if you want to
debate the amendment please
debate the amendment with the Q.
NA that is in the house of rural
it is in a sense
just a friendly reminder to the
body to to queue in a in our
debate.
So Mr speaker and gentleman I
us.
Think about this process and
tell me why it's so wrong.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have
thought about it and I've
actually what brought it to mind
was the emails I was getting
from the smaller counties around
the state and I'm gonna quote.
Please do not passed house bill
four.
This is on behalf of a certain
county clerk this bill is a
horrible.
It was horrible last year it's
horrible this year.
In its own right I have seen
really no changes in language
from last year's bill and would
be devastated and it would be
devastating to the constituents
of our county then of New Mexico
if it passes Mr speaker
The gentle lady.
These emails.
The consul we pour into our
provided the mailboxes I do my
best to open every single one of
them whether I agree with them
or not but when I came across
these.
From some from an election
official in a smaller county I
thought.
This is this is reason to
respond to this to get into a
conversation I got into a
conversation.
And I did not get any.
Positive feedback at all from
the smaller counties do you know
Mr speaker gentle lady.
We're the smaller counties
brought into the conversation.
Gentleman it is your amendment
issues debating your amendment
to if you have that information
you can certainly stated but it
is not a question for the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Mr speaker
thank you for that education I'm
gonna say that there was no they
were not brought into the
conversation as evidenced by the
emails that I'm getting.
The Mr speaker a gentleman.
You also get positive emails
from individuals indicated that
they wanted to make sure that
there was a permanent absentee
ballot list available.
Mr speaker
gentle lady on this issue of my
amendment No I did not.
Mr speaker and gentleman I did
get many emails asking to make
sure that there was a permanent
absentee ballot list available
for individuals because they
were concerned that they could
not always get out maybe it's
the make make up of my district
but Mr Mr speaker and gentleman.
If you had receive those emails
which are determination
regarding this issue have to
aids.
Mr speaker gentle lady like I
said I have done my best to open
and respond to as many of the
emails or whether I agree with
them or not.
Mr speaker gentleman do you see
a problem at all with respect to
the security of a permanent
absentee list.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do
because I'm not convinced that.
The
voters on these permanent lists
will be wiped in the in a timely
fashion once their deceased.
Mr speaker and gentleman what do
you have that concern.
Mr speaker gentle lady because
of past
actions were thousand department
when I was with the department
of Veterans Services we actually
had to initiate that action.
Mr speaker and gentleman has the
technology changes so that it
would have improvement since the
time that you do with that a job
Mr speaker gentle lady I've been
out of that job now for four
years so I'm sure it has but I'm
still waiting for an answer on
the original question.
Mr speaker determined please
repeat the question that you
want an answer to.
I just want to remind the body
debaters we are debating the
amendment so gentleman from
Bernalillo you can present to
answer questions in rural from
Santa you can respond to the
questions I I don't think it's
appropriate for you to respond
another question back
if we can stick to the debate on
the amendment that would be
wonderful thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman I will
close by saying that the the
methods that have been presented
for purposes of making sure that
is that the permanent absentee
ballots are safe have been
presented there has been
evidence to show it to be that
the secretary of state's office
and the county clerk's office do
have methods to determine
whether or not these ballots
would be used in Raleigh are
fraudulently and Mr speaker and
gentleman I suggest to you that.
Your amendment is definitely
unfriendly and should not be
accepted.
Right is on the amendment.
Generated from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move.
I move to table the amendment.
Motion to table house floor
amendment number two to house
bill four.
A vote of yes and amendment will
be tabled a vote of no and we
are back on the amendment there
has been a request for a roll
call vote.
The vote is now open.
Eight months close.
Those members without a recorded
vote.
Representative Cadena is to
table Representative votes yes
to table Representative Hochman
Vigil yes to table
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes to table
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative is yes
Representative Sarinana.
Just to table Representative
Sarinana is yes to table.
One forty two in the affirmative
and twenty four in the negative
house floor amendment number two
to house bill four has been
table gentleman presentable you
still have the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Body
gentlelady from Bernalillo did
you were you able to secure the
answer to the original question
if that program was still in
effect.
identifying those veterans
through the department of
Veterans Services
Mr speaker gentleman I'm sorry
but the secretary of state told
me during the whole debate and I
forgot to get back to she just
couldn't get that information
while she's sitting here we will
she will still get it to them.
Thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I
appreciate the discussion is
always by
Always very curious I tend to
ask very short questions don't
like taking up a lot of time
appreciate your answers.
Thank you gentlemen there is for
debate the gentle lady from you
just had a support
Representative how to me you'll.
Mr speaker gentle lady of my
references were to the native
American boating Act and since
that is no longer in there than
I do not need to speak thank you
and yes I think you gentle lady
there's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
Mr speaker I yield to my friend.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I'd like to follow up on a few
comments that were we're just
maybe focused on the permanent
Absentee voting lists.
We talked a little bit about
technology and you mentioned for
states have fully mail in ballot
elections M. Mr speaker gentle
lady do those four states have
technologies that provide some.
Ballot security measures that
are associated with those mail
in elections.
Mr speaker gentle misstates I
mentioned that with the nine
states the four stage you
mentioned with full of mail and
the balance Mr speaker John I
think there are nine but.
Mr speaker gentleman there
security measures of similar to
what we have in place.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
know about the other state or so
but I am a little bit familiar
with Colorado and it's my
recollection that Colorado has
software scanning software that
allows signature verification as
these ballots get returned to
the appropriate offices is from
through some machines that
Very quickly determined that the
person who mail that and
signature matches the signature
that's on file we're would that
be an accurate statement Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman secretary
of state so that is true in
Colorado.
And so Mister speaker and gentle
lady I think one of the concerns
that we have.
With respect to the permanent
mail in ballot request.
Is that we do not have
employees.
Security measures to verify
those signatures and prompt and
and fast fashion and I'm not
even sure that anybody checks of
signatures on the ballot
Mr speaker and gentle lady
correct me if I'm wrong and
that.
Mr speaker and gentleman
actually when I was discussing
earlier with the gentleman from
Otero the fact that.
Yes only
The election that happened after
she had died.
she actually missed another one
because when I took during the
pandemic I took her absentee
ballots out for her to sign and
I wasn't allowed in the facility
because of the pandemic.
And they had a very good record
of the pandemic there are very
this is a facility but they're
very careful about people coming
in.
And I had talked to my mother
about it and she actually.
Sign into the ballot in
Medicaid.
Which is not allowed and.
No I didn't even realize it
until it was too late and I
honestly didn't know at that
time that reading wasn't allowed
and I sent it in and we got it
back to the mail so there is
definitely someone checking the
signatures.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I certainly hope that as
we continue to move in this
direction.
And I would say that there has
been movement over my number of
years in this body toward the
that direction but I would hope
that at some point the state of
New Mexico invest in
technology similar to Colorado
to insure the that those ballots
are coming back are actually of
the balance of the qualified
elector and I think we all agree
that everyone electors should be
able to vote should be able to
easily vote.
And that their vote should count
for every should count for one
vote and every other electors
vote should count for one vote
and no more and no less Mr
speaker gentle lady let's look a
little further down on on page
twenty seven regarding the
secured containers.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of.
As I read your bill.
This bill requires each county
to have at least to secure
containers is that accurate.
Hi yes Mr speaker gentleman that
is the the floor not the
ceiling.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
New Mexico.
Is a very diverse state with
some very large counties some
very small counties and and all
sizes in between some populous
counties some very very very
rural counties and so I'd like
to know how we came up with
requiring each county to have at
least two secured containers.
Just in developing the process
there was calm there were
conversations with the clerks
and with all stakeholders and
they came up with the two ****
and say floor.
And there is a waiver that I
mentioned earlier so that they
County clerk could apply to have
one less.
Mr speaker and gentle lady in
line sixteen I see the word
shell.
And I may have overlooked but I
don't see any waiver language
could you direct me to where
that may be Mr speaker and
gentleman that is in rural.
So.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
law will say shell.
In the secretary of state can
then waive the law the this body
an axe.
Mr speaker gentleman
spoke earlier so if this is
enacted then they will have to
have to.
With no waiver Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentleman yes.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady the that's the that's part
of my concern we have some very
small counties in fact the the
gentleman from.
As a reset all those counties
basically the north east quarter
corner of the state
Else from a county that that's
a.
As what about seven hundred
fifty eight hundred people in
it.
Seven hundred and ten six six
hundred and ten I'm told so six
hundred ten people in that
county and yet if the county
clerk there would have to of.
Find resources to deal with
these two containers.
Every day I suppose is a is that
what's required Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
first let me just tell you a
story about the first bill I
never got involved with the
in nineteen eighty five when I
was director of a community
program for children with
disabilities
we were trying to get public
education for three and four
year old children with
disabilities because.
There were only in the state of
higher state of New Mexico which
is the fifth largest state
geographically there were only
nineteen community programs for.
Infants toddlers and preschool
children and what we explained
to the legislators when we were
trying to.
require public education for
three and four year old children
with disabilities is that
parents were having to drive the
distance from Washington DC to
Philadelphia.
To get speech therapy or
occupational therapy for their
toddler with disabilities so.
Think about those rural counties
and you talk about we're so
sparsely populated and.
I think people have trouble even
realizing the magnitude of our
distance by the bill as written
is we're trying to ensure that
rural voters have the same
access to the ballot that my
neighbors to.
That's why it's in there it's
it's really to try to win
franchise people.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
understand that goal the.
I'm looking at some counties
that are very small in
population the county clerk's
staff is.
May be over one or two person
staff and I'm just wondering how
they are going to.
Really implemented the this
process particularly as you
point out the map to drive long
distances to check that second
container so do we have.
In the ability to deal with
those types of issues and in the
counties.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The reason it's like this is to
enable citizens to vote.
It's not about whether somebody
is has a job that's
inconvenient.
And so Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
Even in very small populated
counties we're going to impose
this.
And I can speak to my own County
where the very rural precincts
are all mail in ballots of the
the the vote by mail there's two
precincts that that or the
extreme.
Edges of the county that have
taken advantage of of those
third provisions in law they
they mail their ballots and but
I'm thinking of of Harding
County having to to receptacles
that will be.
Probably at least twenty miles
apart Roy mas Caro I think
they're about twenty miles apart
which would be the two logical
places I guess for that.
Somebody's going to have to have
to do that
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
have an amendment and basically
what I'd like to see is that the
counties should have some say in
in this so my movement of.
Gentlelady.
The deals with that exact issue
so this time Mr speaker I would
move house floor amendment
number two to House Bill number
four and.
I believe.
The clerk has copies of it needs
to be done as it is about to get
passed out do you want to read
the two to five number make sure
that the right one yes Sir it's
point two two five five three
three point one that's what I
have a gentleman that is what is
being passed out.
It is on the website so once
again.
Two minutes.
For the get passed out to all
the members.
Originally it appears that.
The best of the amendment
determined to explain the
amendment.
Mr speaker this amendment is
just simply striking the
mandatory two containers for
County and inserting in lieu
thereof that the county clerk
has a discretion to utilize
monitored secured containers to
receive the mail ballots so the
number and whether they they use
these containers will be at the
option of of each of the county
clerk's in our three thirty
three respective counties.
The lady from Bernalillo is this
a friendly amendment Mr speaker
with all due respect to my
colleague it is not
The gentleman from
Chavis.
Said that we are imposing on the
clerks and what I believe we're
doing what the bill is we are
offering the voters an
opportunity so I don't think
this is friendly because this is
stripping that opportunity.
From the voters that is intended
now the second and most
important reason is that this is
on equal access to the ballot
box Mr speaker thank you.
Is there debate on the amendment
the gentle lady from reality by.
Santa Fe tiles and Sandoval
Representative Cadena thank you
Mr speaker will the kind
gentleman yield I will certainly
yield to the gentle lady from
house thank you so much would
you agree that the whole reason
for this debate is that we want
our citizens to both register
and then vote don't you think
that's the purpose of this
debate.
I don't know if it's the purpose
of the debate but it's certainly
the purpose I think of this body
as elected officials we all want
all of the qualified electors to
participate and to have their
ballots cast and counted
equally.
Mr speaker in kind gentleman I
couldn't agree with you more I
mean we all strive to do that in
each of our districts and
encourage people to get out and
vote and and really that is
their voice matters their voice
in this democracy if they don't
participate they won't have that
voice and and I guess when I
look at I to Mr speaker and kind
gentleman and I'm from a very
rural county to probably the
size of Massachusetts not the
largest a district in the nation
but pretty big pretty big.
Anyhow
many have many of my voters are
or many of my citizens live
within an hour of a town or a or
or a voting place a voting place
so I see this I see this
requirement for ballot boxes by
a by county clerks as a real
incentive for for people who may
be may not have enough gas to
drive you know an hour or may
not may not have the opportunity
to the to go very far to really
be able to go and cast their
ballot in a secured location so
so I see this is a real
opportunity for for rural voters
to participate actively in the
process don't you think that's
how this is set up to do you
think that's why this is set up
to to serve that purpose.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would disagree.
Mr speaker under current law
under current rule as I
understand it are County clerk's
able to apply for a waiver from
the.
from the drop box requirements
right now there they can apply
for a waiver.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
not sure about the waiver
requirement I think there were
some county clerks that
I'm not sure we required and we
had so many election fills on
trying to remember whether it
actually to pastor not but the
sectors state could certainly in
light that's on that point.
If she so chooses.
I Mr speaker I'm trying to get
an answer from the secretary of
state it is my understanding
that right could you.
Our our our current our county
clerks currently able to give of
waiver from providing so they
are able to get away right now
so that what that means is right
now if it can it could choose
not to do this they they don't
provide these drop boxes.
It would you agree.
Mr speaker gentle lady of that's
the if that's the case I would
agree that the secretary of
state probably knows the answer
to that so so Mister speaker
kind gentleman.
That's why I think that's why I
think we have this provision it
is so that we can require every
county to have at least two drop
boxes so that people can have
easier access to the voting
process and and and in my in my
district I would I would hope
that they have more than two but
I'm in some places to would be
okay aw and and therefore I
think this is a positive thing
for the citizens of New Mexico
and although good people can
disagree
I really think this is going in
the right direction again
leading every voice be heard
that's what we want if we're
really having going to have a
true democracy we want as many
people to take advantage of this
process I mean look at the
countries that don't even have
the opportunity to vote I mean
really any time we can improve
this process for the people of
our nation I think it's an
important goal thank you Mr
speaker thank you kind
gentleman.
For the debate on the amendment.
The gentleman from a total
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for this amendment
well the gentleman please you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Otero county thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen and
I appreciate you for bringing
this forward I think this is a
very important part of securing
our our elections and by by that
our democracy as well Mr speaker
gentleman and so you know I'm
I'm reading the constitution
here article four section twenty
four S. as the polling places
under the local can under local
laws Mr speaker gentleman so I'm
guessing.
Right now ballots ballot boxes
are.
Unconstitutional I'm not a
constitutional lawyer but I'm
just wondering do you have any
thoughts on that Mr speaker
John.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
sure that I have boned up on
that provision in the
constitution but if that's what
it says and basically I believe
firmly and have debated for
several weeks now that we need
to do to the.
Constitution.
First and foremost thank you Mr
speaker thank you chairman I I
agree with you and I just I'm
reading this and it really makes
me wonder so I appreciate this I
think constitutionally it's
something that's very sound and
something that we should
certainly do and pass this
amendment with haste Mr speaker
Jim and I yield back.
Thank you gentlemen the deleted
from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Would you like a roll call vote
on this.
Yes Sir I would.
We're in a motion to table house
floor amendment number two to
house bill for a vote of yes and
the amendment is tabled a vote
of no and we're back on the
amendment.
The vote is now open.
The clues.
But those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Cadena.
Yes table Representative attests
to table Representative Hochman
Vigil yes to table
Representative hopping the votes
yes to table Representative
Rubio.
Yes the table Representative of
those yes to table
Representative Sarinana is to
table Representative Sarinana
votes yes to table.
Close to forty during the
formative twenty three in the
negative house floor amendment
to house bill four.
Has been table.
Gentleman from Chavis you still
the floor thank you Mr speaker I
think Representative Bob will is
going to move me down to the
minor leagues I think I'm one in
ten on the house floor as of Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
I think that.
These containers.
And I believe you discussed
earlier with the gentleman from
Otero.
The.
Majority of the the containers
and that people can drop off the
number of ballots and so Mister
speaker and gentle lady like to
focus on that issue a little
bit.
there is a requirement for
monitoring of these secured
boxes are not.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
are monitored and secured.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
The monitoring
for for what purpose.
Is a monitoring required.
Mr speaker gentleman to make
sure they're not being tampered
with for that there's any other
election interference.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
would that include.
Dropping off.
Ballots by one who is not
authorized to drop those ballots
off.
Mr speaker gentleman it will
capture anyone who drops off the
ballot.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
there any way to.
To identify the ballots dropped
off by any one individual.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
individual who drops the ballot
into one of those boxes has to
sign and a yes his or her
relationship to the voter.
You Mr speaker and gentle lady
but the monitoring would not
capture whether.
That's accurate or not would it.
Mr speaker Tom monitored twenty
four seven by video.
And Mr speaker gentle lady is a
video of such quality that one
could capture maybe the
handwriting on that balances for
you put in the box.
Mr speaker John it's not
designed to capture that level
of detail.
You Mr speaker gentle lady
that's that's my my concern the
monitoring that we have
anticipated by this as I
understand it.
Is to basically prevent.
Damage or at least being able to
discern who mind their majority
who may
in appropriately deal with the
receptacle itself but it's
really not focused on the person
dropping off the ballot for how
many ballots are being dropped
off for the attendant
information that's supposed to
be on the envelope when someone
other than the qualified elector
is dropping off his or her
balance is that accurate Mr
speaker gentleman that's
accurate the keep in mind that
over a period of ten years so we
responded to an earlier question
and debate there were only five
to seven voter fraud cases in
the entire state five to seven
over a period of ten years not a
single one involved
impersonation of another voter.
Mr speaker gentle lady let's
talk about that for a little bit
That.
Number.
Would be obtained from actual.
Filene's of complaints against
an individual would it not.
Mr speaker gentle sometimes are
actually caught in the act
according to secretary of state
and
so there's not necessarily they
are caught because of the filing
but they're caught and then
there's probably a file and
subsequent to being caught.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
someone.
Or caught.
In violation of the election
code.
But there was no prosecution.
That incident would not be
reflected in the numbers that
you just.
Chavis Mr speaker gentle not so
my understanding at all
facilities caught.
There's there's a prosecution
follows right Mr speaker
gentleman that's that's what
happens.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I can
tell you that in mind County.
There was an incident where a
nurse at a nursing facility
requested ballots for the
residents of a nursing facility
proceeded to vote those ballots.
And there was no prosecution.
It was turn them but there was
no prosecution side you know I I
don't know that all these
infants are getting reported in
the numbers and I'm concerned
with with that I I think there's
a lot of things that.
Because it's just voting so to
speak.
The.
Seriousness of the so called
crime doesn't seem to get the
attention of either the Attorney
General or the district
attorneys and and a lot of those
things.
Thank they just disappear and
I'm concerned that those numbers
are reflected in the numbers
that you just gave us Mr speaker
and gentleman I will say that
they in turn are interim
committee course corrections and
justice and I was just
reminiscing with the one of the
former chairs I'll park recently
and senator savant is.
When he was in the house was co
chair of that committee and we
met twice to have hearings on.
Purported voter fraud in Dona
ana county and both times were
there nobody came.
So you know the way they were
they were claiming something was
happening but they would not
appear before a legislative
committee looking to hear what
the problems were I don't know
what's up with their district
attorney but
we can just speculate all we
want on what could possibly go
wrong with that I know the the
center for justice has done
research for decades on the
integrity of our voting system
and the likelihood of voter
fraud is something like.
Of like of the likelihood of
being struck by lightning it's
very rare.
Mr speaker gentle lady would you
agree with me that the.
Weakling.
In our.
Security measures with respect
to voting would be with respect
to the ballots that are mailed
out and then expected to be
returned.
Mr speaker gentle.
I understand your statement I
hear you that you're afraid of
what's going on but.
How can these nine states
including what's been Oregon and
and we're talking we're talking
these aren't all red or blue
states they're both colors
They've been doing this for
almost thirty years in Oregon.
So.
Why are we so concerned and it's
not like we just have a new
technology that's never been
tried so I I have faith that.
Our methods are secure and we
will improve them as technology
improves.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think the technology is already
here in fact I think the
technology is being has been and
is being utilized in in the past
several elections certainly to
our neighbors to the north and
you mentioned a number of other
states so Mister speaker I think
that the.
The concern is that.
These boxes could be used for
ballot harvesting not
withstanding the laws that are
in place to limit who can
properly drop off a ballot for
them a qualified elector.
Despite the laws that are
employees to require information
to be provided on the outer
envelope with respect to that
person who drops it off.
And this seems to be the one
area where I think there's
there's a weak point and so
we're trying to to address and
obviously we have spending you
know we can agree to disagree
but that that is our concern and
I don't see as implementing the
technology that would provide
the security measures that I
think should go hand in hand
with these keys of voting
Efforts in this lock box the
secure lock box is one of those
areas that I think
is is a potential weak link in
that ballot security measures
Madam or Mr speaker and gentle
lady I appreciate
you know our debates over the
years and obviously we've had
similar debates in the past and
and we we agreed to
I disagree as I stated but I do
I do hope at some point.
The state will invest in the
technology to make sure that
every qualified electors vote is
equally counted Mr speaker and
gentle lady thank you for the
debate thank you for buying
consideration.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield Mister speaker
I yield so the.
For a while speaker and gentle
lady that I grew up in that
awful preservation and crap
thank and I do know that roads
are terrible and if you don't
have money for gas you can get
there if you don't the couple.
The lady you can you would just
the court on your my kids so
very static he.
Or if you want to borrow
here neighbors microphone that
my business better.
The health care thank you I
couldn't hear that so anyway I
grew up in Crown Point that's a
lot of issues but I've been
getting some tax
that some people are are
concerned that the the amendment
that we did accept
by Representative Johnson also
from Crown Point gay
That it stripped out the entire
native American voting rights
act not just the tribal ballot
assisted so mad about I was
going to call you madam chair
Mister speaker gentle lady can
you address that yes Mr speaker
and lady from Bernalillo the
lady from McKinley and San Juan
removed only a small portion of
the native American voting
rights act and that was about
the thank perhaps in order to
let you her let me yield to her
and let her explain that and I
think she did a very good
explanation of why on the the
various tribes wanted to get
together and try to clarify that
a particular position that was a
vision of the legislation so
lady from McKinley and San Juan
if you would address what moved
from the the bill J. lady from
McKinley is and what thank you
Mr speaker and does thank you
kind lady and thank you my
colleague from Crown Point.
The floor amendment strikes only
section twenty two of the bill
so if you will go to page thirty
to thirty eight.
Thirty nine and forty that
entails section twenty two
which regard which is regarding
the tribal absentee ballot
assistance so.
We met with our tribal members
for tribal leaders in our
advocates and we understand that
we have a need for assistance
for tribal voters.
Who have difficulty casting
their ballots.
And we went back to our
communities and we realize that.
Yes there is that concern
however we need to work on this
portion a little bit more and
perfected so that is why it was
amended Mr speaker.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Representative Townsend.
Thank you thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady's I
actually have a few more things
to say so what what you want I
think that I've heard this year
is is legislating through fear
and in my committees that I'm
serve on there's a lot of what
if what if what if we can't tell
the future and there I've heard
a lot of this today I personally
believe that we should make it
as easy as possible for everyone
who is qualified to vote but I
am a little concerned about
voter data privacy so
at this point Mr speaker gentle
lady can other out of state
groups publish our private vote
voter data online.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker and ninety from
Bernalillo there's actually a
federal lawsuit right now in
which we are involved because we
believe that are voted product
of voter data project of our
voters privacy may be threatened
if we do not enact this section.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady
and we've heard in New Mexico
and other states about vigilante
audits where people went and
knocked on doors and demanded
that the the people there
tell them how they voted that
that's really scary.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo yes absolutely it
actually happened here.
Thank you for that
And
or organizations are going to
use voter data for reasons other
than elections campaigns three.
Is that do they have to affirm
that they will use the data for
reasons other than elections
campaigns reserves are access to
government services Mr speaker
in lady from Bernalillo yes
thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady
voters deserve to know what
individuals and organizations
have access to their voter
registration data and that that
data won't be used for
nefarious.
Purposes domestic violence
survivors and people who perhaps
were stopped deserve the ability
to vote and the knowledge that
SB EC knowledge that their data
is protected and secure secure
do you agree.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo I do.
Mr speaker and gentle lady does
this provision protect our
voters the voters data from
being published online.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo yes.
Does the proposed Mr speaker
gentle lady does the provision
prohibit individuals or groups
from using our voter data for
nefarious purposes as outlined
in the election code.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo it does prohibit that
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
in our increasingly hostile
political environment
individuals in some counties
have taken to conducting
vigilante audits which could be
considered voter intimidation do
you believe this provision will
help prevent this from
happening.
Mr speaker and leader Bernalillo
I do.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
Actually actually I have a I got
it a high during this and I'm
going to read it voting is our
voice silencing is a violence I
yearn for chorus thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady.
There's a gentleman from San
Juan Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker only if you have a
high creating.
Mr speaker my and my first
question religion ladies please
don't make me ask questions the
form of haiku or any other form
of poetry so
I guess I'm being question on
the answer's no gentle lady.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo I I believe I'm
traded my comments brief I do
have an amendment to offer but I
want to hone in on what was
touched on briefly which and we
talked on it in judiciary which
is this concept of the automatic
voter registration when you have
a transaction at the DMV.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo the the peace and not
sure is then flushed out yet is
whenever I go to the DMV and I
have a let's say a registered
for arm trying to get a real ID
license and I'm not registered
to vote can you explain the
process of what happens to me
when I go to get that real ID
and I'm not registered to vote.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
are automatically registered.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
And when I have that transaction
with the motor vehicle clerk.
And I tell the clerk.
I do not want to be registered
what happens.
Mr speaker gentleman Jim while
you're there.
Mr speaker gentle lady some have
been doing the trans the way I
understand what we're talking
about is I'm going to get a real
ID for example on the hema
contemplated whether Mercer vote
at the end of the transaction
I'm told by the DMV clerk your
not register to vote you are now
going to be registered to vote I
tell the DMV clerk wait I do not
want to be registered to vote
what happens in that instance.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
will still have to send the
postcard back in.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo what happens if I
fell this in the postcard back
in or if I never see the
postcard.
Mr speaker and gentleman you'll
be registered to vote.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo in spite of the fact
at the time I went to just I was
going there to have it be in the
transaction.
And I protest and said please do
not register to vote that's
still the result.
Mr speaker gentleman if you're
doing anything that relates to
your identification they you
will be registered to vote
renewing
of payer.
Motor vehicle registration fee
that would happen.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo so if I go to the in
the to get a real ID hi I get I
actually do the miracle of bring
everything that I need to the
DMV probably the fourth time
I've been there and get my
really do at the end of the
transaction.
And I'm not register vote the
clerk says you're now going to
be registered to vote I told the
clerk I do not want to be
registered to vote it's part of
my rights as an American and I
want to register to vote.
And she says no the other is
servo send the card.
And either failed to return the
car the car is loss as I
understand it now I'm reserve
vote despite me protesting the
time transactions that correct
Mr speaker gentleman that's
right.
Mr speaker I would move house
for me amendment number two to
house bill four as amended in
the two two five two two I say
that fast the number is two two
five five two nine point one and
ask for a roll call vote.
The general.
The amendment is being passed
out again that two to five
number for folks watching at
home is point two two five five
two nine point one.
It is also on the website.
Sergeant at arms to pass out the
minutes.
Mr speaker if I may.
Determined to explain even
orders and see if we required
the chamber to speak and I
creating these debates to be a
lot shorter but.
I'll go ahead and explain the
moment so Mister speaker I do
believe that it's fundamental or
system that folks have every
opportunity they can to be
registered to vote and
participate in the process
absolutely I think all seven in
answer clearly believing that
prince for would be sitting here
for standing here as the case
may be but Mr speaker with that
I think it's also fundamental in
our system that if you choose
not to register to vote that you
should be obligated to and at
the moment that you are being
given this notification to me
that's the time that's operative
time that I've been told Hey
you're not registered to vote we
are now going to register to
vote and if I protest at that
moment it seems overly
burdensome and harsh there are
going to make that person wait
hope they get the correct
postcard hope they have the
where with all to fill it out
hope they send it back to the
right place hope it's received
hope it's process when we could
just allow a process that right
at that moment transaction when
their said Hey basically you're
opted in and let should tell us
right now that you're opted out
and so that's what this man
would do.
The lady from earlier was just a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker I am really sorry to
say that it is not a friendly
amendment.
In states that do this now in
their number states that do this
exact thing the opt out right.
Is five percent.
So I think we might be overly
concerned about the
unpopularity of this option.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
The gentle lady from Los Alamos
on the fence on the
Representative Chandler.
Mr speaker general fund from San
Juan would you you.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Los Alamos.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
appreciate where you're coming
from but.
Which do you think is more
important.
Having maximum participation.
Or accommodating a few people
who may not for for the opt out
process versus the opt in
process.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo from Los Alamos I
think it's a false dichotomy is
so I think the five percent
matter frankly and this is a
scenario where that person
literally went to the DMV for in
the in the transaction then go
to register to vote they'd
completed in the transaction
they're on register to vote and
for the first time they're
finding out no you must be
registered to vote and it's not
like this creates some huge
bureaucratic nightmare all we
have to do is find an option
that time of transaction if if
you don't tell me otherwise
you're going to be registered to
vote and by the way you can
still opt out later if you
choose to because we're going to
send you a card but you have the
option right now to opt out.
What we actually Mr speaker
gentleman from San Juan offer a
number of options we offer them
the card we they have the option
to go to the county clerk do
they not to register.
And they have the ability to go
online do they not.
Mr gentleman from San Juan Mr
speaker gently from Los Alamos
they do but again I think we
need to understand the premise
of what's happening here you're
going to the DMV to get a real
ID or something else your brain
is not and I'm registered to
vote mode and now we're
switching that and for some that
upon people that may generally
not want to be registered to
vote.
Mr speaker and gentleman
actually over time the executive
will would do do you not agree
that will be the most they are
in people we are adjusting to a
new system Mr speaker mental
gentleman from San Juan and over
time and through the public
education people understand the
ease associated with automatic
registering when they update
when they get their driver's
license or update their driver's
license do you not agree that's
a public service and serving the
benefit of the citizens who
really want to vote.
Mr speaker joined from Los
Alamos ease is not a word that
comes to mind when I think of
the DMV but again what we're not
creating some huge bureaucratic
process will burden trying with
this amendment is trying to give
people the right to choose or
not choose and so they've been
they've been said they've been
told at this point
Hey you've got to rely the the
system says you're not
registered to vote you're now
automatically register to vote
and if you don't tell me
otherwise that's going to be the
case when you leave here today.
And by the way so the option to
to mailing a postcard or maybe
go online or maybe something
else that we carve out but it
seems to me out of respect for
people and not trying to be
altruistic of overall New
Mexicans out of respect of
individual choices which can
operate at the time that Hey I
don't want to be registered to
vote.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I think we agree
people.
Should have choices in all
aspects of their lives and in
this case they have the choice
two unregistered through a
postcard through going to the
county clerk's through
telephoning the county clerk's
Mr speaker through going online
many choices and what we know
was apparently people are pretty
happy with this option Mr
speaker gentleman from San Juan
since only five percent other
states choose to on register
ultimately.
No question there.
Yes so I think we can agree
there is choice Mr speaker can
we not Tillman from San Juan Mr
speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos I'm reminded of a of a
movie quote that we keep using
that word I don't think it means
what you think it means to me
choice means I have the option
to either do it or not do it
here what I'm hearing is you
have the option to opt out later
after it forced you to register
so that to me is not what I
would consider choice.
Mr speaker I urge the body to
decline this proposed amendment
the structure that's being
proposed in the voting rights
act offers maximum opportunity
for people to vote this
automatic voter registration
through the DMV has been tested
in other states and has been
proven to be very popular and
effective in increasing voter
registration and I would point
out Mister speaker this is a
very important for the state of
New Mexico we are ranked forty
second in the country in terms
of our voter registration rates
and anything we can do Mr
speaker to help people though
make it easy people for people
to register I think is a great
service to the citizens of the
state of New Mexico and I thank
you Mr speaker is there for the
debate the gentle lady from
Katrin said a supporter of
women's Representative Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the.
Gentlelady from could thrown
tended County thank you Mr
speaker I have to tell you Mr
speaker kind gentleman I love
this amendment and I'll tell you
why or in catching County.
Seven thousand square miles.
Not very many people more cals
and help the people maybe wolves
now to Mr speaker
kind gentleman.
What happens in rural New Mexico
and I wondered if you knew this
and if it happens in your area.
What happens in in my area is we
may have a physical address that
we don't receive mail at.
We have to put a physical
address Mr speaker to be able to
have a driver's license you
cannot put a PO box.
So if I'm going to get my do
driver's license I have to put a
physical address.
But it's really complicated Mr
speaker in rural New Mexico
because I don't receive mail
there.
And so I I am so in support of
your amendment because it would
give the residents and patrons
of coral Valencia any other
county across the state the
option to opt out and so Mr
speaker and gentleman it what
would this be just like a box
that you would check or how do
you envision it.
Mr speaker joining from
controlling county so I think
the.
They would be probably be borne
out in rural but the I think it
be something as simple as
just any kind of notification to
the person.
At the time that they're being
Told that they're going to be
forced to be registered to vote.
Thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman I just wanted to bring
it to the body's attention that
not everyone gets mail at their
physical address thank you Mr
speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and you
know that Representative
Townsend thank you Mr speaker of
the gentleman yield Mister
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Chavis said in general
thank you Sir I
I will support your amendment
but because I think.
that the five percent or eight
percent or whatever matters.
I think requiring the
To register.
And then forcing them.
To go out of their way doing
something that they are planning
to do to register and I'm
reminded of a conversation and
debate earlier this week that I
think you'll appreciate where
there was a great talk about
this preemptive.
measures and it just wasn't
right.
It wasn't right to force
everybody into force their will
on everybody else to just do you
remember the debate that I'm
talking about Sir.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe so.
So I think we have to.
with tongue in cheek I mean I
think there's some of
We have to be careful that when
we say.
we don't want something for
specific reason today.
It.
We.
We have to look at our values
and our principles and state is
that that we don't want to
impose our will on anybody or is
it due is that that some just
want to impose their will as
they see fit.
And I think we really need to
take a strong.
Look at ourselves when we say.
This is going to be better for
you trust me.
It doesn't matter what you want.
Trust me this is going to be
better for you people don't
trust the government for many
reasons and this is one of those
thank you Sir.
There's further debate the
gentleman from current about the
weather look Roosevelt at San
Miguel Representative somewhat
at.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
current.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Would you agree.
That it's not legal to force
somebody to vote.
Mr speaker dungeons and curry I
think is that there is a
constitutional right to not be
forced to vote.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
you agree that it's not legal
the for somebody to register to
vote.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
curry I think.
If this bill becomes law then
that's something maybe that be
taken up by the courts but I
think this would would and
trying the and and statutory law
anyways.
Thank you Mr speaker I have no
more questions.
The gentle lady from or the
gentleman from Chavis and in the
Representative Mason.
Speaker of.
Representative Eli you yield
Mister speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis just one
simple question
when we require somebody to
register.
Do they have to pick a party
affiliation at that time.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
I think that's a great question
I I don't see that spelled out
in the bill
my amendment I think would help
protect from sort of that piece
of confusion as well.
Thank you Representative Ely Mr
speaker one other quick comment
if I percent opt out.
What percentage.
Just.
So why kids so that is no vote
anyway and my.
Call them not the everyone
involved because they feel their
rights have been infringed.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis I I don't know the answer
what the percentage of real
sorry.
Thank you for this question that
came to my mind out this will
play out thank you I you.
Representative they will get
back to you on that was deleted
from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment Graham motion to table
house floor amendment number two
to house bill four there has
been a request for roll call.
A vote of yes and the amendment
is tabled a vote of no and we're
back on the amendment.
The vote is now open.
To close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes to table Representative
Rubio votes yes to table
Representative Sarinana is to
table Representative Sarinana
votes yes table.
One of forty one the affirmative
twenty five in the negative
house floor amendment number two
to house bill four as amended
has been tabled Jan
Representative Lujan back to you
thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate the debate I I think
that this is a good example of
of what happens when seventy
people gathered building and
sometimes we forget
about the little people people
that have a choice and we sort
of have it and I read to to our
mentality times that we know
what's best for people and this
is situation people have chosen
not to be read servo.
Protest not to be.
The reserve of India I hope they
get the right post card and get
it back in time so thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative on in our new.
Thank you Mr speaker and does a
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I health.
Thank you very much the
generally as had a couple
questions about this bill we
talked about.
Every single aspect of this bill
that feels like we've been at it
for quite some time but I wanted
to ask you specifically about
section of this bill that's
particularly important to me and
that's restoration of voting
rights.
I think that that is.
A very important aspect of this
bill.
Because when somebody has been
incarcerated for a crime they've
served their time and then there
are then released from prison.
I think that is that it is
imperative.
After they've served that time
that they be given every
opportunity to be reinvented re
invited back into society as a
citizen and I think that
restoring voting rights goes a
long way in doing that
It is your right as an American
to vote and I believe that
restoring that right to people
who have served their time.
Is deeply important I believe
that would help reduce
recidivism it makes you feel
like a citizen again it gives
you a sense of civic duty and I
think we need to do everything
to do to encourage that so can
you tell me in this bill
how the right to vote being
restored can help reduce
recidivism can you go into that
a little bit yes Mr speaker and
lady from Bernalillo
we've actually had the
restoration of voting rights
since two thousand and one
Senator at the time Richard
Romero K. that bill and
Republican governor Gary Johnson
signed it into law.
But it's been difficult to.
Carry out because.
Individuals.
Sentences are completed with
with parole or probation the
different venues the corrections
department and the secretary of
state and county clerks have
tried to work together.
And yet we estimate right now
there are about seventeen
thousand eligible voters who
aren't eligible to have not been
able to register to vote when I
was representing children and
adults.
Do me into the little assessment
of child protective services.
I.
The first time it happened I was
representing a baby.
And her parents were co
parenting her and I went to
their supervised visits at the
visitation center.
And they were kind of young.
The dad said.
To me we were we were visiting
and I was watching them interact
with their baby and
Hey he told me that he had
gotten he committed a crime when
he was just.
After just after he turned
eighteen and ended up doing
I wondered is several years and
and he said I learned my lesson
I will never do anything like
that again and I think he said
but you know what I still
couldn't vote in the last
election.
And I said.
Well let me let me check into
that for you and he was willing
to give me all this information.
And with the help of the this I
think was secretary state chief
clerk we we got all the handle
of his paper work to and it
taken it to the county clerk and
she still says you can vote and
I think it was probably.
I'm guessing just from the time
I was probably the twenty twenty
election and he said he just
felt so defeated.
When he wasn't able to vote and
he is a true success story
because by then he had become a
commercial truck driver had a
really good job his mother moved
here so that he would be able to
have someone to care for his
little girl she was a toddler by
the time the case closed
and but we did get him he did
get registered to vote at that
time I I had a number of
expert witnesses over the years
who said to me.
I think my rehabilitation.
After and this of my primary
witness serve some pretty hard
time.
He said that he didn't feel like
A real human being again until
he voted.
And now he has a master's.
From UNM.
And Hey as a contributing member
of society but we started
learning.
We started working on Google
Justice Reform as a bipartisan
group from the house of the
Senate we had for house members
and four senators for
Republicans for Democrats and we
had co chairs one Republican one
Democrat and we
Had folks coming in from right
wing organizations like right on
crime and we had the former
president pro tem of the Texas
Senate red state we had the
chief counsel to the governor of
North Dakota also read state and
they talked about their
decisions in those two states to
stop building new prisons.
Because prisons.
Will it up your whole budget if
few people just putting people
in prison and locking up and
throwing away the key.
And they made this decision and
they change at Texas hasn't this
was in twenty thirteen so ten
years ago that we had this these
folks come and talk to our
bipartisan
Justice Reform subcommittee.
And
What we have learned since that
time in the last ten years is
that when ever you can engage
people who are coming out of
prison and even when they're in
prison if they can maintain
contact with their families if
they can
visit with their families if
they can talk to on the phone if
if they have contacted they're
going to have a smoother path to
Back to society and the more
than ninety five percent greater
than ninety five percent of
people who are in prison are
going to get out.
So.
You want to be standing next to
in the grocery store live
somebody who.
No did not get any
rehabilitation wasn't engaged
and this kind of desperate
doesn't know how to
to to work his or her way free
from all of this for somebody
who is actually engage in
society like my little clients
dad on my expert witness.
I say this is a big part of
reducing recidivism and making
our communities safer.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
and gentle lady for that answer
that's.
Phenomenal it sounds like.
Having your rights to vote
restored is a very big piece of
post release rehab for people
rehabilitation is on going
rehabilitation it's keeping you
engaged with society it's making
you feel like you are once again
part of that society and I'm
very encouraged by that story I
think that that is really
important I'm a big believer
that your vote is your voice and
if we can let people coming out
of the prison system no you have
served your time you have
hopefully had some
rehabilitation learned your
lesson please join us again in
person in part participating
excuse me in your specific
duties and I think that that is
a really important piece so
thank you very much for sharing
that story in addition to
reducing recidivism I believe
that restoring voting rights
would also take some of the
burden off of county clerks is
that correct Mr speaker and and
lady from Bernalillo yes right
now it's somewhat of a
procedural nightmare it's I
think it's the reason that
provided little clients father.
Hadn't.
Unable to register the that way
at least the elective maybe it's
works for the county clerk's is
that for the cancellation of
active registrations and
maintenance of list with
multiple different departments
of who has which specific
documents from the department of
corrections of the governor of
New Mexico creates unnecessary
confusion were eligible voters
are disenfranchised.
Excellent thank you very much
for that answer Mr speaker
gentle lady
so in addition to all these
things are reducing recidivism
taking some of the burden off of
our very busy county clerks of
we should.
Take every opportunity to
alleviate some of their burden
every opportunity are there
other states in the country that
restore voting rights upon
release a cursory shin.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo yes nineteen states
to and Tuesday's ever remove the
franchise.
I want.
Vermont in the do not and in
fact in this country we did not
remove the franchise.
As a widespread practice until
the Emancipation Proclamation
proclamation and the thirteenth
amendment to the United States
constitution so the actual
removal of the franchise.
As an additional punishment for
a crime began as with his roots
in racism because there was fear
that the former slaves would
vote.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for that.
Very real answer and history
lesson I did not know that thank
you very much I'm gonna ask you
a question that I know you
answered already but I just want
some clarification on it if we
were to restore voting rights
tomorrow how many people would
be affected by that decision.
The estimate right now is
seventeen thousand.
So that could have a significant
impact on seventeen thousand
miles be welcomed back into
society in a way that they have
earned at that point.
Mr speaker and lady really more
people than seventeen thousand
those people have families.
I know.
In I have constituents and those
of us who survived the courts
corrections and justice interim
committee.
We're familiar with the families
come to all of our interim
committees who have
incarcerated family members.
There are.
They're serving their own kind
of since.
Because they love and care about
their.
Their family member and if that
individual can.
Navigate a successful release
from prison it's going to mean a
lot to do this one of my
daughters to her entire family.
It will not only be a relief it
will be a gift.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for these very
heartfelt and compassionate
answers I am very glad that this
is a portion of the bill that's
being presented and I am very
much look forward to voting for
it fairly soon I yield back the
rest of my time thank you.
Not soon enough.
Mr speaker there's a lady from
Chavis career is representative
right.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo yield Mister
speaker I yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
gonna go back to the debate you
were just having with the other
gentle lady from Bernalillo on
section seven of your bill
taking out the felony if you're
if you're convicted felon and
once you're released from prison
Mr speaker gentle lady that you
would be allowed to vote.
Would you agree generate Mr
speaker gentle lady that when
you're released from prison you
have not actually completed your
sentence.
Mr speaker and lady from curry
on there may be yeah absolutely
conditions that are still on
going.
And Mr speaker gentle lady in
fact could you tell us when
someone is paroled how long
their parole period generally
is.
Mr speaker and ladies from curry
two years is what I've been.
Told Mr speaker gentle lady yes
it's two years or one year
depending on the type of felony
that you were convicted of Mr
speaker gentle lady would you
also agree well let me just ask
you this do you know how what
the maximum probation term is
for someone who is on probation
for a felony.
Mr speaker and lady from current
thank you probably know it
better than I do based on the
the level of a felony there's a
certain probationary period
that's attached yes Mr speaker
gentle lady you can be anywhere
from one to five years of
probation a maximum before your
sentence actually considered
complete so Mister speaker
gentle lady the concern I have
is that you keep saying the
individuals have completed their
sentences or they're free they
actually have not completed
their sentences Mr speaker
gentle lady would you not agree
Mr speaker and lady from Chavis
consumers about I didn't
actually say they've completed
their sentence I said they were
they had completed their.
Time to be in prison.
And Mr speaker gentle lady but
what I'm hearing is there's a
paperwork issue that we have
somewhere in the system that is
making it difficult for people
who are who had originally under
this old law or the law that's
in place Mr speaker gentle lady
who completed their sentences
but can't prove that they've
completed their sentences is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker and leader the
house that's actually true they
sometimes cannot even though
they actually have about parties
to and this is been taken it's
been in place now for twenty two
years and we haven't gotten it
figured out.
And Mr speaker gentle lady it
seems like a large leap to just
get through some administrative
issues that the state is having
a to just say okay well let's
fix this problem Mr speaker
gentle lady and let's just let
everybody vote in this will take
care of the problem even though
they're convicted felon.
Mr speaker late we also have
evidence that doing so engaging.
In society.
This is recidivism so it's
alright I do it as part of the
whole restorative
Work that goes on when somebody
leaves present.
Mr speaker gentle lady
my concern is that many of these
people who come out of prison on
parole or probation violate
their probation
Mr speaker gentle lady would you
care to guess on what percentage
of average prosecutors caseload
are probation violations Mr
speaker and leading from Chavis
and currently on I know it's
huge because we violate people
all the time for technical we
spent forty five million dollars
a year reading car certain
people on technical violations
of parole and probation.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
that's true my my concern is
that these people have not
completed their sentences
approved yet they're going to be
productive members of the
society in order to give them
back that right to vote Mr
speaker gentle lady while you're
on probation and you would agree
their strict conditions to prove
that you're gonna build to
complete that probation and be a
productive member of society Mr
speaker and leading from Travis
I don't necessarily agree I know
there are conditions I have a
client who was violated twice
and involved his cell phone
going out and his probation
officer
not being able to get a hold of
him and every time he was
violent input went back into the
Lynsey county detention center
the guards immediately made a
trustee and you start helping
with the laundry and passing
everything out because he wasn't
doing anything and this he was
simply she wasn't able to reach
him he wasn't going anywhere he
was going to work he was taking
his daughters to school and
There are.
He he wasn't using drugs it
wasn't selling drugs and yet we
go to court and the judge looks
at the
at the at the computer usable
has just gone did and I said
he's right here your honor it
hasn't been anywhere and the
impact could be proven but I
mean I'm not going to be
I'm not going to buy into the
argument that all these people
are out there
prosecutors busy because they
are reinventing some of them may
be event those people will not
get to vote because of the back
in prison.
Mr speaker gentle lady at and I
agree with you when you say a
lot of these people to to find a
appropriations but a lot of
these people do not in fact they
commit new crimes and commit.
Crimes that are of the crimes of
violence actually with firearms
Mr speaker gentle lady while
you're on probation you actually
lose your constitutional right
to own a firearm or possess a
firearm I just think that it's
it's a appropriations is is one
of those things where they
restrict your rights for a
reason Mr speaker gentle lady
that's to see if you are going
to be a productive member of
society so you might not be able
to contact people you might not
be able to have a full you will
not be able to have a firearm do
you have restrictions on your
travel you have restrictions on
where you can go and these are
all conditions Mr speaker and
gentle lady that show the
community that you can actually
be a productive member of
society why no there are
technical violations a lot of
the violations are very serious
and and Mr speaker and gentle
lady I disagree they often do
not end up back in jail under
current laws they're they're
just out on and our bond yet
they could still walk in a vote
under the this bill would that
be true Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and leading from
connecting I want to get to the
heart of this voting is a right
that comes with being a citizen
some states don't even remove
the franchise when people are
convicted and sentenced serving
us and prison sentence.
Doesn't remove it right to be a
citizen so what we want to do is
encourage people to be
contributing citizens and voting
is part of the contribution it's
part of the engagement as part
of the rehabilitation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
do understand that voting is a
right to but while you're on
probation there are certain
rights that are just taken away
from you like the right to bear
arms and so it is a
constitutional right Mr speaker
gentle lady but I would feel a
lot more comfortable if we were
finishing the sentence and
showing that we actually I mean
when you when you pro out Mr
speaker generally you're
actually getting out of prison
early you're not even finishing
your sentence so while I
understand the argument I would
love to see people who do
complete their sentences
successfully have the right to
vote and I have no problem with
that Mr speaker generally I do I
do believe you should have to
complete your sentence to prove
that you are going to be you are
rehabilitated.
And so I just wondered Jr that
Mr speaker gentle lady if if
you've thought about that and I
know we brought this up in
Judiciary about the sentences
are complete and and on that
note I would like to just move
to another part of your bill
under section seven under age of
voters and eligible to vote
while imprisoned in a
correctional facility as part of
the sentence for felony
conviction except as provided in
this section and otherwise
qualified electors in eligible
to register to vote while
imprisoned in a correctional
facility as part of a sentence
for felony conviction.
Mr speaker gentle lady my
question is have you ever been
aware of felons serving time in
a county jail.
Mr speaker and leader from
trying.
If they are important of phones
perhaps awaiting trial they
aren't supposed to be in a
county facility you and I
probably both know that the
county we've talked about this
that counties there are a
terrible burden.
For.
Housing prisoners who are
supposed to be in a prison and
I think we were both being very
sympathetic to the counties so
but tell me
would you mind telling me again
where in section seven because I
was looking for that and trying
to listen to at the same time
yes Mr speaker gentle lady it's
on page eleven line at nine and
I guess Mr speaker gentle lady
that you use the term
correctional facility and and I
guess I could also ask you Mr
speaker gentle lady how do you
define correctional facility.
Is to provide Mr speaker lady
from credit is defined elsewhere
in statute but a correction
facility is for those who are
sentenced to over here.
Mr speaker gentle lady so of a
felony offense would that be
correct one or actually speaker
gentle and multiple misdemeanor
offenses would also qualify
under this.
Mr speaker lady from current.
Thank god they it has to be a as
part of a sentence for a felony
to be in a correctional facility
Mr speaker gentle lady and and
we we did actually speak about
this and and I think we agreed
and you can correct me if if you
don't agree with me felons
repeatedly and often will serve
time in the local county jail Mr
speaker
gentlelady is that correct.
Mr speaker and maintenance.
Usually.
When they're they're they're
awaiting trial and it and so
they aren't really unless our
former phones that really felons
yet for the purposes is to
describe.
Mr speaker gentle lady and I I
personally and I think you will
do and I did talk about this
have seen judge's order Allen's
to serve their here in the
county jail I've seen that
multiple times over my years and
Mr speaker gentle lady be ever
seen that Mr speaker and I I
didn't do criminal law so I'd I
would I would defer to your
expertise.
Mr speaker gentle lady at the
other I want to touch on is if
somebody is out
of jail and they can vote what
about somebody Mr speaker gentle
lady who is serving their
sentence on an ankle monitor.
Mr speaker gentle lady would
they be able to go vote.
Mr speaker and employees I'm
gonna give you the Law School
answer because we have a debate
going on it depends.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I I will to state that often
then you can disagree or agree
with your experts I seen felons
be placed on an ankle monitor to
serve their sentence so Widger
Mr speaker gentle lady witcher
experts agree that that does
happen at times.
Mr speaker and landed from curry
yes Mr speaker Mr speaker the
gentle gentle lady would you
then agree that if they were on
a.
Ingle monitor serving a felony
sentence at home they could walk
in a vote.
Mr speaker and leading curry yes
because they're not in a
correctional facility Mr speaker
gentle lady I have an issue with
that because there is case law
that does say that if you're
serving a sentence on an ankle
monitor that is consider
presentence confinement the
you're getting credit for it
like you're imprisoned and so I
have an issue as I mentioned in
judiciary I believe with that
suggesting that that might need
to be changed and it and it
wasn't Mr speaker gentle lady so
I have ever current concern that
someone who is serving a felony
sentence and has not finish
their sentence yet could
actually walk into the clerk's
office with their ankle monitor
on and vote so you are agreeing
that that would be possible Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and leader who
present we think it's fairly.
Unlikely because that's usually
on a pre sentence.
Recommendation.
I'm sorry Mr speaker late in the
current we think what you're
describing is predates the
conviction.
Mr speaker gentle lady
all I've personally experienced
sentences happening where they
were sentenced to thirty days
for let's say a felony D. W. Y.
and they were ordered to serve
in on an ankle monitor even
though I believe Mr speaker
gently that is totally an eagle
illegal sentence that does
happen frequently in criminal
court so that's more of what I'm
trying to the point I'm trying
to bring across Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and Gen lady that
it's still not a conviction or
it's.
It's still not on that's right
is still a correction facility
right Mr speaker gentle lady so
what you're saying is somebody
who is imprisoned at home on a
felony could still go in and
vote while they're serving a
sentence Mr speaker lady I think
I've said yes to that before
right well Mr speaker gentle
lady I I just I would just like
to say that I have a problem
with the section I'm just
concerned well I understand
there's issues with the
paperwork and getting that done
then to just job from somebody
who's convicted of a felony and
has a completed their sentence
which is probation or parole to
just all the sudden have that
right to vote when they haven't
proven themselves yet in society
that they are a changed person
that I have to have a big
problem with this this part of
the bill and I'm just concerned
I appreciate the debate Mr
speaker
gentle lady and and without all
yield back to Mister speaker.
Thank you there's further debate
the gentle lady from Katrin
Santos a quarter of an instant
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from Bernalillo healed Mr
speaker of course I would be
able to the lady with the
biggest district in the entire
country.
Thank you Mr speaker
I'm I have a question on page
three on the
Mr speaker the registration at
the motor vehicle division and
taxation and revenue department
and other state and local public
offices designated by the
secretary of state so my
question is Mister speaker.
Kindly the what kind of training
would be involved or would that
be employed if this bill is
passed will be implemented
through rule or how is that
going to work Mr speaker kindly
Mr speaker in related from
culture and are you talking
about line seventeen and
eighteen on page three.
Actually Mr speaker kind lady up
about all of that new underlined
language there so in nineteen
through twenty three I'm just
curious about the what kind of
training would.
Those individuals need to go
through or how is that training
allocated.
Mr speaker in late even catch on
the secretary of state.
That the lines six to the
seventeen eighteen are in
existing law but it languages
and nineteen through twenty
three and that's where the on
the motor vehicle division
simply I don't I don't think
they have to have training
they're just this becomes part
of their.
Electronic you input to the
Whatever the transaction is is
that right that's right okay
thanks Mr speaker let that's
what I I got it right.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
kind lady and so is do we
already register at the motor
vehicle department
automatically.
Mr speaker and and lady from
school
Actually.
We tune but it that's where
there's a conversation about do
you want to register to vote.
And the
the person doing the
transaction.
has a conversation with the
worker there.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
so we already have this in place
but now we're changing it Mr
speaker kind lady to where it's
not an option opt in it's a
mandate.
Mr speaker maybe it's it's.
It is not option.
But it's not a mandate because
no one has to the state
registered.
Mr speaker crime lady I
understand I heard all that
conversation earlier but I'm
hoping that you all heard my
discussion with the on an
amendment where in rural New
Mexico Mr speaker kind lady we
have to have a physical address
to get a driver's license but we
do not receive mail at the
physical address so how will
that be addressed in setting.
A post card.
Mr speaker and lady from square
I'm gonna get all of your
counties here just a second
Captions heroes of coral
influencia.
Thank you have.
Do you dress and a mailing
address.
Wherever they get their mail the
DMV is going to know that
because they have to send them
the bills.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady so even registering to vote
Mr speaker kind lady and
capturing County I am allowed to
have a PO box.
And I believe Mr speaker crime
lady that that is
allowable by the the county is
that my correct in that Mr
speaker kind lady.
Mr speaker from caption
There has to be if you have a PO
box to also have to give a
physical address because you
want to be able to vote for
whomever represents your
residence.
Wants to represent the resident.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady I
I want to just tell you a quick
story Mr speaker kindly the
about what something that
happened to my son in law and my
daughter who are registered to
vote at the exact same household
they live together.
My son in law went to get of a
new drivers license and all the
sudden the precinct to that he
was registered in went to all
mail in ballot only so Mr
speaker kind lady so now he is
male and only and his wife is
precinct because she hasn't.
Representative got a new drivers
license settlement Mr speaker
kind lady so it's very very very
inconvenient Mr speaker kind
lady so how are we gonna dress
problems like that that are that
are coming up Mr speaker kindly
Mr speaker and a lady from the
counter and I am told that as
soon as she has to renew her
driver's license she'll be on
the same system as her husband.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
Elaine she doesn't have to wait
she can just go ahead and do it
thank you Mr speaker kindly
that's so nice to hear you know
they live on a ranch about forty
miles outside of town they don't
go to Sapporo very often Mr
speaker kind lady and it's very
inconvenient with six children
whom they choose to home school.
To go to the county clerk's
office and make that change so
it would have been much easier
if her husband's hadn't been
changed Mr speaker kind lady so
what I'm really trying to get
out Mr speaker kind lady is that
one size does not fit all I
would really like to have an opt
out option
because of the beating mainly
for rural New Mexico Mr speaker
kind lady we have different
issues in rural New Mexico and
this is just going to add to the
confusion Mr speaker kind lady
and I really don't have any
other questions except
I just want to represent my
people thank you Mr speaker.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative little.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county eight yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you so much.
I.
Wanted I thought it was
important to note.
That this bill is very
important.
And it dresses some of the
issues I guess I should take a
step back.
The Americans I think it's
important to remind everyone
didn't gain the right to vote
until nineteen forty eight
in August I believe it's August
of this year.
That will translate Mr speaker
two and.
Two seventy five years.
In some communities that's about
two and a half maybe three
generations.
But it's taken a long time for
people to.
Have the trust
instilled in them to vote is
taken many years I personally
have been registering people to
vote and native communities
educating them giving them
information about the importance
of voting.
And I've seen over time that
that participation rate has
increased the efforts that have
been made over this the last
uh years have actually we've
seen a rise in that number and I
thought it was especially
noteworthy that during the
pandemic as when so many tribal
communities
were missing that had to miss
the opportunity to vote for many
reasons many of which were to be
to to the pandemic and the need
to preserve the health and
safety of their communities but
what it shows me Mr speaker is
that.
People do value their
opportunity to vote in
communities rural communities
all over the state.
And I'm wondering.
What.
How would this bill if not been
acted.
Will.
How will it affect all of these.
Gains that have been made how.
This is for example secure
automatic voter registration
enhance.
The other critical components of
this bill.
Mr speaker the lady from
Bernalillo.
I think that's a really good
question is for a comprehensive.
What we have in this bill and I
have here the co sponsors and
McKinley and San Juan and her
expertise to we on page and.
We have a whole section in the
bill.
For the protection of native
American voting rights.
But every other section of the
bill.
Makes the accessibility of the
ballot more.
Greater it makes it greater for
our native brothers and sisters
at just as it does for the
people in rural areas and and I
have Wirth said again and again.
We're not.
Put in to drop boxes as a
minimum in each county to bother
the county clerk's with extra
work we're doing it to make the
voters.
Find it easier to vote so
everything about this bill.
Is about access if I could say
something about.
The our record with native
voting.
I
I don't know where I was.
And I don't know what how it was
in Arizona where I grew up that.
When I started serving and I've
learned.
That native Americans didn't
have the franchise in New Mexico
until nineteen forty eight I was
really embarrassed we're trying
why.
The code talkers.
Save the lives.
Of all the pilots in the Pacific
one of whom was my dad.
It was the pilot of a B. twenty
nine.
He came home.
War.
He owes his life to these people
who could vote here.
That's.
That's a travesty.
Anything we can do.
To make certain.
That are native populations who
have.
Maybe died for this country.
Have the same rights as every
other American who they actually
were here first so we've got
their land were probably on
sacred land here.
And we need to protect.
Their rights as citizens and
honor them and and I mean I I
can't say enough how really a
embarrassed or humiliated I was
that that was the case that my
father's life I felt he.
Owed to these people who weren't
allowed to vote yes.
And there is.
Nothing more important in this
bill tentative American
protection the voting rights
act.
I don't even think I have the
words right anymore is probably
a little bit late.
But there's this is really
really important Mr speaker and
lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
the lady from Bernalillo I
appreciate your response
and I'm also.
I see as I understand this bill
that is going to four better
opportunities for access to
early voting I mean just getting
people to locations are finding
locations were was with an issue
early voting.
As a whole nother issue and so
we've been working on that for
many many years and certainly
there have been people ahead of
me that up than that as well
work to make this happen.
Language translation.
I have been in senior centers in
native communities where I see
the change that has come.
Of with the availability of
translation services for.
Of people whose first language
is still their native language.
Having people there.
It was really tough I remember
early on when I first started
because we couldn't find them we
were assisting county clerks who
were willing to help to provide
that service and I can't say
enough about how much I
appreciated that but that wasn't
always guaranteed either and
it's my understanding that in
this bill that that will
continue that is more likely to
continue to be a possibility and
is services available.
One other issue that I've found
that
Mr speaker it was.
The description that
Representative Johnson brought
up and that was on traditional
mailing addresses that became an
issue that really hampered not
just native communities but as
I've heard described other rural
communities in New Mexico.
And.
I believe that what's
these first steps to address
that or second or third steps to
address this issue is really
important.
And I can't thank you enough I
can't say enough to thank you
all for bringing.
This bill forward.
I am.
Wondering.
As well.
Are there any other.
Are there any other areas that.
We'll see benefits from this
bill that I have not already
addressed.
Mr speaker lady from Bernalillo
dealing with regard to the
wanted to vote yes yes.
Mr speaker and lady let me ask
my co sponsor Representative
Johnson if she would like to I
could yield to to her for a
response to your question.
The lady from McKinley is and
what.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady's I think I with.
Make a broad statement and say
that as the first people of this
land.
We are included in this bill at
the tail end.
from sections thirteen through
twenty three.
N. as the first people of this
land we should be included.
In the beginning of this bill
so this bill will increase
collaboration between our tribal
leaders are tribal communities
our tribal members and our
election clerks are election
facilities to help improve.
Our native American people
elders and our children who are
growing into a devoting.
Afford them the opportunity to
vote in every possible way thank
you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from earlier
percent Chasey.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo.
We just got some information
from the American Bar
Association soon that the right
to vote has been adopted by for
native Americans.
The voting rights act of
nineteen sixty five help to
secure and protect that right.
Using someone else's phone to
read in the.
Since the Shelby County decision
efforts to suppress the vote of
native Americans has increased
and for native Americans is
voter suppression efforts can
and do have devastating impacts
and frankly it Mr speaker house
bill four is this body's
response to the suppression of
native American voting rights.
That occurred because of the
Shelby decision.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I approved the responses that I
have received this evening I
appreciate the considerations
that have been given to this
bill the detail that and the
thoughtfulness of the writers
the Sanchez.
And I can only hope Mr speaker
that and not hope but I see that
this benefit is not just about
native Americans it is about the
people in my district the people
in the city in the county of
Bernalillo in this state
because I believe everyone
deserves an opportunity to get
to vote and I think this will.
Move that forward so I thank you
very much.
Thank you.
The lady from.
Mr speaker this matter having
been under consideration for
three hours I moved to close
debate motion because bait all
those in favor signify by saying
hi.
Was a.
This rather again.
Motion to close a bit on this if
it was a busy night.
Name.
Is have a debate is closed.
Close.
Mr speaker I honestly think we
kind of had the closing already
in my discussion with the lady
from from Bernalillo I think
that house bill four is a major
step forward to protecting the
right to vote for our citizens
in New Mexico with that Mr
speaker I move that house bill
four as amended do now pass.
Passage of house bill four as
amended the vote is now open.
Was about to close.
Those members without a recorded
vote.
Representative
Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana yes
Representative Sarinana votes
yes.
In the affirmative twenty six
and the negative house bill four
as amended has duly passed this
house.
Delay from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business in
addition to this order.
Members thank you for a great
deal of work today I commend all
of you for the very productive
and spirited debate on two very
difficult and complex bills
we've we've shared the list for
bills that we're gonna take up
tomorrow during the morning
session with both leadership
offices so you all should have
that right now.
Are there or else miss.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative comes Mr speaker
we will have I'm losing my voice
all health and Human Services
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
in room three oh seven members
take note.
Gentleman from.
Santa and all those beautiful
counties thank you Mr speaker
I'll your house taxation revenue
committee will meet tomorrow
morning eight thirty in room
three seventy there were some
note.
Any other committees committee
from going on a.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
commerce will meet tomorrow at
one thirty three seventeen.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from San Juan
McKinley Representative Johnson
thank you Mr speaker house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow tomorrow morning eight
thirty room three zero five
thank you.
Members take note gentlelady
from Los Alamos Mr speaker your
house Judiciary Committee will
meet tomorrow afternoon at one
thirty in room three oh nine.
Members take.
Right.
Deleting from Bernalillo.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker of the house Dennis
us until ten thirty eight AM
tomorrow Wednesday February
twenty second.
Thank you Jim lady thank you
members for great day of work
today the house was in recess
until ten thirty tomorrow
morning.
