Representative Zamora here.
Representative Chasey.
Thanks chair Johnson.
Here.
Madam chair is excused.
Madam vice chair we have seven
president and to excuse.
Thank you.
Okay so the first bill we have
on the agenda is house bill two
zero eight.
And do we have Representative
Romero.
With us to begin her present
presentation.
The.
So let's promote Representative
Romero.
She is in the audience.
There you are.
Good morning Representative
Romero.
The floor is yours you need to
and you.
I'm sorry.
I'm I've been on Jim all weekend
and I didn't have my personal
background ready thank you madam
chair thank you representative I
also have an expert with the
Stephanie Salazar from the
Indian Affairs Department their
general counsel.
Okay.
There she is.
All right madam chair should I
begin.
Yes please thank you.
Thank you madam chair good
morning everyone good morning to
everyone in the audience today
we are presenting house bill two
oh eight this is building upon
essentially a task force work on
missing and murdered indigenous
women and relatives as we know
this is been
a tragic situation not only in
our state but across the United
States of ensuring that we can
protect those most vulnerable in
communities that we have not
been able to meet the demands of
public safety eight as far as
what we're trying to do with
this bill is built upon what
we've learned in a task force
all that Stephanie talk about
some of the many incredible
details and data that they were
able to uncover in the course of
the year even despite the
pandemic they continue to do the
work of M. fig finding ways to
improve public safety health and
and of course build a better
relationship with our our law
enforcement and the folks who
have been affected by this
including everywhere in the
links of the chain of protection
so we're hoping to continue that
work for another year with the
task force and this what this
bill does is to continue that
and then find the next step too
so we we don't stop in the
middle of the process we want to
continue this and and build
forward so with that I will turn
the Mike over to you as as a
councilman Stephanie cells are
from the Indian Affairs
Department their general counsel
thank you madam thank you
representative
Stephanie would you like to go
ahead and proceed.
Yes thank you madam chair good
morning madam chair
representative my name is
Stephanie Salazar and I am the
general counsel for the New
Mexico Indian Affairs
Department.
Thank you know first apartment
administers the missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives task force I have had
the great pleasure of supporting
the task force and and our task
force chair since two thousand
nineteen.
The task force is working
diligently to find the New
Mexico legislature and the
governor with the status of the
crisis of missing and murdered
indigenous relatives in our
state.
Since it was formally appointed
the task forces held several
meetings where heard from
advocates survivors family
members community members and
law enforcement who shared with
the task for stories and
experiences about the barriers
and challenges that they face
when seeking justice.
The task force also collected
original data and learn through
its public record requests that
one data is not being collected
consistently across the state.
And when asked to produce data
on MMI W. R. cases many law
enforcement agencies stated that
this request was unduly
burdensome and or drugs or that
they were unable to categorize
incidents by race
in a way that would allow them
to create a report for us.
Second jurisdictions that
responded to the request
reported more cases of MMI W. R.
than what was previously known
before it and the study.
Community testimony in data also
showed that this crisis affects
more than just indigenous women
it also affects indigenous men
and members of the trans and
LGBTQ community in New Mexico.
The task force released its
report last December the report
and infographic with data
findings and a summary of house
bill two eight was provided to
the committee members.
I hope that if you had a chance
to review the report date you'll
see that we have accomplished a
lot in our first year of work
but there's still much work to
do.
Our goal for this first year for
this year is to draft policy
recommendations in partnership
with the department of public
safety advocates and others say
tribal and federal partners to
present to the interim
legislative committees this
summer.
Well we're unable to include the
appropriation requests to the
Department agency budget.
We feel strongly that this work
must continue in fact the Indian
Affairs Department was able to
secure a partnership with the
Harvard University native
American programs to assist the
task force to identify how the
state of New Mexico can
institutionalize the MMI W. task
force and the recommendations in
the report.
The project calls for strategic
planning prioritizing of the
report recommendations receiving
community feedback and
developing tangible tangible
next steps for the state's work
in this area.
So with the organizational
support from the Harvard program
partnership with the department
of public safety and guidance
from community leaders survivors
families and experts we hope to
bring solid policy
recommendations to the interim
legislative committees this
year.
I will stop their excuse me I
will stop there but I do want to
thank the committee members and
Madam chair for hearing this
bill today thank you.
Thank you Representative Romero
and the Salazar so now what we
do is we take a whole.
So we will content conduct a
poll and have that those were in
favor of the bill the bill and
those who oppose so we will have
the clerk begin whole.
Okay so the whole is complete
and we have the.
Forty one in favor.
Of the bill and zero seven
hundred percent of our audience.
I think so with that
Let's go to the audience and
Begin to hear
testimony if we could make our
testimonies short and concise as
possible.
We will begin with that.
I have I see Indian Affairs.
Good morning vice chair and
members of the committee my name
is Lynn Trujillo and I and the
secretary of the Indian Affairs
Department we stand in strong
support of house bill two oh
eight well that task forces made
significant strides even during
the pandemic we know there is
much work to be done on this
crisis that is deeply impacting
our state in communities I urge
you to support this bill and I
want to thank you madam vice
chair and members of this
committee thank you.
Thank you Secretary Trujillo
next we have and I hope I say
this name right Jeremy or yaki
or Yanqi.
Thank you madam chair our
journey thank you director V. to
learning percent are speaking on
behalf of governors have Rio of
Santa Clara pueblo of Santa
Clara pueblo fully commends the
work of the task force and all
the work that has been
accomplished but we do know that
there's much more to to work on
with that Senator public fully
supports this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have a cat
Kathleen Burke.
Thank you madam chair good
morning Kathleen Burke New
Mexico human trafficking task
force thank you missiles are The
New Mexico Indian Affairs
Department thank you for the
hard work of the missing and
murdered indigenous women task
force we know that indigenous
women are recruited by force
fraud or coercion into sex
trafficking in New Mexico in my
prior experience as associate
director of street safe New
Mexico we found that many
survivors in and around
Albuquerque are indigenous women
as a matter of fact the greatest
percentage of survivors who whom
we
Offered service to a provided
service to have and interacted
with of the greatest percentage
were indigenous women.
I stand in support of house bill
two oh eight and I urge you
members of the committee to
please voted to pass on this
thank you very much ladies and
gentleman.
Thank you now we will hear from
Pamela Herndon.
Good morning members of the
madam chair members of the
committee I'm Pamela Herndon I'm
the legal adviser to the New
Mexico indigenous women's
resource council headquartered
in Gallup New Mexico the council
strongly supports continuing the
work of the task force and the
creation of a permanent task
force to study and determined
and effective way of
investigating and reporting on
missing and murdered indigenous
women in addition we support
finding ways to better protect
indigenous women in the future
so they are no longer missing
and murdered we strongly urge
you to pass house bill two oh
eight.
Thank you now we'll hear from
Karen what lot.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Karen what walk
with the national association
for social workers New Mexico
chapter I just in the interest
of time I'd like to echo the
sentiments of Pamela Herndon and
thank her for her important work
the we also have an indigenous
women our task force as part of
the national association of
social workers have a very
active task force and we would
like to in ask see if they could
be part of this
again we want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this and
we thank you have a good day.
Thank you next we'll hear from
Valerie bills sent.
Yes good morning my name is
Valerie Voss and I represent all
work together action and I'm
from Zuni pueblo.
Armstrong support house bill two
oh eight because my family has
been affected.
Because our sister was murdered
thirteen years ago I agree that
we need current accurate data
and I also support this bill
because as family members were
in a constant state of healing
and I support and I.
Have prayers for the families of
the murdered and missing
indigenous women brothers and
sisters out there I strongly
support this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have on the
latest Hannah Burling.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Hannah
Burling and I'm speaking for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico the league stands in
strong support of this bill and
we urge you to pass thank you.
Thank you next we have Christine
means.
Hi good morning my name is
Christine means thank you so
much to the committee this
morning for hearing the findings
and information of the New
Mexico amendment the task force
and I would just like to urge my
support along with the others
as a family member of a victim
of a homicide case out of
McKinley County.
Who is in L. I live in
Albuquerque I would just like to
encourage you to support the for
the work of the task force thank
you very much.
Thank you if I could just remind
that participants to make their
remarks concise we have a full
agenda we have a total of six
items on the agenda today so
next we have crystal curly thank
you.
Yes.
my name is crystal curly I'm a
committee member and McKinley
County I'm also a organizer here
and I strongly urge members of
the committee today to pass H.
B. two oh eight.
Thank you next we have Carolyn
Massey.
I'm good morning.
And my name is terra Lee Massey
and executive director of the
southwest women's Law Center I
am also a Navajo Nation tribal
member and a member I'm sorry
and a mother we have been
looking at the federal
legislation that the van is back
in the not invisible Act was
switched from your command the
state of New Mexico and the
tribal governments who are
working on this project and we
support them to I'm sick this
extension.
The funding thank you.
Thank you next we have Mister
Leonard Gorman.
Good morning the other day.
this is Leonard Gorman I'm
executive director for the
Navajo Nation Human Rights
Commission the commission has
several complaints that have
been filed that relate to
missing and murdered relative.
We urge of the house and the
Senate to pass house bill two oh
eight thank you.
Thank you next we have Christina
Castro.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and members of the house
committee my name is Dr
Christine M. Castro I'm calling
in from of the pro gay Santa Fe
New Mexico I am part three
sisters collective a grassroots
organization and we would like
to extend our support to house
bill two oh eight New Mexico has
the highest rate of missing and
murdered indigenous relatives
and we need to mobilize to
address this issue.
I cannot tell you one native
woman that has not been impacted
directly or indirectly by this
issue and I ask for your
continued support thank you.
Thank you next we have Joanne
Holgate.
Yeah that's a good morning my
name is Joe lean Holgate and I
am with the missing and murdered
in that relatives are in order
to grassroots organization out
on the Navajo Nation I want to
think madam chair in the house
committee for holding this
discussion in providing some
time to community members to
provide their thoughts on this
really important subject
I would ask the committee to
support house bill two zero
eight to continue to work
and to also keep in mind that
when the work continues like
this you're also providing
services to the families who are
in desperate need of
not only being heard but also
knowing that the state of New
Mexico is taking direct actions
to.
Take these cases seriously but
also there definitely is a need
for data to really understand
the dynamics that are taking
place
the issue with the missing and
murdered crisis in the state of
New Mexico is.
Action is urgently needed so I
would ask the committee to
sustain this project or even
call for a up from at it as a
permanent fixture us somewhere
in the legislature ordered in
terms of services or as task
force
and I would urge the the
committee to please pass the to
await thank you for.
Thank you next we have Liam may
make Laughlin.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee.
Yet.
My name is Liam Malia may
McLaughlin
my client is tied behind flat
the kind of wishes team Kiani
addition to the competition not
I am born from the water edge
plan I am a native American
woman in this I support house
bill two oh eight because.
It's it's it's crazy how.
Our own.
Women as a nation is being taken
and nobody is even looking for
them no eight but if it was a
different different type of
person date they I don't
understand the minutes then is
so please I I I urge you to
support house bill two eight
thank you.
Thank you next we have governor
are Joe Tallahatchie.
Can you tell everyone again this
is just a lot to the governor
with public walkie and and in
full support of this bill House
Bill to await as the brother of
a abused and murdered a child I
fully fully support this and
encourage the members of the
committee committee to support
thank you.
Thank you we will take one last
comment Tanya and James and then
we will move to committee
members.
Hello Committee and chairman I
mean sorry hello chairman madam
chair and committee this is
turning into dating with four
together action I support Bill
two eight.
For every indigenous woman who
has been taken please remember
our sisters.
I urge you to vote for this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you and for my relatives
in the audience yeah at a pin
J. Johansson on Jennings long
Chianti bush's team managed as
touching ADA should shape our
status no without a high here
hat though is not a huge issue
to.
So now committee members.
That was a greeting to my
relatives and my language and we
exchange our clans.
So we could have a family
reunion Representative neighbor.
Thank you madam chair.
I listen the.
Intently are in the.
Discussion of why this Task
Force needs to be extended and
it sounded to me like the work
that needs to be done moving
forward as a drafting of policy
recommendations that I
understand that right Sir madam
chair and representative.
I'm Madam chair representative
thank you for the question that
that's correct so it's it's kind
of the there's several
components to this number one
they want to expand the task
force and and look at some of
the things that have already
been found through the day
through the process as far as
being able to appoint new folks
into the conversations just
public safety and and having
them at the table and then along
with that chair representative
is is expanding upon the the
policy initiatives and
directives that we should be
looking at as a state and madam
chair if I may with my experts
just filling.
Yes please that I missed thank
you madam chair.
That's correct Representative
Romero madam chair
Representative Nibert we there
are few objectives one is
expanding the task force
membership right now we are
hopeful that
Right now we don't know exactly
how many additional
representatives we will bring on
bring on but we are hopeful that
moving forward that to given
giving that.
US secretary winter here who's a
chair of the task force along
with DPS secretary or does it
need with co chair appointment
authorities that we'll be able
to bring on folks who we feel
have the expertise to fill in a
lot of the gaps to some of the
discussions are having in to
help us
create and draft policy
recommendations that will.
I think that will be vetted
appropriately and prioritized so
that we can present that to the
interim committees later this
year.
Madam chair one thing that I
know government does well and
that is it likes to study things
that they have and often times
we get caught up in studies and
don't get any action and if we
don't hold.
These groups feet to the fire to
actually accomplish something in
the and our we can study things
for years and years and never
get anywhere and this is an
important issue that needs
action and so.
I'm certainly willing to
continue our.
The the task force but but I do
think that we need to hold their
feet to the fire make them
accountable for coming up with
tangible results as quickly as
possible and so.
What what really concerns me
was.
Not the fact that they would
need to continue it to develop
Policy recommendations but I see
in paragraph the on page three.
We're just re doing we're
telling them to redo what they
already did
if I heard it correctly they've
already determined how to
increase state resources for
reporting and identifying
missing and murdered indigenous
indigenous women
I collaborated with tribal law
enforcement agencies are to
determine the scope of the
problem thereby genocide
barriers to address the problem
so those things have already
been done.
That needs to be taken out Ortiz
be revised to give specific
direction for the task force
moving forward I I get it all on
On G. we're we're we're talking
about the task force shall
report a summary of its work
policy recommendations in any
additional findings.
But I I don't think that we
ought to just be redoing what's
already been done I think we
ought to give them specific
direction and expect them to
see.
Court and come up with those
recommendations so we can solve
a problem not simply start study
something to that so I would I
would encourage the the sponsor
to maybe take a look at
paragraph the and maybe
not just simply para what was
done last the last time it's
really look at what needs to be
done in this next year what
needs to be done in the year
after that and to try to
keep this task force focused on
moving forward to solve a real
problem thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Romero
would you like to respond sure
madam chair representative I
just want to to validate
Representative night birds
comments what one of the reasons
why it's identical is that we're
sort of in the middle of the
assessment if you'll read the
report Madam chair
representative that they did
compile the task force did
respond to identifies very key
points that have already been
making progress as far as the
data that's missing the folks
that need to be at the table
that aren't currently Madam
chair representative we're
building upon that but because
we're kind of in the middle and
of course due to the pandemic
there were some constraints on
having those conversations and
being able to to get to the
point where we feel we're ready
to get to that next step Madam
chair representative that's why
we're just basically doing this
stopgap until the interim
committees can get started so
that that we can keep the
momentum going madam chair
representative we didn't want to
stop in the middle of of where
we're at the the momentum has
grown and of course the
information that they've had so
chair representative we are
right before those next steps
just a few more months and
reporting to continue that work
get the right folks around the
table and and really identify
those key components so I and
Madam chair representative
that's why it's it's identical
but definitely don't want to
stifle any progress and I'm with
you a hundred percent we need
action we need to be able to to
get what has been reported upon
and what's been happening in our
communities we need to resolve
that and and have a robust
response so that's why it is the
way that it is in the language
that we use in statute but madam
chair representative it's
absolutely moving forward.
Thank you under committee
members.
Madam chair I was going to
actually follow up with that but
Representative remember answer
the question so I don't see any
further discussion on moving to
pass.
Thank you I have a motion for a
do pass also and I'll.
I have a and we have a second by
Representative.
Guy a ghosts and the.
to take Rowe.
Representative Chasey.
Excuse.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Thank you.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam vice chair with that we
have seven in the affirmative
and to excuse.
Our I've also on this is the
directing less I I'd like to
record my vote as a yes please
hi madam chair number of the
thank you.
That we have eight in the
affirmative and one excuse.
Thank you and with that
Representative Romero you have a
due pass for.
House Bill.
Lost my page here for your bill
thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you to everyone who
served on the task force and for
our co sponsors as well and
thank you Stephanie for adding
your expertise thank you
chairman and thank you
committee.
Okay.
Give me one moment.
Okay we will go to our next bill
house bill two zero eight and
that will be presented by our
chair.
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members
Health age is a state Indian
child welfare act bill this bill
has been in the works for.
Order yeah.
It's a house bill two hundred
and we're.
Thank you for that House Bill
two zero nine.
this bill has been in the works
for about a year it's had
several stakeholders including
the state's children youth and
families department as well as
representatives from equity
departments from a tribes
throughout the state and what it
would do you is that it would
first update
incorrupt from when it was last
risen revised by the federal
government to include those
updates and additionally it
would include other actions that
are currently in practice by the
way at the based on their
interactions with tribal if what
departments so I have several
witnesses however I think we
what want to to actually be able
to provide comment during this
opening and then have the others
be available to provide
technical assistance and that
committee is asking questions so
with that I'd like to introduce
my first expert witness governor
yes of to latte from the Pueblo
of Pojoaque came and governor to
watch a has offered to also
began with a brief prayer as
well so thank you madam chair.
And I we just need to get folks
moved over from the attendees to
the panelists mode.
It looks like now we're
dismissing governor to lodging I
heard him speak earlier so I
think he's still in the
attendees list.
Governor you can raise your hand
we're having difficulty seeing
you.
Okay there I see his name
governor tell Archie you are you
have the four.
All right good morning everyone
can everyone hear me.
All right as is customary all of
start up with a quick prayer or
traditions we'll be out in the
the Sierra this is going to quit
doing the.
Said to be a we said oh don't
then we should note on thank you
of the you go to enjoy what he'd
more to donate we we get him on
its on on on the way that we're
looking for a way to get a
meeting ended on may not be on
the Courts AOC time normally so
do Center something within the
building Senator at the New
Mexico the son in law name the
dictated what do you all you
will teach on the amendment he
would be archery manning I know
he will be working with the new
demanding and although he will
be able to do our bidding on a
could be arguing on the no one
knew what would be the non
shedding so suitable you put on
the vehicle it's this one of
those people who W. what you
will be Mandy Watkins Katie it.
And madam chair and members of
the committee good morning to
you all thank you for the
opportunity to speak about this
proposed legislation it's an
honor
thank you for the opportunity to
speak to you about the Indian
child welfare act from the
perspective of this Indian child
was given the opportunity
because of this act.
And I'm hopeful that the passage
of the state Indian child
welfare act will give others an
opportunity that I was so freely
given.
My name is Joseph entomology I
was originally born with the
name Archie Edwards stall
hafizan
the biological son of and you've
got a a public walking tribal
member who was orphaned at an
early age due to Burcu Los's.
And the bottom biological
brother of an abused and
murdered child.
Keith brown.
I am the biological brother
Lorenzo Barker who lost his life
to addiction a little over three
years ago.
And the biological brother four
other siblings older than me
were not as fortunate as me
having been placed in homes
outside of the what local
walking they were adopted out
prior to the passage of the
nineteen seventy eight Indian
child welfare act and to this
day I still search for.
I am grateful adopted son of Joe
and Thelma to Lachie my mother
being the former governor of the
public walkie and my father
being a okay we get trouble
member both live here and public
walking.
And the father six beautiful
daughters and husband to a wife
and I've been with since high
school and the current governor
of the Pueblo pool walkie and
haven't have served in
leadership for over eleven years
now.
Before that I served in law
enforcement for many years.
Today I'm here to share a little
bit about my store and how the
Indian child welfare act.
The benefit of my life.
In the lives of my of my
children and their children.
As mentioned earlier I have four
other biological siblings were
born prior to nineteen seventy
eight.
They were not given the
opportunity that I was
gratefully given thanks to the
act.
Thanks to the Indian child
welfare act when I was born in
more similar in nineteen eighty
one.
But a lot of concern of an
orphan native American mother.
And the current war veteran of
German and Scandinavian descent.
Hence the beard one of the few
with tribal members that can
actually grow beards so and
that's if you're wondering
that's why I'm of mixed descent.
My mother being a native
American.
If you look at my birth
certificate will not mention the
hospital as board at.
Because I was born when my
biological mother was serving
time in prison.
I was moved from orphanage
orphanages to household back to
orphanages until nineteen eighty
five I was four years old at the
time.
In nineteen eighty five my great
uncle JPL governor the pope
walkie reached out to my parents
don't don't want to lie to to
ask if they would be willing to
take in the child was soon to be
given up for adoption outside of
the Pueblo unless he was able to
find placement for.
He had been reached because the
nineteen seventy eight Indian
child welfare act which was
passed less than three years
before I was born.
Although he was reached out to
the at the time the legislation
was ambiguous at best forever
our people in the state of New
Mexico to understand.
Yet been reached of I was
looking enough that they said
yes and I was going back to New
Mexico I remember the flight
vividly and can still remember
running into the open arms of my
now sister and my parents.
As we drove from Albuquerque
back coated walking remember
looking out the windows and
seeing the non stress by.
Those which I never seen before
up until that point four years
old.
I immediately knew I was home.
Only found out just recently
after reviewing my adoption
paperwork that is a four year
old I had the cognitive ability
of the two year old due to
neglect.
To a certain extent my wife
still believes that I have the
cognitive ability but two year
old but I'll make an argument to
that.
So how does one go from a four
year old was severe cognitive
abilities to the governor of a
tribe I am from.
I hate to sound cliche but it
took an entire tried to reason.
After much research and studying
I found some of the answers as
to why I was able to thrive.
Thank you very are the book
authored book primal wound a
book on the effects of adoption
on children rights.
Young children are exquisitely
attuned to their senses before
we begin to use our intellect to
discern.
Of from this from that we depend
upon our senses much like other
mammals do.
We know well the first five
senses sight sound touch taste
and smell when those senses over
miglior we feel say if they are
different it sends alarms to the
child's body and keeps them from
driving.
As you can see the biological
senses of familiarity with our
culture languages do and deep
impact on the child's ability to
thrive.
So what does it matter so much
that Indian children be placed
back in their own respective
what will.
For tribal and what does this
have to do with the Indian child
welfare act.
Hispanic in European cultures
are broadly and widely
identifiable throughout America.
You can find English and Spanish
are spoken from coast to coast.
Get all those Christianity are
the most widely practiced
religions in the United States
currently you can find Hispanic
and various other European
cuisines restaurants in nearly
every American city.
What you will not find Is Terrel
being spoken in the other states
city or country.
Our culture is hundreds of
thousands of times more narrow
than that of other cultures.
What you will not find is our
customs and our prayers practice
in any other place other than a
few specific problems here in
New Mexico and this holds true
for each of our pueblos and
tribes your New Mexico.
We are in danger culture of
culture so close to extinction
that if we do not continue to
protect it by and protecting the
children belong to this culture
will be lost in just a couple
generations.
We have substantially more cases
of children placement not
because we're a lesser human
beings or lesser species.
It is because to this day we
suffer from the consequences of
historical trump.
It is because we still suffer
from the religious oppression
and the physical sexual
emotional spiritual abuse
associated with the people of
people whose entire world in
thousands of years generations
and culture was approved by
European conflicts.
Again we are in danger culture.
So why should you support the
state Indian child welfare act.
Our our state has a larger
population of native Americans
and and then other states even
though there's federal law
regarding Indian child welfare
they're still lack of clarity
and confusion from the state's
staff for.
The more biologically familiar
our children are with their true
genetic roots the more they're
likely to thrive.
We're in danger culture that
will deplete be depleted to
nothing within just a few
generations if we do not do
something about it.
My question to you is lawmakers
is would not be diligent to help
break the cycle of historical
trauma as it has been broken up
for me thanks to our previous
leadership.
Would it not be diligent Kerry
legacy of lawmakers of healing
historical trauma by giving our
children a chance to stay within
their biologically familiar
Pueblo or tribe rather than
adopting a passive and cynical
view of Kalai a close to extinct
culture.
You would not be diligent to
develop impasse legislative
policy that protects our native
children rather than allow the
historical trauma to permeate
into the future.
I ask what your legacy will be.
What were your children remember
of you we choose to make a
difference in the lives of
native children or when you hear
to the passive knowledge meant
the issue without taking action.
Madam chair and members of the
committee
This legislation is is very
close to my heart having lived
the life of a child being
adopted in the continuous
healing that happens not just
today but every day as I move
into the future of healing that
I have to do
every morning every evening.
You know it's all thanks to my
tribes surrounding me.
We've talked about you know our
our native the assistance such
as the buffalo and how they
surround their youth when they
are in danger I felt that that
that surrounding when my of my
tribe came to my rescue and
helped me unfortunately I do
have siblings that are still out
there who did not get the
opportunity that I had and so I
continue to search for a.
Now is the state of New Mexico I
would hope that we could help
the you know identify and
improperly recognized the name
child both rector only states
statute.
So that we can send resources or
advocate for children who are
struggling the same way I did in
the same way I do as we move
into the future the one way to
break the cycle is to take
action one way to break cycle is
to to do certain that we haven't
done before so today I am
expressing my story in in
sometimes it's uncomfortable to
explain my story but in the
context of helping other
children in the context of
promoting this legislation I'm
more than more than willing to
do so and to continue to answer
questions if there are any so
with that being said I I
appreciate the opportunity could
go off on a keyboard and I will
hand it off to Representative
Lewis or to the other witnesses
a lot thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
governor but again for sharing I
really appreciate that I think
that really brings the input
impact of what this bill is
intending to do and madam chair
committee members next we have
Jacquelyn.
Yes she is president of the New
Mexico tribal Indian children
welfare consortium and she is
the equipped for Nader at the
Pueblo of this letter.
Jacqueline.
We
on heading but good morning
Representative Lewis madam chair
and members of the committee
Just a little history of how the
New Mexico FY came under
development this unique
development of the state Indian
child welfare act is primarily
based on the lived experiences
of children and families in very
similar situations
to the experience of governor to
Lachey historically non natives
have forced pre written policies
and practice into tribal
communities they feel is best
for us this process this system.
Act is is not working for tribal
communities.
The children youth and families
department respected and honored
the government to government
relationships and follow the
lead of the community and field
experts of the twenty three
sovereign nations and tribes in
New Mexico.
Together we created this law.
Focusing on Indian communities
who are most impacted by
expanding provisions and
protections to maintain and
preserve our Indian culture and
identity without it as
governmental actually
beautifully stated we will cease
to exist as a native population.
Thank you Representative Lewis.
Thank you thank you madam chair
as I mentioned earlier the other
experts will be available to
help with any technical
questions that come up during
the hearing.
Thank you representative
chairwoman.
We'll just and that expert
witnesses now we will move to
open up a whole to conduct the
whole.
And we will have sure Reese
launch the poll and the poll has
began.
Ten more seconds to.
Both.
In favor or against the bill.
And we have a fifty five in
favor of the bill and one
against the bill and we will
take comments from the audience
and we will take our.
We will take that comments in
favor of the bill.
Yes I see the first name wishes
Frank.
Hi it's Lucas good good morning
committee members it's Lucas
Frank I emailed the committee an
email that has more detail I I
support the bill with the
amendment and the amendment that
that I would seek relates to
first of all me just introduce
myself I am a member of an
Equifax for family my wife and I
have been it was a foster
parents for the last two years
and I have to say the governor
at to Lachie it's a statement
that really.
I was very moving to me
I'll be concise my concern is in
in use if I may governor to
watch these example which is.
What I'm talking about when to
fifth affected his exact
situation because as the bills
written he was adopted by his
relatives in so it would not
have affected his relatives
right to intervene but if if he
had not been fortunate enough to
have a relative willing to adopt
him but if there'd been another
member of his efforts tried who
is a licensed foster care worker
R. for foster care parents equip
parent they would not under this
under section twelve to the
statute of had the right to
intervene in his case and and
that's important currently the
laws structured thirty seven
eight dash for twenty seven NMSA
to allow foster parents to
intervene after six months
that's important because it's
really not appropriate to
intervene before then because
you're in the reunification
phase but after six months you
get a good idea if everyone's
been given proper notice and the
parents are involved whether or
not the parents are going to be
able to work a plan to get
reunification or whether or not
another family member is going
to be able to step up and and
take the child into care and
that's really the goal because
we want permanency for these
kids we don't want these
children to stay in a home for
three years have that be the
only family they know and they
can get pulled three years later
when another family just found
for them in so permanency timely
placement is all very key in
this and when you have a
situation where no one has
stepped up from the family or
for or in the parents are
involved that's when
intervention is very helpful to
the children because the foster
parent can intervene the foster
parent knows with the child's
going through on a daily basis
and they can advocate for them
now there are a lot of advocates
in the system there's the costs
of the guardian Adlai item the
lawyers the judges but none of
those people.
All those people have dozens of
cases for the foster parent
their sole focus is on that
child in the way we've amid this
this laws proposed it would take
from the foster parents the
right to intervene the the it in
that would includes if will
foster parents because often
times the if a foster parent
will be a member of the tribe
but not a relative so I would
ask that the committee consider
amending the the the current
legislation to ensure that those
folks have a right to intervene
I think that's critically
important because one thing that
when I heard governed Talat G.
talking I wanted to ask him how
many.
If the foster parents is your
tribe have.
there's not enough currently to
meet demand we all know that and
if we tell it will foster
families the you're not going to
have the same right to interview
Jean in New Mexico as you're not
and you're not able counterparts
that's going to hurt retention
and recruitment the other
concern I have relates to.
Section twenty one which has a
cultural contact which I support
the idea of a cultural compact
but it requires engagement with
family members I would allow
discretion for that and allow
the judge to do a one it's
appropriate because sometimes
the family members are people
who have abused the child and in
those cases it would not be
appropriate for them to be
involved so I would grant
discussion discretion to the
court in those instances that's
outlined in my email I
appreciate the the time to speak
and and otherwise I fully
support the bill as an as an
important piece of legislation
here in New Mexico.
Thank you okay pardon me for
mispronouncing your name next we
have Marci star.
More Silverstar for the truck to
nation of Oklahoma my wife and I
are.
Preferred home currently insured
during through foster care and
adoption through foster care.
We.
Not to adopt we started to
because we wanted to foster L.
G. B. T. Q. plus teens but the
creator had other plans.
I believe
Indian child welfare act aims to
do and provide for native
children and families.
Professionals believe that we
will need to be addressed before
I I also.
Support this bill with
amendments.
We need
are brought into state care each
year throughout the state.
Children many stay in state for
us to care when or is it just
the tribe chooses to not take
jurisdiction.
Question.
Preferred in the state.
Or in Bernalillo county were the
highest majority of my
understanding the highest
majority of native children are
brought into care.
How many are relative versus non
relative.
I ask about how many for
preferred foster families.
Bernalillo county is this few
years ago the conference for
foster parents.
State officials will foster
families there were in the state
and in Bernalillo county only
answer.
Many worry Bernalillo county.
One.
That's possible because I'm.
Faster.
That's correct you are the only
one.
We recruit.
If we're preferred families.
This bill excludes even what
family foster families from
being considered effective can.
It also excludes foster parents
from intervening.
Interview twice both times were
about three years into the case.
These items will I'm that.
Not
can.
From intervening will make
recruitment and retention
difficult if not impossible.
Here that still stands right
now.
Support more in families we're
finding our children up for
potential lifetime without
permanent state.
That was interesting and fixing
some of these concerns the bill
could very well her two children
it aims to protect.
We can recruit train support
line.
Ways we potentially inflicting
more trauma to our children.
We are children who are older
when they come into care.
Eight.
I have requested numerous I have
connections with with tribes
tribal facility at and I've
requested that they look into
having a foster grandmother
program training programs there
is nothing I've spent some
dollars intervening and dollars
on training materials and
different books opportunities
for my children.
But I know where to go what are
we gonna do for those who don't
know where to go and when
there is especially if there's
no where other than I'm not home
for these children to go to.
Thank you so audience I know
this is a very very important
issue and of bill however we
were gonna time your comments to
four minutes after four minutes
we'll have to cut you off so if
you could make your comments as
brief as possible we have many
people who would like to express
their support and then we have
other bills on the agenda this
morning so next we have kids
Barbara.
He.
Good morning.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is kept
Bobroff on million has attorney
for the Pueblo of Laguna in the
pueblo Laguna stands in support
of a strong effective
State it was a law in we look
forward to the passage of the
bill that accomplishes exactly
that there's no resource that is
more important the end of the
children and families of the.
Laguna pueblo in the go to
commit Pueblo is committed to
doing whatever we can to support
that and having a strong
effective say it was an
important way to accomplish that
so thank you very much and
we look forward to supporting
passage of a strong effective
final bill thank you.
Thank you next we have Jeremy on
yaki or Yankee.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee a German thank you
director Mr learning speaking on
behalf of governor Chevy of
Santa Clara pueblo we see the
benefits of record the federal
level and we do believe that
this clarifies the stance and
some of the processes for the
state of New Mexico also
strictly to the government to
government relation so with that
Santa Clara food stands behind
this bill thank you Joe.
Thank you next we have Nicole
Martin.
Yes good morning
my name is Nicole more in I am
calling and from to a territory
which is Albuquerque and the
surrounding areas.
I'm co founder of indigenous
womanizing and
I have mixed mixed feelings
about echo honestly as an
indigenous person but.
I believe the efforts to protect
our future generations
so they had opportunities to
grow up in their communities
and then to Dennis communities I
support that.
and I just ask everyone to the
members of the committee to also
support H. B. two oh nine thank
you.
Thank you and next I believe we
have secretary Trujillo.
Or the office of Indian Affairs.
Good morning on madam vice chair
might it madam chair and
committee members my name is
Lynn Trujillo I am the secretary
of the Indian Affairs Department
we stand in support of this bill
children fare better when placed
with family and community and
are connected to their culture
promoting resiliency and well
being our tribal leaders and
tribal communities care deeply
about the safety and well being
of their children and families
and this bill is another step
towards ensuring that native
children are protected and that
native culture and families are
respected we are chat members of
the committee to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you Secretary next we have
Franciscans Allah's.
Good morning madam chair good
morning madam vice chair and
committee my name is Francis
Gonzalez some from their New
Mexico.
Yep there's a whole I am
workstreams are patchy from down
over here in the southwest part
of New Mexico I wanted to speak
from some experience as as being
under being Indian because
that's one thing that we haven't
spoken about this morning a lot
of folks do not know the
difference and they do not think
that we can live off our tribal
lands or are are quibbles I
worked with casa as a special
advocate and one of the things
that I saw was reluctance and
some of our areas with some of
the in court cases that we did
have CPS didn't try hard to look
for are are natives of families
on the tribal lands or within
the pueblos and the other thing
that happened as well is that
the judges the attorneys and the
CPS are really in need of
training they will need to
understand it where as I tried
to explain to them many times so
that's something to look forward
to a that can also be amended
and added is that training
statewide and to understand what
you quite years and looking for
more more
Homes that we can have for our
children and also our children
I have family that live off the
reservation my where I live over
in the bay area we've had some
of our did not children that
have come to live with their
grandfathers but when they
passed away they don't have any
more ties to our native of
families because their their
their parents that are left are
non native so something else to
think about thank you I'm going
there and I appreciate your
time.
Thank you next we have at Akron.
Good morning madam chair and
madam vice chair and members of
the committee my name is an
acronym I am the social services
director for the Pueblo of Santa
Ana and here today on behalf of
the Pueblo and governor Ulises
we all are we are in full
support of this bill and we
urged the committee to please
also support and pass this bill
if you would like to thank.
Representative Louis for
sponsoring the bill and.
Secretary Blalock and his
wonderful staff for all the hard
work they've been putting in
collaborating with us on the
development of the bill thank
you.
Thank you next we have Candace
L..
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Yet been and not on a done and
then you get closer to a budget
in the act J. A. Kandace
Littlefoot oxygen in Japan I
ain't syndicalist although the
need I just need that education
budgetary protection fashion on
up with a golden as fundamental
strength good morning chairwoman
and members of the committee and
to my relatives my name is
Kandace Littlefoot I'm a member
that in that tribe and I'm in my
I'm also policy associate with
all features from a known as
young woman United in nonprofit
organization by and for women
and people of color here in New
Mexico we we policy change
research please based
organization and culture we
fully support house bill two
zero nine we know the importance
of keeping our children safe and
within their homes and
communities to flourish and grow
we also recognize the years in
practice and systemic racism and
help please within the child
welfare system and the
generational impact has made on
our tribal communities say well
we'll hold the state accountable
when Indian child is a more
costly and ultimately provides a
tribal nations the opportunity
to protect their children and
multiple ways we would like to
thank the sponsor Representative
Louis for bringing with them
crime legislation forward and
urged the members of this
committee to support this vital
piece of legislation thank you
for your time.
Thank you next we have Donna
Quintana.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee and Representative
Georgene Louis for sponsoring
house bill two oh nine I am
Donna can Tana ended child
welfare case manager for the
Pueblo of to Stuckey and I'm
also a tribal member of coach to
pueblo I am the vice president
of New Mexico tribal Indian.
Children not known otherwise as
New Mexico check to see can I
whole heartedly support.
House bill two nine.
We are the voice of our native
American children our children
are the sustainability of our
native tribes I urge you to pass
house bill two or nine New
Mexico state it was thank you.
So.
Thank you next we have Giovanna
Archuleta.
Good morning thank you madam
chair madam vice chair members
of the committee I'm to
financial at the Assistant
Secretary for native Americans
early education and care with
the early education and care
department.
ECC stand in support of H. B.
two oh nine.
Well H. B. two oh nine provides
many support for the security of
an Indian child is most
importantly outlines a cultural
compact.
HB two nine states the ultimate
goal is a child's reunification
with their tribe or tribal
family and culture critical in
the brain development of young
child studies show that by age
five ninety percent of the brain
has been developed which proves
why a growing brain needs the
connection to a language and
environment that promotes self
identity as you heard from
governor taught G..
A child being wrapped in the
services required in H. B. two
oh nine have ensure that strong
supports for child for child be
clearly defined to continue to
aid in the growth and
development in the culture and
language a child comes in which
alone we will continue to
support sh to preserve in Hellas
as native people thank you.
Thank you Valerie bell St.
Good morning cash in my name is
Valerie Paulson and I'm
concerned Pueblo and I'm with
school work together action.
I would like to say hold Valory
Voss on the issue and report
call up that quick down Kelly or
would check the I support H.
bill to own nine because as I
have just done I introduced you
Imaizumi language and I was
relating to my clients my client
has sent central Committee and
child that the eagle and I.
I totally.
Love the testimony of the
governor from publication and I
just want to say that.
It is in our hands to break the
cycle the character of our
children reliance on the
connections they have to finally
I support this bill hello Mexico
thank you.
Thank you next we have some
treat peyote.
Good morning chair and vice
chair and committee members my
name is country pay of GM tells
Pueblo in Oakland New Mexico
ten.
As active community member and
parent advocate San Juan County
I strongly support H. B. two oh
nine and I think the sponsors
for bring in four.
Have a good day.
Thank you next we have Pamela
Hootie.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Pamela
moody I'm a registered lobbyist
for is that and simply pueblos
we appreciate Representative
Louis bringing this bill to
forward to the committee and the
pueblos us support this bill and
I believe I also include myself
in this important bill because
it relates to our native people
send this is something that is
very important in our lives
today especially when young
people are living in
Home life that is not very
conducive to learning or
anything like that and there's
just too many of our young
people committing suicide so
hopefully something like this
will help us maybe even perhaps
move our children into other.
Relatives homes and take care of
them in ways that we need to
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have Secretary
Blalock.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of these Brian
Blaylock and the cabinet
secretary for the children youth
and families department here in
the state of New Mexico Houston
support for this bill that we
developed for and by the child
welfare experts with the tribes
all over New Mexico as well as
national experts on that you
Indian child welfare act we
heard clearly from the tribes
with the priority of for the
tribal nations and something
that they have been discussing
and working on for years since
before this administration came
on board and it therefore one of
the highest priorities for CYFD
this legislative session this
bill will help ensure that the
way to the state of New Mexico
will no longer be able to make
decisions about tribal use
without the partnership voice
and leadership of the tribal
nations in New Mexico so we are
proud to support with the
development of tribes and we
look forward to its passage in
the continuing to work very
closely in collaboration with
the tribal nations as we
implement this very very
important bill thank you.
Thank you Secretary next we have
Christina Castro.
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I would
also like to say Todd to
Representative George Georgene
Louis for sponsoring this bill
also talk a governor to like to
for your heartfelt story I think
it really helps contextualize
this issue and personalize it my
name is Dr Christina Castro I'm
calling from all that full day
Santa Fe I'm Towson hemos Pueblo
I would just like to say there
is no dollar amount there's no
amount you can never quantify
the effects of state and federal
government and American policy
and its effects on indigenous
people on our children from
boarding schools to relocation
policy there's been so many
examples of failure on the on
the federal and state level to
adequately protect indigenous
people so I would ask that any
any support reparations and
restitution you can find in
support of H. B. two oh nine is
is very important I would also
advocate to say and tribal
representatives when we talk
about really reunification of
language and culture and the
preservation of our culture and
these children's access to it I
think it's important we think
about the way we we're we're
calling these bills and calling
ourselves to use the term Indian
is so outdated it's a de
humanization of who we are as
indigenous people so as you're
lobbying and working in the
spaces I think we really need to
redefine how we engage and how
they allow that to name us how
how we are needing so top thank
you thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you now we will go to
opposing comments if we have
any.
And I don't see any hands being
raised so now we'll go to
committee members.
Representative Nighbor.
Thank you madam chair
I just have a couple questions
regarding some of the comments
are particularly the comments
that requested us to look at
some.
Amendments and I don't know
whether the the sponsor has
look at those things but madam
chair and and Representative it
seems to me that that the there
may be a.
Apple places where we do need to
tweak the just to make sure that
the best interest of the
children are being advanced
through the process and I think
the the requests that were made
were were
reasonable and my only
experience as a family here in
Santa Fe
Is
fostering.
A little girl I don't know from
what tribe she.
Yes or belongs to but the the
family who is fostering her
Has been.
Discouraged a number of times
because of the process.
To the point that the you have a
child after years could get
taken away from home and that's
not a but that's certainly not a
process that we of.
You should be forcing on these
children I believe somebody made
the work sat we should not be
inflicting more show trauma on
our children and I certainly
agree with that
these children are born in
unfortunate circumstances
provide some stability and then
to be.
In a process that may include
more trauma unit is certainly
does concerning so I would just
ask the sponsor to look at the
at some of the comments that
were brought for us because I
think having a foster parent the
at some point after some period
of time being an advocate for
that child is probably a good
thing and we certainly want to.
Create a stable environment for
these children that they can
grow up in loving homes I guess
this really wouldn't be an issue
all of the children were being
raised are in families who were
members of their of their tribe.
It apparently that is not
occurring so other people are
having to step up to foster
maybe the laptop some of these
children yeah and that's where
the rub so are just encourage
the sponsor madam chair to a
look at some of the suggestions
and see if there's some positive
things that can result thank you
this bill better bill thank you.
Representative Lewis.
Would you like to respond or.
Thank you madam chair I'll
briefly respond so we do have
amendments to the bill after
implement with made from some of
the tribes and tribal advocates
the bill is up about a little
over a hundred and thirty pages
long and the appropriating
process with Legislative Council
is still I believe on going with
the amendment so we didn't want
to rush them but we did speak
with those advocates to let them
know that we would be amending
at and fortunately
Representative Chasey isn't here
because I believe it goes to
Judiciary.
Those defects or they get their
budget
We we have that in the process
again it was just a some some
issues with Legislative Council
and proofreading so we hope to
have those really soon and
definitely before the next
hearing so that B. analysts are
able to take a look at that we
distant want to rush them and
get them to this committee so
late in the process.
Madam chair and madam chair we
would with that involves the two
issues raised by
the gentleman who spoke earlier
I think it's our Mr Frank.
I'm gonna do to our whatever
expert witnesses city Eric on
issues with the general counsel
of is the White at the.
Good morning thank you for the
question Representative night
were Madam chair representative
Lewis members of the committee
there are number of amendments
is going on I don't recall
exactly if there was an
intervention amendment
specifically to foster parents
non Indian foster parents
intervening but there is
definitely a a in the bill
mention and talk about
collaboration with tribes
initially the amendment does
address initial part of
collaboration up on the
investigation so that the there
is a contact with the tribes to
coordinate and to collaborate
before the child is that action
so that there's a efforts to be
able to go and in and limit and
and limit the traumatizing
effect as well as to work with
the tribe in developing of
contacts with tribal members
community members extended
family members it specifically
identifies lists specifically
those active efforts that the
current bill the current
legislation the current statutes
do not so it goes step by step
in to try to eliminate early
intervention notice upon
invented investigations said of
notice upon removal after
custody notice a right now is
usually to tribes after a
petitions filed with this early
intervention would notice an
active efforts specifically
identifying with the state needs
to do to enforce and to do what
they need to do to comply with
the mandates of federal
legislation.
madam chair also in this or for
this email to to the the chair
of the committee but basically
they're they're asking that
after a relationship has been
developed between the child in
the foster parents of the foster
parents have the ability to
advocate of.
For the for the child and the
second point that was made
Is that
Basically allowing.
Allowing some process during
during the adoptions all for the
Mr Frank's email to the chair
and maybe she can directed to
the appropriate party to see if
there's any.
Being here that that needs to be
addressed in those amendments
before does she need to ensure
thank you.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Thank you next we have
Representative guy goes.
Thank you madam chair and the
thank you Representative night
but for bringing up those points
I think those are are well taken
points
First a I also wanted to
acknowledge and thank governor's
Lachey for his beautiful story
eight eight I think that that's
so important to understand how
children sometimes are bounced
around through foster care I've
been a social worker in a child
advocate for over twenty five
years and
see see this very difficult
story on a daily basis and so I
just want to stress how
important this piece of
legislation as
and to make sure that we really
acknowledge how so many times
that are native children that
enter foster care that they lose
they have the potential to lose
their their language and their
culture and their ties to their
family so this is just cruise up
crucial legislation to
maintaining their own identity
so thank you for that
In the I see in the bill that
there there's going to be
training offered to anybody who
is working within the child
welfare system which includes
judges of foster parents causes
of social workers and I think
that that piece is is crucial
the piece that I was a one of
the pieces I was a little
concerned about is
That the child that is so many
times what I have seen is that
what there is a reach out to
the child's tribe and there may
not be
a follow up.
And so that child is in foster
care and there there are you
know whether there is in the
same foster home or being
bounced around I think that
there needs to be a more
dedicated effort to work with
the tribe's to make sure that
the tribes have a sufficient
number of foster parents or they
are working with effective in
within the tribe to make sure
that
these families these children
can return to a family member
within the tribe sometimes what
we are seeing is that maybe
members of the tribe who who are
related to this child don't have
the resources or don't
understand the process and so I
think it's really important that
that education is given to them
as well
so I I would hope that once this
if this bill goes through and I
hope it does that we can then
start looking at some
appropriation money to really
work on the the side of
Preparing families to take on
these children because so many
times they've been victims of
horrendous abuse and neglect and
you know for a child who doesn't
necessarily have a relationship
with their tribal family that
tribal families going to need to
have extra resources to learn
how to deal with those behaviors
in that madam chair I'll hand it
back over
one more thing I think what what
representative never did say
when that child is building
those bonds with these foster
parents it's really important
whether the child is is returned
or stays there that there is a
communication both ways with the
tribe should should the child
stay with a foster parent that
does not belong to the tribe
that the tribes still needs to
make sure that they have the
have access to that child so
that child doesn't lose their
identity it culture language
that sort of thing I think that
that is crucial in these these
cases so with that madam chair I
I will turn it back over thank
you for allowing me to say a few
words.
Thank you representative I don't
see any more of a hands raised
from my colleague so
Representative Louis would you
like to make closing remarks.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members
I am writing down all of your
comments and I thank you for
them I just want to note that
CYFD has done a great job in a
notification to the tribe's when
tribes excuse me when children
are in their custody and I think
that will.
Have a long lasting a factor on
those relationships with foster
parents at that intervention is
done early that's one of the
reasons why we do want to codify
the work that they're doing so
that we can ensure that that
communication and cooperation
accord  between the tribe's
tribal families and CYFD.
And again I just want to thank
the experts that testified
especially governor touchy and
sharing his story and his
experience we thank you for your
leadership and he's just a prime
example of what children can
become and do for their tribes
if they're giving that
opportunity so now at governor
to let J. and as he mentioned
you know.
The the ultimate result here is
not only the prosperity of the
tribe and the tribal community
but the existence of the tribe
and tribal communities in New
Mexico so that's really
significant and I'm glad he
brought out that issue and
just a shout out to all the
social workers you guys are
doing a fantastic job I know
it's a heavy load to carry and I
just want to thank you
personally for all the work that
you're doing out there and my
final closing statement is that
what House Bill to all nine will
do is it will really strengthen
and the joint efforts at is
currently occurring between the
tribes and CYFD why CYFD so I
job members to vote in favor of
this bill thank you madam chair
thank you committee members.
Thank you Representative less
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair all move a do pass
on house bill two nine.
I'm sorry.
Thank you we have a motion by
Representative Nyberg for a do
pass and a second by
Representative Eli for
thank you pass it is moved to
pass House Bill.
Two zero nine and at where to
take role please.
Representative Chasey is excused
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part.
yes I look forward to the
amendments.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
If.
Our madam vice chair.
Yes.
Yes yes.
Madam chair with that we have
nine NM permitted sorry eight in
the affirmative and one excuse.
Thank you Representative worse
you have it you pass.
On house bill two zero nine.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members.
Thank you and and now we will
proceed to the next bill House
Bill two three one.
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members
We just check to see if we have
any expert witnesses I don't
know if.
The office of the secretary of
state.
Might be here.
And I'll just go ahead and I'll
just go ahead and start madam
chair if that's okay while we're
waiting for experts to join.
Okay yes thank you
Representative.
Great thank you so house bill
two thirty one man's parts of
the election code and it's
really to protect the voting
rights of voters of an Indian
nation tribe or pueblo by
ensuring access to a polling
place within the boundaries of
the Indian nation tribe or
pueblo during the statewide
election so we have three point.
Following changes the first is
to rent the rent the closure or
consolidation of a polling place
located on an Indian nation
tribe or pueblo without the
written consent of that tried
ensure the second one is ensure
that there will be at least one
polling location within the
boundaries of the tribe even
when there are public health
concerns restricting entry to
the tribe and the third is that
it would provide that the
trident nascent meant a written
request to the county where
we're at least one alternate
voting location or mobile
alternative voting location on
the Indian tribe no later than
one Hundred Days before a
statewide election so if
everyone recalls some of these
changes are maybe all of them
were actually made when we met
during special session really
looking to
allow these opportunities to
always be available to the
tribe's so that we can allow
folks within the community to
have that opportunity to vote
and with that madam chair
I want to
let the secretary.
Offer any other remarks thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Maggie
Toulouse Oliver secretary of
state I just concurrent with
that The presentation made by a
chairwoman Lewis this is really
mostly just carrying forward the
protections put in place for
tribal voters
you know things happen we we
learned in twenty twenty things
happen that we never could have
anticipated and the upshot of it
was that many of our tribal
communities throughout the state
due to the fact that their
tribal lands were closed as a
result of the pandemic we're
also able to use three fourths
here pulling location due to
certain provisions in state law
and this would protect those
voters
well we are moving up that
request for early voting site
two hundred days before election
day right now county clerks
establish all other pulling
excuse me all other early voting
locations ninety days before
election day and right now a
request from a tribal location
has to be made in November of
odd numbered year before an
election obviously in twenty
twenty nobody we had never even
heard of COVID nineteen
and so tribes were really hot
and aware and with almost no
ability to.
I'll be able to find some
alternative
voting options for their tribal
members because the deadline had
passed we too long ago at those
locations the state our office
will still pay for those
locations there won't be a
burden on the county clerk for
that purpose and with that will
just be here for any questions
you may have thank you.
Thank you Secretary.
Representative do you have other
witnesses.
You madam chair a committee
member's pots that we're ready
to answer any questions we hear
from the public.
Okay thank you so now we will at
conduct a poll and give an
opportunity for those who are in
favor or opposed to the bill to
vote so let's get at the poll
going.
Point of order you're showing HB
to eleven in the all not H. B.
two thirty one.
Thank you we will make that
correction.
So that call is complete and and
once again this was for house
bill two thirty one and we have
thirty seven in favor.
Okay now we will go to public
comments and we will begin with
and those favor of the bill and
begin with excited Chavis.
Yet a shakeup the Chavis you
share with the initial piece on
the budget need not cried then
at Mr chair a case on it that's
another what's the hope but if
any al you will miss at the good
morning members of the committee
and chair thank you for the
opportunity to provide comment
on this bill I am the executive
director of naval education
project an animated vote we are
engaged in helping to
Help the communities around our
state with the voting process we
do a lot of education and
advocacy on behalf of our
communities and what we know is
during the
The primary election we had a
lot of
Issues with the polling
locations and the closures of
tribal borders we are in support
of this bill because we know
that it guarantees that tribes
have a polling location on their
tribal lands
when these types of instances
happened and this bill helps to
reaffirm tribal sovereignty by
allowing them to close those
borders when necessary to help
protect our communities while
still maintaining a polling
location we know that these
safeguards that were put in
during the special session help
to prevent the closures of a lot
of polling locations during the
general election so we strongly
support this bill to help our
communities continue to advocate
for themselves and have the
ability to vote during health
crisis these are other areas
where they might need to close
their borders the other thing
that I think is key in this is
that being able to make those
adjustments within a Hundred
Days of the actual election day
makes more sense rather than
having to make those request a
whole year in advance so we
would really really asking the
members of the committee to
please support this bill and we
think sponsor Georgene Louis for
bringing this forward thank you
so much.
Thank you next we have had a
Burling.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Hannah Burling I'm
speaking for the league of women
voters of New Mexico.
The league is in strong support
of this bill we advocate for
methods that increase voter
participation and for the
protection of the right of every
citizen to vote thank you.
Thank you next we have amber
Carrillo.
Yes I'm here.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is amber
Correo koleksi Hopa I'm from the
public of the gonna I am also
speaking on behalf of common
cause New Mexico as also of
someone who is closely
affiliated with the the outreach
efforts to engage native
Americans and voting
since nineteen ninety eight I've
done a lot of voter registration
and then helped with campaigns
throughout the periods of the
what we call the election season
I'm I rise in strong support of
H. B. two thirty one this
legislation guarantees voters
residing on sovereign land a
polling location it guarantees
them the chance to go in person
at a polling place.
It also ensures some of New
Mexicos most vulnerable the
right to cast a ballot without
having to travel long distances
and it ensures some of New
Mexicos most vulnerable will not
have to put their lives at risk
by choosing to exercise their
constitutional right to cast a
ballot during the pandemic most
importantly to HB to thirty one
insurers voters residing on
sovereign land are not
disenfranchised and afforded
every opportunity to cast about
it like all New Mexicans I would
like to thank the sponsor and
the folks at the New Mexico and
need to vote for their hard work
intending this legislation and I
encourage the committee to to
pass H. B. two thirty one I
would also just like to say that
it is really important that
these changes that are
incorporated to at
especially the one Hundred Days
for tribes to be able to work
through the there are various
through the secretary state and
then through the county clerk's
that that makes a huge
difference for our public
leadership and tribes and it it
it brings us into the twentieth
century so it does a lot to
advance the civil and voting
rights of native American so I
thank you for your time today
and urge you to do passed thank
you L. A..
Thank you next we have a leader
Suazo.
All right can you hear me.
Hello.
Yes we can hear you thank you
what the hell hello everybody
thank you chair we're giving me
the opportunity to to address
this committee my name is Lee to
pi Sano swathes of washing away
our goal may echo what.
I'm from the Pueblo sub Act
language
My mother was on the hunt known
people clad Act one and my
father was made hello Mister
plan from the government I am
also the chair of the native
American democratic Office of
New Mexico.
During this unexpected election
the native American democratic
caucus of New Mexico working
many of the tribal communities
to assist in voter turnout
during this pandemic.
Unfortunately or.
Some tribes may be unexpected
decision to close or consolidate
their polling locations due to
the fear of spreading COVID
nineteen within their
communities which was
understandable.
Eight to thirty one provides
protection for polling locations
on native lands by requiring a
written agreement I didn't
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
to close or consolidate holding
locations on their tribal lands.
This action faster is better
communication among the tribal
governments and the county
clerk's office regarding those
polling location on their
tribal.
Then the native American
democratic caucus of New Mexico
wholeheartedly support HP to
thirty one and asked that all
you members support this bill as
well thank you representative
Lewis for sponsoring this bill
this much needed bill our tribal
communities
and thank you committee chair
and committee members.
Thank you next we have who do we
have the next we have the least
Guerrero.
Yes hi good morning madam chair
and members of the committee
many mysteries Garratt all I am
the legislative and political
organizer for the Sierra Club
Rio Grande chapter and we
support this bill last year I
got to do some political work in
a different US employment
capacity not with the Sierra
Club
but with an organization and we
were working on making sure that
people knew about well by mail
specifically in the tribal.
Counties and.
This bill to me is really
important I think we need to
make it accessible for all New
Mexicans
to be able to vote you know we
we are still in the middle of
the pandemic hopefully will be
out of a pandemic but next time
elections are out but either way
you know we just need to make it
better in excess when I'll
always support built into that
so again that's that's my own
personal reason to support this
bill but also the thirty five
thousand members of the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter support
this bill thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you next we have Carl that
creating a whole for you'll have
to help me pronounce your last
name Carla thank you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee and
creating Halford with the center
for civic policy and we stand in
support of this bill we
encourage a do pass we believe
that no voter should have to
hassle in order to cast their
vote and have their voice be
heard we believe that this bill
does what it needs to and
provides ample flexibility to
weather events like comment or
other unforeseen circumstances
with that we think the sponsor
and the committee thank you.
Thank you next we have Francis
Gonzalez.
Yes good morning madam chair
madam vice chair members of the
board Mr chair of a whole I am
warm springs Apache as well as a
member of the other content
progressive caucus I am the CD
to chair first topless New
Mexico as well as part of the
Democrat party of.
Santa Fe County and I also see
it as vice chair on the chairs
committee for the state and some
of the things that that had
occurred as we said everybody
said during the pandemic but
other concerns I had come out
with some of the reports of some
of the county chairs are
disenfranchised seen on some of
our native folks so the
important thing is that when I
think of Georgene US our sister
for pushing this through it
needs to happen so that way
everybody's on the same page
there's actually part of the
election law which will and a
lot of the voter suppression
that still happens to our people
whether we are on also
date of land the other thing is
that this year we incorporated
within the state party our own
tribal organizers to go on to
our.
For tribal lands and to get
folks done so with more of the
outreach that there is this bill
would definitely be in favor so
that voting convenience centers
are closed ballot places for
when we do the absentee voting
that there will be ballot boxes
available for people as well as
all the information and it's
really good that is has come
through I appreciate or
secretary of state support the
league of women voters
sister sways so from our native
American caucus which I'm also a
member of as well so thank you
for your time a do pass and I'm
going.
Thank you next we have letter
Gorman from the Navajo Nation.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and
sponsor.
She can assist in in Sloan to
streaming buses to.
Speaking on behalf of the Navajo
Nation Human Rights Commission.
The commission gets involved in
variety of voter rights issues.
On the Navajo Nation there are
several polling places and it's
good to see that the counties
make the effort to coincide
Navajo polling places with their
respective county polling places
clearly this measure house bill
two thirty one respects the
Navajo nation's effort to try
and make every opportunity
available to the voters
are registered on the Navajo
Nation not only with Navajo
elections but also state county
and federal elections this is a
very good measure the only point
that I want to add is that
there's also a need as these
counties are section two three
counties that extend onto the
Navajo Nation the need to ensure
that language assistance or also
appropriately addressed during
these times especially during
the case with COVID nineteen
thank you.
Thank you next we have John
house.
Good morning madam chair
committee members on a
Representative.
I'm speaking on behalf of
Representative us New Mexico a
nonprofit organization that
supports democracy reforms and
protections.
We in New Mexico have long
failed to understand some of the
unique obstacles the native
Americans living on tribal lands
face in terms of registering to
vote and voting.
And we have failed to take
appropriate action to help.
So this bill is long past due.
But will make a big difference
Cephas to facilitating the
ability of native Americans on
tribal lands to include their
voices.
In the democratic process.
As is their right.
For those and other reasons
mentioned.
We represent us New Mexico
strongly urge you to vote yes to
pass this bill.
Thank you next we have Valerie
bell St.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Valerie Boston early there was
forward together action and I
would also like to mention that
I work as to children's program
quit ordinary workers in the
public library and I wholly
support house bill two thirty
one because I was able to
volunteer with organizers in my
community to help with some
booths where registering to vote
to encourage my community
members to vote and we
distributed the PED he's a
sanitizer stat sisters were also
talked about and also with the
neighbor education project and
it is important that our
families realize that.
That their voices are important
It begins to family and when
parents step up to Boyce.
I've already it is setting and
teaching our little ones on the
stage and I would like to say
that I was a part of history
here and soon we were able to
come up to hunt two thousand six
hundred eighty eight members
vote and that is the highest
number of bony never done in my
Pueblo.
So I support this bill and I
would just like to.
I leave you with two statements
on the human flesh again our we
will respect one another respect
our tribal lands and give us to
space and this bill that we can
continue to build up.
The voices and that is in
regards to home.
One now give me more give us our
turn to raise our voices as
well.
Thank you next we have Derrick
land.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Derek Landon I'm representing
New Mexico voices for children I
want to thank the sponsor for
bring this important bill
forward we are in strong support
of this bill because we as a
society should be doing
everything we can to make voting
more accessible to all New
Mexicans we have recently seen
unprecedented attacks on our
democracy in this bill protects
democratic process by working
towards ensuring that
historically marginalized people
who've long been disenfranchised
will better be able to have
their voices heard we urge you
to support this critically
important bill thank you.
Thank you next we have Austin we
aqui.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Austin
we act I'm here on behalf of the
entire nation so I and I stand
in support of eighty two thirty
one it's not every day you get
stand in support of legislation
which has already us already
this affects that was added to
have but H. B. two thirty one is
that
it showed that these provisions
help or not the native folks and
make sure that it was safe and
accessible for tribes in New
Mexico
and it gives the flexibility it
respect for tribal sovereignty
that say like next I have so we
stand in full support of eighty
two thirty one
thank you sponsor and that
worked on this does that we hope
that the committee will also
support thanks very much.
Thank you next we have Charlotte
let.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the commission the
committee my name is Charlotte
little I come from the pueblos
as potentially be inTaos I'm
here this morning to register my
support for house bill two
thirty one.
For more than fifteen years I
have worked with many tribes and
and numerous colleagues to
inform educate and encourage
native people to vote.
This bill will ensure voters on
sovereign lands have the
opportunity to vote.
I thank you and the sponsor for
all of your work on this bill
and urged committee members to
pass house bill two thirty one
thank you.
Thank you next we have sherry
bell sent.
One.
Hi good morning can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Good morning to shake up on lack
at the can now sherry bassin let
she know what she when an air
call not that bank and I want
to.
Good morning today how are you
my name is sherry thousand I am
from Sony Pueblo and I am
sending a crane clan and left
the eagle.
Today I would like to ask your
support for this bill as a
grassroots organizer I had the
privilege of reaching out to my
community members for supporting
absentee ballot requesting and
voting as well as registering
and getting PPE kits to organize
was settings during the voting
time and I would like to
publicly thank New Mexico native
vote us to don Chavis amber
Carrillo common cause New Mexico
and Tweedy
chair New Mexico of the
democratic caucus of New Mexico
Kiana and that cutting for all
the support that they gave
during election time to native
communities this bill will
greatly support they impacts
because as my sister Valerie
pass and has stated we were a
part of history for our
community for geo TV during this
time so please support this bill
and I thank you for your time
today as.
Thank you and we will take to
our last comments and those will
be from lily Irvin Vitela and
Curt Granger thank you.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and the
president and executive.
You'll need to and mute yourself
we lost you.
Sorry about that madam chair
committee members my name is
limited in the time that the
president and executive director
of New Mexico First and we stand
in strong support of house bill
two thirty one as it's aligned
with our public policy
priorities around good
governance we think that the
right of people to participate
not just in name but in
practicality is really important
so protecting polling places is
vitally important thank you.
Current ranger.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kurt rigor and I'm the
director of loose from advocacy
administrative New Mexico
Lutheran advocacy ministry also
speaks on behalf of the New
Mexico conference of churches
and ecumenical organization that
is made up of a Christian
denominational bodies both
Protestant and Catholic for all
the reasons previously stated
I'm here to offer our fervent
support for H. B. two thirty one
thank you.
Thank you now we will at.
Go to committee members.
Committee.
And we have Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
I think I understand what the
intention is but the words on
the paper I don't believe get us
where we need to go.
The polling places closed at
seven PM on election.
Yes it says here that a poly
place shall not be closed or
consolidated with other polling
locations without written
agreement of the Indian the the
the.
I think that's the wrong word I
think you mean that the holy
place shall not be
The lead from the list of
polling places that have been
established by the the county
commission I understand the
intent correct you're not
intending to.
Change the time the polling
places closed are year well
madam chair madam chair.
You madam chair and
representative neighbor we are
not intending to use the time of
the police eradication but to
operate after the Indian tribe
I'm not sure how different that
is from the language used and
the bill from the special
session that I'll have a
secretary of state answer that
question thank you madam
secretary.
madam chair madam chair and
representative neighbor that is
the language that we use and
that's before I don't I I do
that representatives point
certainly that is not the intent
there of course other provisions
within the election code that we
do require the polling location
to be open I you know it's
really up to the sponsor but
you know again that there there
is other there are other
provisions of the law that the
hours of operation but if you
wanted to use the term you know
canceled perhaps or
Modified you know it it's really
up to you madam chair sponsor
and and Representative.
Madam chair and and
Madam secretary.
I really do think the work
clothes is not the proper term
here because closed.
Is.
That we messed up in the special
session where we messed up but
the closure of a polling places
is a designated time on election
day
and what you're talking about
here is that you don't want to
have the county commission
removed from the list of polling
locations a polling location on
tribal lands without the tribe's
consent I I understand or we say
I.
Understand the intent of what
we're trying to get out there.
Madam chair representative our
election director Mandy Vigil
suggests the term eliminate I
would.
Great I'm glad we're on the same
page.
Okay so so then my second the
concern is later in paragraphs
do
You madam chair what happens if
the.
Order closing the reservation
occurs on Saturday before the
election that.
And my ideas can you physically
accomplish the mandates of this
bill if that were to occur.
Maybe that's a question of the
secretary of state as well.
At.
Madam chair for settlement
Sanchez if you like we we
certainly experienced a lot of
last minute changes during
particularly the primary
election and as we were heading
into early voting in the general
election for twenty twenty
Navajo Nation in particular had
More strict
lockdown requirements that went
into place and the county clerk
do communicate closely with
those at the tribal government
when that situation occurred so
I you know I think the point of
this bill is that you know if
there is a request that comes
from the tribal government even
if it is the best Saturday
before election day
then at you know.
Then it is really up to the
county clerk's in our office and
the tribal governments work
together to try to accommodate
that request but generally when
there have been last minute
changes there have always been
accommodation to keep that
polling place opened not to
close it or to eliminate it if
we're going to use that term
so it's it's much easier to stop
something that was going to
happen then to try to get it
going at the very last minute so
I think if your question is
they're going to stay the
Saturday before election day we
want to close this location
It entirely for election day
that would that would actually
require a court order in
addition to the request of the
tribal government.
madam chair and and madam
secretary my real question is.
How do you accomplish having at
least one polling location
within the boundaries.
Yes one was not already there
you're not closing one your
potentially adding one how does
that occur with three days
notice and and and madam chair
and representative neighbor we
already have the requirements
for establishment of polling
location on that have to be done
by the county commission effort
early location and have to be
done a hundred days before
election day madam chair and
representative.
So madam chair and and madam
secretary the answer is you
can't do that three days out.
Madam chair and representative
correct.
And madam chair and secretary
this bill if it becomes law
mandates.
That polling place.
There shall be at least one
polling location within the
boundaries of the Indian nation
that has closed this board.
Right Madam chair representative
and that would have been
established well before.
The time period that we're
talking about madam chair and
representative.
Not necessarily.
The polling locations are are
established the well in advance
I agree Madam chair of the and
madam secretary.
Yes there's not a polling
location.
And.
Three days before the election.
The broad close as it gets or
all those boundaries and causes
this provision to be implemented
then.
Your county clerk one of the
county clerk's and your office
are going to have to create at
least one polling location
within the boundaries of that
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
according to the terms of this
bill.
And and madam chair
representative I'm I'm sorry I'm
really not meaning to be
argumentative do we have other
provisions in the election code
that call for the establishment
of polling location this is
calling for making sure that
there is tribal consent for the
elimination of polling locations
so the polling location within
the boundaries of the tribe or
pueblo would have already been
established again within you
know within the confines of the
county commission resolution.
Further the up to hundred days
before election day request this
particular provision.
Applied backward to that not to
establishing polling places.
Madam chair and madam secretary.
I think you need to look at the
first sentence of paragraph the
separately from the second
sentence of paragraph two
because the first sentence of
paragraph the talks about what
you were just talking about the
second sentence of paragraph
the.
Deals where.
What happens when they tried.
Does lock down.
It forces there shall be at
least one polling location
within the boundaries of the
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
and we've already established
that maybe can't be done.
So and I I think I understand
where you're going now Madam
chair representative so my a
reading of this provision and
and why it's included in here.
Is such that even after let's
let's say we have it a tribe or
pueblo that has you know.
I polling locations.
if there is a a lock down a
public you know public health
pandemic and with the consent of
the Indian nation tribe or
pueblo there are elimination and
or other modifications that are
requests.
We're not eliminating all of
them there will still be at
least one that that is the
intent of the provision madam
chair and representative.
And madam chair and madam
secretary of.
I I am not familiar with.
Any of the polling places in
Indian country
so I'm not going to venture
as to whether or not there is at
least one on every
For every Indian nation tribe or
pueblo but I do know of at least
one.
Place on interstate ten that
could say we need a polling
place on our ten acres of land
adjacent to interstate ten and
this fall requires.
And Representative neighbor I
think I can bring some light to
the issue so the trying to
already have polling locations
however
the polling locations according
to the current law and I believe
issues with the county clerk's
must be open to everyone within
that precinct or or or
they must be open to everyone so
that's what happened when the
pandemic that's what caused the
issue when the impact pandemic
occurred is that the tribe's
closed down three to everyone
except tribal members and tribal
residents so without this
provision then they would not be
afforded that polling location
because it wouldn't be
accessible to every others that
were in that area as well so
that's what this is doing
because the tribes or any do you
have calling locations what is
not going to be like oh you know
it's three days before or even a
hundred days before we need one
it's just allowing them to stay
open and in in the event that
they do close the boundaries to
tribal members tribal residents
or other authorized individuals
that are allowed to enter the
Pueblo.
Madam chair and madam chair this
does.
This doesn't address that issue.
This does not prohibit.
For this does not to provide for
Other.
Non tribal members to vote in a
polling place
within the boundaries of the
Indian nation tribe or pueblo.
Nothing here that says that.
Well.
Right correct madam chair
representative about the whole
point because right now current
law requires.
All of those polling location at
their voting convenience centers
which many are on election day
to be open to the public and
what happened during the primary
with that those polling
locations had to be closed or
moved off and tribal land in
order to accommodate the at
public health closed down of the
tribal lands so what this is
doing is saying okay let's say
that tribal land is locked down
people can't come in or out the
people that are still here can
still have the polling location
even if people from the outside
can't come at that bad of the
purpose Madam chair
representative.
Well and and in many areas
particularly in the Navajo
checkerboard area you have
tribal members and non tribal
members that I would assume
would still vote in a polling
location on tribal lands.
I'm sorry madam chair
representative could you say
that again.
Well in in some areas you have.
Non tribal members living in the
same areas as tribal members and
the holy location may be out the
tribal location and those people
who are not tribal members would
still need to vote that.
Particular the checkerboard area
Madam chair representative if
they are living with and that
tribal community then they will
have access to that polling
place Madam chair
representative.
I would agree and and I don't
think that this bill does what
you all are reading them to I
think that it's pretty narrow.
And I and I hope we chains were
closed on on line eighteen of
paid for but the second the
second issue and I still see it
as an issue particularly with
respect to the Fort Sill Apache
five or ten acres down on I. T.
M..
You're not intending to have a
polling location there even
though I think this requires.
Is that madam chair and and
madam chair is that.
Am I reading that correctly.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative I'm I'm
looking at it right now and I
think the the the sentence that
you're looking at is that second
so it's the last complete
sentence on page four F. as a
result of public health
concerns.
Voters registered with in the
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
are unable to leave the Indian
nation tribe or pueblo during
the time when voting occurs
regardless of whether voting
three voters residing outside
the boundaries of the Indian
nation tribe or pueblo are able
to access such polling locations
there shall be at least one
polling location within the
boundaries of the Indian nation
tribe or pueblo is that correct.
That's the Senate just ma'am.
I I guess and we are just going
to agree to disagree because.
you know if there is a public
health order I'll tell you right
now I'm actually at work at the
public just to pay I was hoping
to head back to Santa Fe and I
just got caught up at work but
the public to see gays currently
closed unless you're a tribal
member or tribal resident or an
authorized individual out to
access the trying so last
November when election occurred
the pueblo was closed and so
only the individuals at we're
here were allowed to vote and
they actually act on that one
day of election day they allow
others to comment about just
that wasn't a choice that the
tribe mate but have they not
make that choice and they said
we want to keep that on lockdown
then Santa Fe County would have
sent one sorry because you're
denying the public access you
can't have a polling location so
this is what that sentence does
it allows the tribe during a
time of closure to to keep that
public look for excuse me to
keep that holding location even
though the public is not allowed
access to call on on the tribal
land.
And madam chair and and madam
chair I.
I wish the that's what this that
are I really wish said that the
it were worded to my at the
point.
Clear and I'm more worried about
the the actual language on the
paper and possibly requiring
things that can't be done to be
done and
certs if I understand it
basically what what we're
wanting to do is to make sure
that there's at least one
polling location on every.
Indian nation tribe or pueblo.
That is accessible during times
where there may be a public
health concern.
I and I wholeheartedly.
I I just.
Don't.
Why the language that of of.
Says there shall be at least one
polling location if you're
telling me every.
Every Indian nation tribe or
pueblo in New Mexico has at
least one polling location on it
then.
I do yes I'm
Worried about something that
that's not practical but if
there are any.
Yes.
Indian nations tribes or pueblos
in New Mexico that do not have a
polling location.
Then you have a problem with
this language.
And those are those are things
that I can't answer I.
Imagine that the Los crucis
Where nobody lives I imagine
there's not a polling location
on the Fort Sill Apache lands
out the middle of
County at that point maybe Dona
Ana but the.
That's my concern.
Madam chair representative just
to point out really quick and I
hear I hear exactly what you're
saying Representative
Keep in mind the language on
page four starting on line
twenty one F. as a result of the
public health concerns voters
registered within the Indian
nation tribe or pueblo are
unable to leave so again madam
chair representative I'm not.
I should be aware of whether or
not we have registered voters
within that community I don't
believe that we do there are
already requirements for at in
other sections of the law as as
we've kind of been talking about
add that that do have these
minimum requirements and tribal
lands
and so I think that this this
thank that scenario you're
talking about doesn't apply
I will say however Madam chair
representative and madam sponsor
that if there's a desire at two.
We have given this languages
second lot
it in the Judiciary Committee we
would be happy to work with you
on that but again I think that
that language addresses the
issue that you're talking about
Madam chair representative.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary thank you
representative Representative
two I know that you know the
tribe that you're referring to
is a federally recognized tribe
however they don't have a lot of
members living on the
reservation because of the lack
of infrastructure there so I
don't think that that tribe has
worked with the
probably Dona ana county clerk
to establish a voting location I
don't imagine that they what but
because it would only be a
handful of people and share
but but I I get what you're
saying.
but I think because the process
has already been established in
parts of other law we're certain
things have to be done prior to
all of this so let's just say
that that tried and says yes we
want a polling location they
would have to working it out
with the I I believe it's the
Dona Ana County I'm whatever
county it is
to to work out the Kinks fare
but it would be but the process
followed by all of the other
tribes and the county clerk's
that they're working with so it
wouldn't be you know at on the
snap of a finger Hey we want to
calling vocation you must get it
pressed there has to be other
processes that are follow to
ensure that that happens.
Madam chair and madam chair I
wish that that's what this.
and I would just suggest the
Representative paragraph the
needs some work to accomplish
what I think are laudable goals
are and I don't think we ought
to create a potential problems
And.
In enacting of.
Statutes that the the that have
those problems so I would I
would encourage you and more
madam secretary to look at it
and to
certainly change a word on
on line eighteen and maybe
address some of the concerns in
lines twenty one through twenty
five all paid for in the first
three line say I to accomplish
the laudable goals to the I I
hear you sent
I think it's I think it's
something that probably does
need to be done and and there
ought to be a mechanism to
accomplish that I just think the
words on the paper
need something and and that we
oughta
trying to provide adequate
direction in the in the bill of
forty on the statute that gives
our everyone.
The framework by which they can
work through these these issues
that that may be raised in the
future hopefully that provision
will never come into us
hopefully we don't have to ever
do what we're doing right now.
Yeah the the again if if we're
going to set something up let's
accomplish your intent with
words that that actually
accomplish seven to so thank you
madam chair thank you madam
chair and thank you madam
secretary.
Thank you Representative and and
madam chair if I may I wind up
close I would actually be in
agreement with the
With the amendment to page four
line eighteen to delete the word
closed and Lou there of insert
the word eliminate it.
I think that was what
Representative night bird was
also just referencing right now
and then we can look at the
other language on lines twenty
one through twenty five.
Thank you representative would
you like to do that now.
Okay thank you so
Shall we move at.
Showing that amendment.
Madam chair all move the
amendment changing the work
closed online add to that page
for to the word eliminated.
And I'll second that.
Thank you so we have a motion at
and data the motion to that
amendment was expressed by
Representative night for and we
have a second on the amendment.
And is there any opposition or
objection to that amendment.
we will show everyone.
In the affirmative for proving
that then.
Representative you have and
adopted amendment.
Committee members.
Do we have further discussion.
Representative Eli Madam chair
of the do pass of house bill two
thirty one as amended.
Thank you I have a motion for it
to pass by Representative Eli as
Amanda.
And I will second that.
you.
I second that motion and at
where to take role for about.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey is excused
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part.
No and I'd like to explain more
about this Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes sport is sits amended before
it gets to help stricter shared.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair blue.
You madam chair with that we
have one excused R. seven in the
affirmative and one and the
negative.
Thank you representative will
assist you have a do pass on
house bill two thirty one as
amended.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members.
Thank you for the yes
Representative Nighbor.
Madam chair.
And and madam chair I would
really love to support this bill
and will do so and in Judiciary
if I if we can tidy up the
language all ages four and five.
I think it's it's needed the the
I think we need to accomplish
your intent and not necessarily
what the words help paper right
now thank you.
Thank you representative.
Number.
Did we have others who wanted to
explain their vote.
We will now move to House Bill
to eleven and I will return the
gavel to chairwoman Lewis.
You madam chair I am just going
to look for Representative Dow
it you and the witnesses can
raise your hands we can will be
over to the panelists.
Great it looks like we're
getting folks over.
And maybe it is Representative
figure are you going to present
on behalf of Representative
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow there she is
she's hearing the same owner and
president first okay thank you
madam chair thank you I I with
that being heard so.
We'll get our over.
Sure is do you see her.
Madam chair I promoted her to
panelist she was the first one
I'm not sure where she went.
You madam chair when you are
okay great thank you
Representative Dow welcome go
ahead when you're ready.
Thank you madam chair members of
the the committee thank you so
much for allowing at
Representative Figueroa and I to
co president of this bipartisan
bill for your consideration
around redistricting and so New
Mexicans across the political
probate persuasions are eager
for a fair transparent and
equitable redistricting process
we have experienced New Mexico
expensive legal battles that
result in confusing and and
crazy lawsuits over six point
two million dollars we spent in
the last redistricting process
battling out the final results
so these partisan battles among
legislators results in these
legal battles and it undermines
the public confidence in our
like for real process so by
creating new rules and processes
as this redistricting act does
it makes the process less
confusing more engaging with the
public and provides conflict
resolution prior to final
decisions about maps without
involving the courts that's the
idea an independent advisory
commission list of community
input about communities of
interest and very disturbing
math it that's the inputs with
constitutional and voting rights
act requirements and it assist
the legislators and selecting
maps from three to five choices
that would would be selected
through this process and I will
pass this over to my co sponsor
one of many co sponsors who
signed on I think we're past
over thirty or thirty co
sponsors very bipartisan
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dow I am so
pleased to be here and stand up
for what I see as a good
governance bill this is about
fair and transparent
redistricting which is the
responsibility lay it on us as
legislators every ten years
through the New Mexico
constitution and we need to
Cecil this duty in a fair and
transparent way to restore
public faith it's time to do it
well and do it right as my co
sponsor pointed out ten years
ago this cost us several million
dollars ten years prior to that
it costs the state of New Mexico
several million dollars we can't
afford to keep getting it wrong
we need to do this well we need
to involve the public and we
think this bill provides a way
to accomplish that.
We have an expert witness to see
here to speak with you and I
believe you have brought them
into the panelists room already
uncle Willie Irvine right della
and retired justice Edward
Thomas if it's already madam
chair may they speak.
Representative thank you.
Madam chair co sponsors
Committee representatives my
name is lily Irvin Vitela and
I'm the president and executive
director of New Mexico first
we're statewide nonprofit
organization that engages New
Mexicans and public policy by
bringing together people from
diverse political perspectives
cultural linguistic and
geographic perspectives as well
in that way we brought together
a task force in the fall
of degroot diverse group of
stakeholders to look at
redistricting in New Mexico and
to come up with some decisions
and recommendations to help
support and guide the work of
the legislature they were over a
hundred forty people who were
either nominated or self
nominated to serve on the task
force obviously that's too big a
task force to to get things done
in a short amount of time but we
were able to select twenty five
people which included eight of
our state legislators we had
representation from both
chambers we had representation
from both parties including
minority leader Townsend
Representative funeral of
Representative heart of
Representative Dow to approve
our co sponsors here today on
the Senate side we had Senators
Moore's Moore's R. T. C. Pino
Pinto annual and in addition to
that we had researchers we had
good governance and get out the
vote activists we had a whole
range of political perspectives
and really what we were aiming
for New Mexico first wasn't a
particular policy solution but
it was the wisdom of community
to be lifted up to problem solve
around openness transparency and
equity we were really
intentional on the selection of
the task force retired Chief
Justice
Travis and chief judge judge
committee co chaired the task
force for us we provided
background and research
including information on civic
engagement a report that was
conducted by Dr again Sanchez.
With UNM and Latino decisions in
which they actually interviewed
five hundred registered voters
and ask them about their
attitudes and beliefs about
redistricting and thirty nine
percent of the folks who
responded identified as liberal
thirty one percent identified as
conservative as as moderate and
twenty percent identified as
conservative and all of those
respondents eighty nine percent.
We're very interested and
greater transparency in the just
redistricting process and ninety
three percent of respondents
said that they would like the
Legislature to consider new laws
for an independent redistricting
task force so from that task
force they were nineteen
recommendations I won't do a
deep dive of all of them but I'm
happy to read share the report
if you didn't see it right
before the busy influx of emails
before the holidays but what I
would tell you is that there was
one overarching recommendations
which was to move the.
What are currently guidelines
and make the rules and process
codified in law so there was it
wasn't optional but there was
real clarity around how to
approach this in a way that is
less contentious and has more
buying and the other major
recommendation was around having
an independent advisory
commission in the short term to
help that public input and bring
that forward to legislators for
consideration the more moderate
point included things like
definitions and it seems small
but it's mighty to understand
what a community of interest is
and then there were some
recommendations that were
aligned with the status quo in
terms of for example respecting
single member districts so I'm
gonna turn it over to my
colleague and our our fearless
leader in the task force a
justice Travis to share more
specifics about the act.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee.
I co chair the task force and
really was talking about
perhaps more importantly ten
years ago I wrote the opinion
for the Supreme Court and dealt
with redistricting interested in
their the really interesting net
interest me because the whole
purpose of redistricting is
really to give people a fair and
equal opportunity to well for
someone who will best represent
their interests and it's
important for that reason that
we allow the public to have
meaningful input into the
process in the bill that is
before you this really for the
benefit of the legislature and
also for the public it's a bill
that authorizes the legislature
to creating seven member
commission it has a
responsibility of submitting
three to five district maps to
the legislature by October
fifteen forward Congress from
the state house and state Senate
the Public Education Commission
it also sets forth the
qualifications for the members
who the appointing authorities
are dictates what standards are
to be applied by the commission
drawing the plans what it shall
consider what it may consider
the weather shall not consider
and I'm happy to go through
those and in detail but I'm sure
that you read through them and
will ask the questions that you
still have but important from my
perspective and I think
perspective the task force is
that the legislation emphasizes
public participation.
Wires a minimum number of
meetings the first six meetings
have to comply with the open
meetings act the whole purpose
of that those meetings will be
to identify communities of
interest and consider other
evidence that is relevant to
voting rights act issues the one
person one vote principle in how
the districts are drawn well
once that information is made
available the commission will be
responsible to compile the
information index it and make it
available to the public that
with public sees what it is that
the commission has been
considering that information is
also required by the statute to
be utilized medicine with other
data population data margin that
other demographics that will
inform the commission on how to
draw maps the commission will
then draw the maps based on the
information from the public and
the help of the technical
assistance and they have to
read.
Published the plans.
As rules under the stables Act
and that's important because has
to be published in the New
Mexico register you have to give
a certain amount of time for
written comments in public
comments at public hearings
those hearings also we will be
recorded and.
After that information was
obtained by the commission the
commission will then go back
digest the information we
received at the public hearings
in drawbacks that they will
propose tuned up during the
course of an open meeting again
all the compliance with the open
meetings act.
Once the commission.
I guess has we're adopts three
five maps the then submitted to
the legislature they'll do that
by October fifteenth the whole
idea behind that is not only to
submit plans with the commission
has a responsibility of.
Writing an evaluation the plans
to explain to the public in the
Legislature on why those plans
comply with the redistricting
act by complies with federal
office where reserves
communities of interest why did
does not dilute the.
Voting power of minority or
language the groups in it's that
sort of information unless the
public know what it is that the
commission consider why the
match comply with.
In the legislature is then
allowed to adopt one of the maps
for each of the elected bodies
Congress house Senator the
Public Education Commission.
We've also built in to the the
legislation and appeal process
it would be an appeal that goes
directly to the New Mexico
Supreme Court.
The reason for that is an effort
to put to the front side many
potential litigation that might
arise from the adoption of the
particular map and any group or
person participated in the
commission hearings can can peel
one of the maps on the basis
that they believe it does not
comply with the redistricting
act were federal law.
With the voting rights act for
example.
We have built into the thirty
day notice of appeal
requirements and also the thirty
day requirement for the record
relating to the map.
To go to the Supreme Court I've
talked to the New Mexico Supreme
Court justices about this
because we we are dictating in
some respects procedure and
actually what they've told me is
that they would reduce the
number of days for the notice of
appeal for Representative record
profits.
The the.
The Supreme Court is not to
redraw maps would either to
affirm the map that is
challenged we're to nullify
incentive back to the commission
for further consideration in
addition I think the important
issues the court cannot award
attorney fees and it's it's
required by federal law it under
the legislation.
The commission had started April
first which requires an
emergency clause in this case
assuming that
we have census data on time
which does not appear we will
the best case scenario is for a
special session would be a late
August early September and best
case scenario means that the the
commission is able to draw maps
within six things in that there
is no appeal on the other hand
the worst case scenario.
Is if there's an appeal if it
takes longer for the commission
to draw maps six days and it
would be mid November when when
the legislation would have the
special session I think that's
important because the last go
round by the time the the
judgment was issued by the
district court it was the end of
February just a few weeks away
from nominating petitions are
declarations of candidacy.
So that's basically the nuts and
bolts of the actor can go I can
go section by section right now
if you'd like for me to madam
chair members of the committee
but I presume that you read in
you probably have questions I'm
happy to answer.
Thank you just does.
I think we also have
representative Kelly Fajardo
Kelly do you want to say
anything in addition to expense
that.
Thank you madam chair you know
everybody else is pretty much
said everything I would love to
say I do think this rejection
Committee is extremely important
to the legislature and as was
clearly stated you know we went
to this ten years ago and we
went and say we got public
comments we came back with maps
and everything was pretty much
thrown out the window
and I truly believe that the
people's voices were heard and
so I think we have an
opportunity to rectify that this
year with this bill and
looking forward to a to a great
debate conversation and I think
even you may have been signed on
to this chair woman if I
remember correctly but does this
to be great thanks.
Thank you Representative Margo
and yes sign on I was gonna
mention that later on.
yeah I I I
I agree with a lot of what's
been said I remember that I
actually was on the fence when I
was going to run for office for
the very first time in twenty
twelve because there were the
fights in the court so you know
I understand the costs and how
everything load last year so I I
do like the bipartisan stand
participation and the public
meetings and even looking at
redistricting that will occur
later this year it seems awfully
big task for a legislature that
is our fault part time and
volunteer I was attended some
conferences with the national
conference of state legislators
and all the information was
quite overwhelming so yeah with
that that's that's that that's
my participation and sponsorship
of this bill and we will go now
to public comment or excuse me
will go ahead and pull the folks
and attendees so we are opening
that pull up right now.
I think we just need to re
launch it.
Right now so we'll keep this
open for twenty seconds and
folks that are in the attendants
column there can vote for or
against House Bill to eleven.
And we are going to close the
pull in about five seconds.
Okay and the poll is closed we
have a vote of twenty four House
Bill and zero against so now we
will take public comment let's
start with opposition if there
was any if there's anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Okay we have outside cabins you
are now and it.
Yes HA Act The Chavis you
should go to help the economy
out the woman said the my name
is also Chavis I am Dinesh born
for Kewa Pueblo living in
Albuquerque New Mexico I am
speaking as the executive
director of may the education
project we strongly support this
bill and the concept of an
independent redistricting
commission a redistricting task
force with native American
representation was formed
earlier in twenty twenty as
stated before to help craft the
languages in this bill we need
to take the long view to move
away from the partisan pressure
to stack the deck to every ten
years in these closed rooms
which is been the past has set
the stage for these costly
German being basis instead with
the planned for commission we
can set rules that are fair for
everyone these rules take into
account communities of interest
communities color majority
minority districts and voting
rights act of nineteen sixty
five we welcome the opportunity
for tribal leadership in
communities of color across New
Mexico to engage in the process
of the upcoming redistricting
work to ensure and create a more
equitable and record it
Representative Representative
maps for our community our only
suggestion is that we add the
additional language on diversity
on the diversity of the
commission we want to ensure
that the make up reflects the
diversity of the state sixty
percent people of color and
seventy percent women remember
you don't have to get it perfect
but this will make it better and
move us towards a more fair and
transparent redistricting
process he had double at madam
chair bill sponsors and members
of the committee thank you.
Thank you madam just for
clarification and we were going
to hear from opposition first I
don't know if there are folks
that are opposed so if there are
let's go had and hear from you
if not we'll just go into
support so Richard Mason you are
now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee made a mistake
Mason and I'm chair of the
action committee of the league
of women voters of New Mexico I
want to thank the sponsors of HB
two eleven and and twenty five
other co sponsors for bringing
this bill forward.
And under the committee given
that I do pass I was proud to
represent the league of the
league on New Mexico for staff
task force and of the
recommendations that are
reflected in H. B. two eleven H.
B. two eleven also reflects the
league's criteria that is
printer developed over the many
years of advocating for
redistricting reform.
Right it does in and out to the
committee the league has a long
history of advocating for fair
redistricting the league stats
with the basic principle that
constituents should choose that
legislators rather than
legislators choosing a
constituents.
The lake if I threw for reform
through it far through the
legislative and judicial
processes because the league
believes that I'm fair
redistricting further it creates
distrust in the political
process in violates the one
person one vote.
Principal.
It has been involved in New
Mexico on reform since twenty
eleven in the bottom twenty
nineteen the league supported
SB four sixteen based upon
hybrid
I will model that actually the
league help institute in Iowa.
If that bill passed the Senate
rules committee tend to nothing
that led to believe that there
was provided support for
redistricting reform and that is
why we may do is a priority for
the twenty twenty one session.
At least fourteen other states
have some form of independent
redistricting commission and at
least ten of the state's.
Have instituted redistricting
for reforms to make the system
fairer and more transparent this
actually is growing every day.
In closing New Mexico is one of
the last stage to created the
independent ethics commission
let's not be one elastase to
reform our redistricting process
we urge you to vote I do passed
on H. B. two eleven thank you.
Thank you we hear we can hear
primary Smith very you are now
and it.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
representative I am very eight
Smith in Albuquerque attorney in
league of women voters member I
speak today on my own behalf and
not as a league member I've been
interested in to varying degrees
involved in redistricting in New
Mexico since the year two
thousand.
I express my strong support for
H. B. two eleven and its plan to
better structure in Dodd fair
redistricting in to ensure that
the people of the state have a
sincere and meaningful voice in
redistricting efforts.
At the conclusion of the two
thousand one in two thousand
eleven redistricting process
sees that both ended up in
court.
I saw for myself and heard from
others that we needed to do
redistricting better.
Today in twenty twenty one is
when we can do just that with
this redistricting act I urge
you do pass of HB to eleven and
I thank you madam chair and
representative.
Thank you next we have France
has Gonzales you're now and it.
Good morning my name is Frances
Gonzalez for more New Mexico
southwest part of New Mexico I'm
chairman and that warm springs
Apache is our job get a whole
but shin that is show thank I am
from a rural area I am C. to
chair of
the caucus and member of the
remote New Mexico this bill
should be in the past all right
common sense independent
redistricting process is needed
this bill addresses the issues
currently happy in how district
thirty nine and Senate district
twenty eight which child so
rural with urban part of New
Mexico and partisan to one party
the congressional districts need
to be evenly divided exceeding
two is here Jon which others are
a lot smaller.
Eric and tribal leaders should
be added to the committee due to
the fact that all three
congressional districts are
tribal communities and or
pueblos and we should be heard
on this bill should receive a do
pass it does move us towards
more diversity less suppression
a lot more speak for the
community the voters rural areas
and has a lot more inclusion
there are doing it though thank
you and you pass for this bill
thank you.
Thank you next we have Kathleen
Burke your now and it.
Thank you madam chair Kathleen
Burke project coordinator Sarah
districts for New Mexico good
morning ladies and gentlemen of
the committee for districts for
New Mexico and it's twenty four
partner organizations are
advocating for fair
redistricting process in our
state.
We totaled nearly forty thousand
New Mexicans seeking
redistricting reform.
Since nineteen ninety nine New
Mexicans have been bringing the
plea for fair redistricting
process to our legislature.
New Mexicans are again asking
our legislature for
redistricting process which is
free of racial discrimination
fair and transparent.
New Mexico's districts along to
The New Mexican people and
should be determined by such.
Gerrymandering hinders the
democratisation of our state and
our Republic to this very day.
With redistricting happening
this year the forty thousand New
Mexicans in support of this bill
are asking you to make history
by removing this on just process
from our backs and yours by
bringing us into modern
redistricting and out of the
same post colonial election
rigging which continues to
undermine the power of voters.
The very foundation for creating
equal and fair voting access
begins with redistricting.
It's the redistricting process
remains on fair as it is today
in New Mexico all of us here
continue working on an unfair
playing field.
Concern so voting access really
began at making redistricting
rights.
We are seeking a fair
transparent and accountable
redistricting process in twenty
twenty one the will of the
people has never been stronger
to reform redistricting.
We believe constituents should
choose their legislators rather
than legislators choosing their
constituents.
Please support the redistricting
at risk redistricting act now
sponsored by thirty three house
members.
On behalf of the twenty four
partner organizations and almost
forty thousand members we urge
you to vote do pass on H. B. two
eleven today thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you Leonard garment you
are now and it.
Morning madam chair members of
the commission made the
committee my name is Leonard
Gorman I'm executive director
for the Navajo Nation Human
Rights Commission.
The commission office was a
member of the task force was
established last fall and
completed its work at the end of
the year.
Are just some principal issues
that the commission was
concerned about we were also
party ended litigation that was
a reference early on during the
twenty eleven redistricting
activities one is that it's
important that the
priest but district boundaries.
Capture the population in the
manner in which it also respects
indigenous governments which is
why my office made a
recommendation and it's
incorporated into the bill that
looks at using a smaller
population units other than the
precinct boundaries that has
been used in the past.
A precinct boundaries are for
voting activities not
redistricting.
Secondly the idea that the
district should.
Compass the development of these
plans to take into consideration
population counts not just
incumbent residency that's also
part of the deal here before you
the other one is to ensure that
the.
Deviation factor continues to be
five percent below and five
percent above the ideal number
it's a very important facet when
we take into consideration the
voting rights act affects the
state New Mexico is a very
diverse state it has multiple
which peoples are referred to as
minorities.
African Americans Hispanics
Asians and native Americans.
These peoples are protected
societies in accordance to the
nineteen sixty five voting
rights act which is why it's
very very important to maintain
a five percent ten percent
deviation five percent above
five percent below and in
addition of the task force it
also considered aspects of.
Indigenous governing bodies
indigenous governments in this
case there is a provision in
there that there would be
consultation there would be
consideration offered by
indigenous governments the
Navajo Nation has participated
in these redistricting in two
victories in the past to Samuel
census counts so I'm I asked the
committee members to vote to
pass on this particular bill
house bill two eleven thank you.
Thank you are you you are now
and it.
Thank you madam.
The committee good morning being
and as mentioned mom monarchy
equipment on behalf coming
because and also a member of the
redistricting task force that
was instrumental in drafting the
bill before you all this morning
a justice Chavez The Little
Italy as well as sponsors of HB
two eleven and others have
already done a great job in
articulating the reasons why HB
to eleven should be adopted by
this committee I will simply add
a common cause supports public
inclusion and transparency which
this bill offers and for that
reason as well as others already
stated we strongly support H.
between eleven and encourage the
committee to also support this
piece of legislation thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Berlin your now and it.
Mr Berlin you'll just have to
and mute on your end.
Okay sorry about that of thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Bruce
Berlin I am the chair of the
legislative action committee for
Representative Austin Mexico we
have over five hundred members
and I just reiterate most of
what everybody else's said we
want a fair and nonpartisan way
of of having our districts are
voting districts
Created and redistricting every
ten years and it's very
important that the we the voters
are the ones to create our
districts and not take it and
those who represent.
We take the the districts rather
than the people of the
Legislature picking their voters
so and a nonpartisan commission
that
On this bill would create or
move towards is very important
and we really supported very
much thank you.
Thank you.
John how you are now and it.
Good morning madam chair person
committee members and other
speakers and attendees I am a
president to represent us New
Mexico and gerrymandering in New
Mexico is an embarrassment it
should be lows to buy anyone who
believes and and strives to
preserve and protect democracy.
We have to remember that this
awful practice began to be used
as a tool in some states to
dilute the votes of black and or
other minority voters by making
sure that those groups were
always a minority in districts
everywhere.
That was possible.
Course that violates the
Fourteenth Amendment and it is
stopped when recognized but even
that using gerrymandering for
that reason still goes on.
Then partisan power realize the
two would also be useful to
dilute the voters of voters from
the opposing party.
We decry that practice being use
when it is used against us and
condemn at its use in other
states.
Wrongfully.
But when the major pop party and
incumbent candidates see that
they can use it in their favor
it doesn't seem like such a bad
thing anymore let's be Frank as
a critical.
Interestingly gerrymandering
doesn't exactly disenfranchise
the voters votes but it
manipulates their the fact.
Not to benefit the voters but to
benefit incumbent candidates.
And the party in power.
Do during the last few years the
legislature had opportunities to
remedy this unfair process press
process by passing a resolution
to amend the state constitution
to permit the formation of a
permanent independent
redistricting commission to
conduct the process has been
done in over thirteen other
states.
The New Mexico Democratic Party
in twenty eighteen adopted as a
provision of its party platform
to do just that.
But strangely the legislature
missed the chance to pass such a
resolution in time.
To have a permanent independent
redistricting commission and in
time for this effort.
That leaves us now with the only
option which is to create a
temporary commission in twenty
twenty one to develop services
district maps according to the
coal practical unbiased
nonpartisan criteria from which
the legislature can choose one
sent to use in establishing the
new voting districts.
This procedural change to the
initial part of the process
process puts us one step away
from partisan politics
medicating the unfair advantage
enjoyed by the majority party in
New Mexico.
The independent process by
others
The reduce possibility of
protracted expensive let it
litigation over the process.
Process which is occurred in the
last two redistricting instances
costing taxpayers more than
seven million dollars.
I strongly urge you to vote yes
to pass.
H. B. two one one thanks.
Thank you current Rader you are
now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee as a shared
earlier on Kirk record on the
director of Lutheran advocacy
ministry New Mexico and we also
speak on behalf The New Mexico
conference of churches.
As an organization we follow the
work of the redistricting or
sponsored by New Mexico First
and we're especially pleased
with the process and with a
strong buy parts and make up of
the group this is an excellent
build will make tremendous
strides in terms of equity
fairness and confidence in our
state's political process and
therefore we urge strongly urge
you to support bill H. B. two
eleven thank you.
Thank you and I know we jump
from opposition to support so
and I'm giving folks the last
opportunity if you'd like to
speak in opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Okay seeing then we will go to
the committee representative Ely
hi you madam chair thank you I
support this our redistricting
of bills but I I do have a
concern about and and I've
raised this was some of the
supporters is that a bill as a
bill we pass it it's a statute
and then the political winds
change and we were okay.
we come back with another bill
and get rid of the redistricting
commission so if you want to
lock it in for ever you do a
constitutional amendment which
I'm not seeing are you do a
house joint resolution
Representative night we're not
you're doing both the bill and
house joint resolution on on a
bipartisan I'm sorry on the
emergency declaration
I mean I have.
but the in addition to
everything else there is a
concern even in the constitution
where it says in article four
section three which talks about
redistricting and I'm gonna read
you the section it says once
following publication of the
official report of each federal
decennial census because you're
here after conducted the
legislature made by statute we
apportion its membership so
there's a real question as to
whether this can be done having
said that I totally support this
and we we try it we see what
happens but I'm curious as to
why the sponsors have not
supported a house joint
resolution so that we can get
this before the voters and lock
it in place for all times and
with that manager I'd be
interested in the Sanchez
response thank you madam chair.
Representative I'm gonna jump on
that one because I would
absolutely support house joint
resolution to do just exactly
that this commission came
together in the fall and look
process and there is no way to
get a constitutional amendment
before the people in the time to
address redistricting in this
decade so we decided to focus
our attention in this session on
dealing with this redistricting
process and then we have a nine
year window to get that house
joint resolution passed nine his
certainly added to my plate and
put it out for this session but
would be willing to do so and
hope you win co sponsor but to
get the redistricting process
change and open and transparent
in this decade for this
redistricting process we have to
try something different.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate that from my fellow
caucus member but I would like
to hear from the other side to
be honest with you I don't I I
appreciate that that could go
into effect for this process I
get that I'm not suggesting that
but there isn't anything
stopping us from doing both and
so I I'll be very blunt about it
it's nice to hear from my caucus
member but I really want to hear
from the Republicans I'd like to
know Representative down
Representative Fajardo will
commit to a constitutional
amendment on this issue if they
if they will that so kind of
making a whole lot more
comfortable with supporting this
re I I which I do on this
redistricting plan so I'm really
in directing my concerns to
representatives down part when
I'd like to hear their response.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative Eli and that's
not the bill before us and my
exit my answer with exactly the
same as Natalie Figueroa is and
I I hope you'll go back and look
at the Sanchez on this bill
there are literally dozens and
it's bipartisan the reason why I
chose to go ahead and introduce
a mere a bill to the Senate bill
was that when the bill was
introduced on the Senate side it
was referred to three committees
so I guess this is a very good
opportunity for the public to
see true bipartisan effort for a
truly can't transparent and
public input in very distracting
for this decade draft the bill
let me read it let's do it.
Madam chair representative I
don't mean to press you on this
is a lawyer but it's a pretty
simple question it is would you
support a house joint resolution
that would lock in place will
work out the details that would
lock in place for all times a
redistricting commission if you
what I'm happy to support
digital and I get the problem I
do and that's why supported but
before signing my name off on it
I wanted to know that everybody
was on the same page that this
isn't just now when the
Democrats control the house the
Senate the governor's office and
you guys are asking them to give
up power to make change and I
want to make sure that there's
real integrity to this and that
you wish for in principle
understanding I'm not getting
you to sign off on the dotted
line but I want to know that in
principle they that that we are
when I introduce this next
session and we could do it in a
special session without the
governor's call because it
doesn't go to the governor that
you would support in principle
working with me on a
constitutional amendment so we
can lock into place what I think
is a very necessary change I
agree with you that is a very
necessary change to take
politics out of this and take
the conflict out of it but I I
that's where I'm at and I'm
sorry to be so blunt about it
but that's for Act what what
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Eli and thank you
for pointing out that you are a
lawyer.
My reason early childhood but
from the day I was elected there
redistricting and transparency
in government has been something
that my constituents and folks
across the state have contacted
me on in principle yes I hope to
voted for it and that we had
passes the nineteen we did not
and so that's that the primary
sponsors three out of five are
Democrats and the Senate
sponsors were primarily
Democrats I consider this
bipartisan and something that
needs a permanent solution and
in principle I support that.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate that answer very much
thank you I can so I will
certainly be voting for your for
your bill thank you thank thank
you Mr thank you madam chair go
ahead.
Representative Fajardo if you
don't mind I would love to
answer that as well for the
Representative okay.
Representative Eli.
I'm so first of all thank you
for that and I look forward to
carrying that constitutional
amendment with you we have filed
constitutional amendments before
and they haven't gone anywhere
and so we so you know this
argument that why are we doing
this now it's because the clock
is ticking this is important
it's important to stay in New
Mexico I would argue you know
let's not wait for the special
session of this is something
you're interested in doing
Representative Eli let's do it
now and that won't take into a
fact this late into the voters
though not it which means it
will not make it in time for
this redistricting but if we can
do both if there is an appetite
within our legislature and
within within the systems of of
New Mexico to make sure that our
districts are fair that they're
not gerrymandered and we're
actually giving the people the
vote the voice let's do that now
and so I would tell you
Representative Eli to go ahead
and file that constitutional
amendment let us sign onto it.
Madam chair representative as
you know we have kind of imposed
a limit on ourselves of five
because that is in my rear view
mirror but and as a practical
matter I know it's pretty late
in the session be getting there
but I have to tell you I very
much appreciate both of your
answers so I trust both of you
and and my view is is that this
is the beginning of kind of a
bipartisan approach to this and
that's why I wanted to race and
so I appreciate the answer but
you can expect in the thirty day
session you're gonna see a house
joint resolution on this issue
so thank you thank you.
What will.
I will tell me Representative
Ely that I think that we there's
enough pressure that we could
probably get you one extra bill
if you wanted to and thank you
madam chair and I yield.
Madam chair and.
Madam chair and representative
Ely there's certainly nothing
preventing you from being like
the thirty six thirty seven
person to sign on to this bill.
Thank you and I'm just described
as I see that your hand is a do
you want to answer that question
that Representative Eli asked
earlier.
Yes thank you madam chair.
Talking about the article four
section three that you're
concerned I from correct
Representative Eli is about the
legislature perhaps delegating
to the redistricting commission.
It's important to redistricting
itself in a I think the answer
to that is is you can delegate
under existing Supreme Court
precedent your authority
provided that you provide
standards that will guide the
discretion of the redistricting
commission and in fact that's
what we've done with this
legislation is put in some
standards so that everybody
understands the rules of
redistricting and then I would
also say that the we are
requiring the legislature to
completely delegate the
authority because you also then
we would have a choice of the
one of the three to five maps in
our recommended by the
redistricting commission I would
say you Madam good reasons for
this bill.
Despite the fact that a
constitutional amendment would
be much better is that this
redistricting commission would
likely catapult that results
because and I think it's going
to be very successful.
On madam chair justice and
representatives yeah I agree
with that I I do I understand
that I I was raising the
constitutional issue only
because you know I've seen
constitutional challenges raised
that I didn't think had merit
not casting aspersions on any
current lawsuit I played members
of my body but I
so I'm always concerned about
that as a legislator but I do
think you're right I and I don't
have any problems with that and
and to respond to Representative
Dow yeah I really don't have any
problem signing off on the bill
I just wanted to ask that
question before I did it I mean
is a fair question I think
remember one party to ask
publicly the member the other
party I don't mean to put
anybody on the spot but I really
appreciate the discussion I do
and I'm going to strongly
supported and I'll direct my
legislative assistant to sign
off on the bill so I don't have
any problem with that and I
agree with justice child is that
you know if people can see that
this process works it'll take a
lot of the fear out of it I'm
from Arizona originally and they
went to a bipartisan
redistricting commission and
it's spectacularly works so I am
I I don't want people to think
I'm opposed to this or the
concept I'm not I just want to
make sure we make all of us
honest brokers in this and take
politics out of it so I
appreciate it justice always
nice to see you I I I see it the
rooms the same color so.
Thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative nine point.
Thank you madam chair.
To address the representative
from St Paul's question yes.
At.
Madam chair I'm going to
probably get the.
A little too much in the weeds
here but I do have some some
are.
Comments with respect to
portions of the of the bill and
we'll go through those my my
first comment is on page three.
Why.
Sixteen and let me preface my
remarks by saying in the ethics
bill and some other legislation
that we passed we have tried to
make sure that people could not
simply change their voter
registration for purposes of
all the sudden you're complying
with whatever statute we are
passing so I would suggest in
line sixteen but you say
within the prior two years so
that a person who's not a member
of the largest or second largest
political party in the in the
state I think two years of what
we put the ethics bill it by
memory serves me correctly and
that's probably a reasonable
time that way you don't get
somebody just changing their
registration so that they now
are not a member of the largest
or second largest political
party.
my next comment.
Madam chair.
Is.
On page five wind nine.
You can't be a member of the
commission if you are an
employee of the legislative
branch.
But ironically you could be an
employee of the executive branch
and I just did not understand
why
why we would choose one and not
the other
So that they may need to be some
expansion there are page five
wind twenty.
We have a deadline of October
fifteenth twenty twenty one of I
have heard with some authority
that the census data is going to
be delayed and expressed some
concern as to whether or not
these time frames for this year
would comport with the actual
dissemination of census data
from the federal government I
don't know or not I just think
it's something that we ought to
you look at their own rate six
line six and
You know coming from rural New
Mexico.
We.
Are the ones that seem to always
get slide on on
Public meetings are are access
to the public meetings and the
idea of having these types of
meetings virtually just rubbed
me the wrong way.
I don't like I don't like this
virtual meeting and I sure as
heck would like of virtual
meeting of the our commission
deciding things around the state
as to where district lines are
going to be are going to be
drawn and so I like the fact
that they'll be at least six
meetings in the various regions
of the state but allowing those
to be conducted virtually
Maybe give somebody the
court wants to just hold zoom
meetings and said well they have
the opportunity to participate
here of the slight different
when you get in a room and start
talking seeing people I die so I
question whether we should allow
virtual meetings and on page six
line six yes.
Thank J. winds eleven and
twelve.
And one of the gentleman that
spoke in favor of this
said the precinct boundaries are
for voting not redistricting
I'm not sure if the secretary of
state our would agree with that.
Precinct boundaries are the
basic building block upon which
districts are created and if you
start drawing our district lines
through precincts people
It's going to complicate number
one the county clerk's in the
sector's States job but it's
also going to to make people
wonder how come you're in that
district and we're in the same
precinct but I'm in the district
next to it.
Precincts first things have got
to be the basic building block
upon which
our districts are created and
and so having precincts or
allowing a reference to units of
population of other smaller the
precincts does not make
care to much sense to me if
those are being utilized for
determining the boundaries of a
district because people within
the precinct oughta be assured
that they know who their
representative is.
Them over on page nine.
we see a lot of the.
Things that need to be
considered when drawing
boundaries and the I would just
suggest to the.
Drafters of this bill that the
county lines.
Rivers major highways other
major geophysical or man made
structures that allow a
demarcation of the boundary to
be recognized and I think that
comports with federal law
You know the idea that the.
People ought to have some
general census to so what
districts area and where we see
gerrymandering is when you start
drawing lines that don't give
much affect to natural or
our political structures such as
county lines or what have you so
I would I would.
Encourage you to look at maybe
expanding some of those things
to include
are those things that are are.
Part of it and it may be the the
winds twenty two and twenty
three all page by.
Accomplishes accounting line
issue it says affording.
The importance of fragmenting
governmental subdivisions that
that may be county lines or or
city
units bowl boundary lines things
of that nature but the I do
think it's important for of
those natural or.
Man made boundaries.
Have some ability and
are growing the the boundaries
of districts are meant that my
last comment.
Would be I I I say we have a
link them with
our criteria and you want to
maybe a square as possible but
when you get out into some very
rural parts of the state and and
my my district may be an example
this mines.
Fairly square but because there
are many people living between
my house and corona it is a
definitely wider than it is tall
although it's our it's pretty
tall it's probably.
Eighty miles to all work and
then probably about a hundred
twenty hundred for thirty miles
wide.
Of.
I just think that that I hope
the the commission would not the
would not to just try to create
boxes because are
it's a hearing to that
requirement but that the county
lines would be important and
some of these other geophysical
characteristics on the on the
land itself in determining which
district you're at so those will
be by my overall comments on the
bill I support the the idea of
having the commission and
appreciate the the sponsor for
bringing this and appreciate the
the former Chief Justice and and
others who worked on on this
issue for a long time and I
would agree with by.
Our colleague from Santa Fe
County that the you know not
only get this in place in terms
of the statute books but to to
put it in stone in the
constitution our long term would
make some sense thank you madam
chair.
Right thank you for your
comments Representative any
other committee members have
comments or questions.
Otherwise what is the pleasure
of the committee.
madam chair.
Representative Eli all of the do
passed.
We have a motion by
Representative Eli where do
passed second and a second by
Representative neighbor.
Let's go ahead and call the
roll.
Representative Chasey is excuse
Representative Chasey is
currently online sorry.
Representative.
They see thank you because I
missed most of the discussion in
the past for a moment if you'll
come back to me.
Thank you Representative Eli
yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative neighbor yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Johnson yes.
Madam chair.
Representative Chasey do you
want.
Chasey did you want me to come
back to you know yes please
although yes.
Thank you madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that we have
nine affirmative.
Thank you representatives
Figueroa and doubt and I heard
you know you have a do pass.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
Thank you committee members
thank you.
And so we have Representative
Romero on for house bill fifty
four Representative thank you
madam chair I do have a couple
experts in the audience a
superintendent and our former
colleague or Representative
Lynda Trujillo.
And secretary at Lucia to
affordably sero was well.
Right thank you it looks like
we're getting them on so yes
they're all right.
Excellence.
Thank you madam chair would you
like me to begin yes please okay
before you Madam chair
representative this house bill
fifty four essentially this
updates are barber and
cosmetologist regulation
licensing to ensure that we can
create a streamlined approach
for folks to be able to get
their licensure for these very
important jobs as we know with
the pandemic and I've been
joking with my colleagues how
necessary this bill is being
that I've had to cut my.
Try to groom myself for the last
several months this is so
desperately needed to get folks
licensed and of course in the
work force I with me are my
experts as I mentioned super now
superintendent of regulation and
licensing Representative Lynda
Trujillo and of course secretary
to for those so this bill is
about allowing folks to build
their lives and of course just
cleaning up our our policy and
how we get that done so I will
go ahead and allow both of them
to speak and decide whoever goes
first.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and what we are so
happy to see you Secretary are
superintendent for independent
review.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative for caring
this really important
legislation in addition to
ensuring that people can get
licensed under the barbers and
cosmetology Act we also did a
little bit of cleanup one is the
you'll note on page two five and
six pages five and six we added
in the regulation licensing
department duties over the years
there's always been that kind of
question of what are the duties
of the board sort of the duties
that the department does and for
the most part we issue licenses
based upon the applicant meeting
the standards set by the board
and we do investigations this
just clarifies that those are
the things that will do it
doesn't change the relationship
with the department and the
board it just clarifies what
past practices been so that
there's not a question about
that we also just did some basic
cleanup that is now being done
electronically it like change of
address issuing hard copies of
current rules all of that's
available online now and I I I'm
going to defer to the of
elimination of the moral
turpitude because I know there's
gonna be a lot of questions
about that and I'm happy to
answer those questions when they
come up
thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and and
also thank you to Representative
Romero for caring this
legislation and also to
superintendents are here it's
been a real pleasure to work
with these find advocates on
this on this bill this is an and
a bill we're looking at as an
agency bill for for our purposes
it's a very significant change
that just needs to be made we
are trying to figure out ways
every day to reduce recidivism
but what that really comes down
to is helping people figure out
a way where they can make a
living in the community and this
is one of those career options
that is a very viable option
that now it's a limited
opportunity for people who are
leaving our institutions and and
returning back to the community
after having been incarcerated
currently in our system we
actually have a barber program
at our Santa Rosa facility and
what are the county and this
program is just incredible it's
a a year and a half long it's
it's it's administered through
the Luna community college.
Disciplines go through more than
a thousand hours to complete
their program then when it comes
time to take the test and seek
licensure that they have we have
found that that was not a
possibility that because of that
language regarding moral
turpitude it is specially
excluded people that had felony
convictions from being able to
be licenses barbers and
cosmetologists in our state
ideally we want to do everything
that we can do to increase the
opportunities for people to
become employed free of the
conservation but also for people
to seek a career option pre
incarceration and to contribute
in part to diversionary options
to keep people out of
institutions in the first place
this is one of those careers
that we hear a lot of people
interested in and we feel like
it is a barrier.
Long overdue incredibly
unnecessary and we ask for your
support and of course I'll be
able to answer questions on any
being that the the committee
members have thank you.
Right thank you we are now going
to take a poll of the attendees
and
We can get that going.
Great it is now open and will
keep it open for another ten
seconds.
And now another five seconds.
Okay so we have to and favor and
zero against and now let's go
ahead and hear from support if
you would like to speak in
support of house bill fifty four
please raise your hand.
If you would like to speak in
opposition of house bill fifty
four please raise your hand.
Okay even hello this you are now
and it.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that Bob Lowe's I've been
licensed cosmetologist for the
past twenty years and I chose to
become a salon owner
fourteen years into my career
Sosa about six years ago and now
I have the privilege of offering
jobs to incoming licensee
professionals.
I am here today to do that I
would like to express my
concerns with sections forty
seven of house bill fifty four.
Eliminating the need basic
requirement of having an
education equivalent to two
years of high school or high
school graduation or the
equivalent in order to obtain a
cosmetology or barber license is
a disservice to the individual
and to the beauty industry as a
whole high school teaches
discipline time management
skills it provides structure
which helps one manage
expectations and it teaches the
importance of honoring you
schedule.
It is also a time when young
adults learn how to handle
stress YC the beauty industry
needs these disciplines
disciplines I'm sorry you school
we teach just minimum competency
skills candidates pursuing in a
licensing industry should
already come equipped with the
skills learned through formal
education in my experience and
and through observation those
who pursue the industry because
it's a quick program and they
think that it's not gonna
require strong disciplines like
a college route would require do
not arrive in this industry
please not eliminate two years
of high school or graduation or
the equivalent for all incoming
you to professionals thank you.
You are that concludes our
public comment we will now go to
the committee.
Representative Nibert.
Choose of course.
Madam chair
Couple questions.
Guarding this bill the the.
We're eliminating.
The.
Education requirements as a as a
lady just are indicated.
But yet we have a age
requirement and I was wondering.
Where the I I know the age
requirements of the existing
statute but it will the decision
was made not to believe that
even though we deleted the.
High school or two years of high
school education or the
equivalent which I assume would
be evidence of progress toward
G. D. but we did not eliminate
the seventeen year of age
requirement is there an
explanation for that Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair and
I'll give it over to
superintendent Rio.
Thank you representative madam
chair representative it's good
to hear from you and see you the
reason that we didn't take out
the ages because it has posed
itself to be a barrier the
education is unrelated even
though ISIS absolutely you know
I've been a strong advocate for
public education for a long time
I this doesn't encourage people
to not get an education it's
just an related and we find that
adults that apply for licensure
who have gone through and
whether they've learned it under
the correction industry of
vocational the corrections
department vocational education
or if they've taken it up as a
second career having to prove
their high school even just two
years some of the licenses only
required that you prove two
years that can in very often
times be a barrier I use the
example of my own kids I hold on
to their diplomas now their high
schools diplomacy even though
all of them of gone through
college because they'll call me
up on occasion as a mom do you
know where my diploma is and now
I can just pull it out and I can
take a picture of it and I can
send it to them but not
everybody has a mother who's
quite that obsessive about that
and hold on to and we have in
fact found that to be a real
barrier whether you've earned it
and you can't find it whether
you've just not finished high
school and now you're an adult
I'm going on to another
profession but the age we we
don't we're not going to
encourage people who are less
than seventeen to go into the
beauty industry we we really do
think that age we have not seen
it as being a barrier which is
why we didn't take it out.
Madam chair.
Former representative all right.
I understand.
Why we sometimes put the same
amendment but if we're going
solely to a.
Situation where you're only
looking at ability.
The demonstration of ability.
Hey you shouldn't have any
bearing on that the in many
instances I I would I would
agree with you that is generally
not something that would come up
because most.
That are fifteen sixteen they're
not thinking about a career.
But there might be you know one
or two.
In our state the would find that
to be a barrier and if we're
only going to look at their
ability their ability cut hair
their ability to be a
cosmetologist their ability to
be a stylist
Same so we ought to just take
this opportunity to get rid of
the age requirement and focus on
what appears to be the real crux
of it that is does this person
have the
skills that are required of a
barber of a stylist of a
cosmetologist and and allow them
to engage in that pursuit if
they so wish
So that's my that's my first
question.
The second question.
Madam chair and this probably
for
administrative as well
One thousand two hundred hours
or some of them are right we
have access to that is that
really what's required to to
have the skills.
For these various.
Andeavor's.
Representative would you like me
to answer that.
Yes ma'am okay.
Chair representative yes that is
in fact the norm across the
country.
Okay and then my third question
feels with the difference
between Barberena and then the
other pursuits
With respect to barbering you
can get.
The experience through an
apprenticeship program approved
by the board
in the others we've taken the
apprenticeship out or it does
not have an apprenticeship
component to it so could you
explain why there's a an
apprenticeship program for
barbering but not the others
licensure is that we're looking
at here.
Madam chair representative
that's a really good question I
don't have an actual answer for
that I wasn't prepared to answer
that question because it was in
an area that we're addressing
but I can tell you that I think
there's a handful of barber's
left licensed in the state
because the cosmetologists have
much more responsibility when it
comes to and cosmetologist of
course hairstylist means men and
women right the barbers were of
much less they didn't work with
chemicals to the extent that are
a cosmetologist these days to
and so honestly there's really a
handful and it could even be
that there's only one left in
the state.
But I don't have an answer for
why we don't do an
apprenticeship there.
Well it seems like you madam
chair and mystery are it seems
to me like if we're trying to
to.
Not down barriers allow entry
into these professions that
there ought to be a mechanism by
which someone can learn the
skills by serving under a
cosmetologist or a hair stylist
and not just forcing them to go
to the school of cosmetology
down the street get the
requisite number of hours
I think in a lot of pursuits of
probably more learn on the job
the areas through of.
And so I just noted that
there's.
There seems to be different
standards for the for them and
and did not.
Why understand why
you could to secure a license
having served under someone as a
hair stylist or a cosmetologist.
So those with.
Those would be my comments side
I don't know that it
necessarily prevents me from
supported the bill it's just
it's just insane.
People across the board and and
those are things jumped out at
me so maybe the sponsor of this
legislation might want to look
at whether or not there's a.
Good reason not to allow an
apprenticeship program under the
other two and still have an
apprenticeship program under
Barbary but it.
It just doesn't seem of.
It doesn't appear on its face
that there would be much reason
for that differentiation thank
you madam chair good to see you.
With the.
Thank you Representative
Representative Eli yes madam
chair I move a do pass and say
hi to Linda hi Representative
Trujillo.
Hi my friend.
Motion by Representative Eli.
And we have a second by
Representative or cans.
I'm is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion.
Okay seeing that you have a do
pass on the house bill fifty
four thank you representative
thank you for today thanks to
experts thank.
Thank you.
Our last bill and I thank
everyone for your patience and
getting through this long agenda
we are welcoming back
Representative Figueroa for
house bill fifty two as amended.
Thank you madam chair to be here
Adrian Santa Fe believes in the
attendee room he is the expert
witness if you would raise and
to help you find him that would
be great and in the interest of
time I'm gonna go ahead and
start if that's alright with you
madam chair.
We have provided to the
panelists thank you thank you
madam chair thank you committee
I am happy to be here to present
to you house bill fifty two this
is alleged and Ellie S. C.
endorsed bill from the interim
and influence in statute the
bilingual multicultural
education advisory committee it
is men and hot Committee and
puts it in statute so is on par
with the Indian education and
when he is sentenced Education
Act.
And I think we'll just go with
questions the board of the bill
is to make sure that the voices
of these communities are heard
as we pursue.
Improvements in our educational
system so let's ask you
questions will stand for
questions thank you very thank
you representative and we'll go
ahead and pull the audience care
just before we go to public
comment and will keep that open
for about fifteen seconds.
Okay the poll is now open you
can now go in favor or
opposition of house bill fifty
two as amended.
And you have about ten more
seconds to vote.
Great so we are going to close
all we have seven.
In favor and zero against so now
we will take public comment from
anyone that would like to speak
and support.
So we have in Julia rose the
Lopez.
Just three you are now and it.
Yes.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am in earnest
support of this bill house bill
fifty two which actually is the
sponsor mention it puts the
committee that exists for many
many years into what long so
that it will not be.
Then away with is it is it did
about three or four years ago
and it's a committee that are
represents the entire state of
New Mexico and all these
constituents and people that are
very interested in bilingual
multicultural education so I do
or do to pass house bill fifty
two.
Thank you for your meal yanking
you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee German thank you
director of you to learning for
some require public speaking on
behalf of governor Jeffrey a I
also serve as the vice chair for
the Indian Education Advisory
Council in Santa Clara pueblo of
we support this bill as a minute
thank you.
Thank you.
Just delete them you are now and
meet it.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
provide comment on house bill
fifty two my name is Patricia
you minutes later I am the
project manager for transform
education New Mexico
transformation cation New Mexico
would like to thank
Representative Figueroa for
sponsoring house bill fifty to
place in the bilingual
multicultural Education Act into
statute ensures that a council
that has indoor for over fifty
years will continue to fulfill
its role to provide guidance
recommendation and support to
the New Mexico public education
department secretary and the
director of the language and
cultural division as that's
related to multi cultural and
multi lingual programs this bill
also leverages the expertise of
indigenous Hispanic and other
culturally and linguistically
diverse communities advocating
for high quality bilingual
multicultural education programs
in their own school school
communities transformation
cation and it's twenty four
Organization affiliates stand in
support of house bill fifty two
and respectfully ask members of
this committee to support this
bill madam chair again thank you
for the opportunity.
Thank you.
There aren't any other hands if
you would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
We have a New Mexico C. L. P.
education you are now and muted.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney at the New Mexico
Center online poverty and a
member of the legal team for the
Aussie play next in the Yazzie
Martinez case The New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty
strongly supports this bill this
legislation is consistent with
the US the Martinez case which
calls for the full
implementation of loss already
on the books including the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act Indian Education
Act and the Hispanic Education
Act and we believe this bill as
amended with further the state's
efforts in providing access to
culturally and linguistically
relevant education to the for
student groups in the case so we
urge on the committee to pass
this legislation thank you so
much.
I don't see any others that are
raising their hands so we will
now go to the committee.
Representative night.
Representative Eli.
Committee members.
We were both silent.
Madam chair of moving to pass.
Thank you we have a.
In New Hampshire so I can say
something.
Representative neighbor would
you say is.
Second great okay we have a
motion by Representative Eli and
a second by Representative
neighbors is there anyone in
opposition to do past motion.
Seeing and hearing line you have
a do pass showing all members in
attendance voting in the
affirmative for health bill
fifty two as amended thank you
Representative after a.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
Thank you and thanks to the
public for all your
participation and and comments
today thanks to our committee
members for getting through
pretty
big agenda and we are now
adjourned and I'll see everyone
in a couple of days.
Thank you.
