Yes the webcast.
Okay very good okay from clerk
to call the roll.
Representative on in order.
Representative what present.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little.
Representative ring your.
Representative Zamora here.
By Senator present.
a madam chair Johnson present
thank you okay quelled good
morning and welcome everyone.
We will begin with House Bill
nine five Representative Lujan.
Introduce yourself introduce.
Thank you morning madam chair
morning members committee
Representative turning on house
right.
And expert witness today's
facilities to work he's deputy
commissioner of operations after
State Land Office
We are.
I am sure this is my first.
So
So and may I ask for some
direction just in case your.
Introduce them to like to
introduce your experience there
have been introduce himself and
then to the bill you madam chair
similarly Stewart deputy
commissioner of operations.
Thank you madam chair.
And then you have some doubts
is.
Yes.
Madam chair representative.
I.
Transaction you will energy's
office.
So what services.
In that nineteen commissioner
our staff which the statement
offices first ever Office
renewable energy this
legislation is being at ease was
this function and if successful
actors to advance removal
Energy.
So statutory changes were one of
the steps toward to go.
For
section of Los.
Commissioner of public lands at
issue the staff.
Energy Office dance productions
Development.
The bill also half brother to.
To this section.
Nineteen welcome to have making
references to commission.
Gender neutral.
So what is the State Land
Office.
Here commissioner Richard has
prioritized energy see what
that's include energy does.
Prepositional funding for
education and the person I
revenue services State Land
Office you sure you are.
Over the last four years has
increased.
Revenue by forty.
More than triple the number
after
grams a lot
two hundred fifty percent.
There are currently three line
act long term leases that's
twenty seven.
And twelve so.
And thirty three lease
applications wind solar and
fourteen to conduct.
The solar projects.
And then the we're passed out of
the members of this impact
projects.
So there's.
Impact on this legislation.
And.
I understand.
Let's go to the audience and
then today and going forward and
an asset with COVID and take.
Whether.
So we have.
Individuals who are in support
of the bill.
Okay any opposing.
Saying and let's go ahead and
begin on the second.
Madam chair
Any
of this for the last Energy
Alliance.
This is a trade association with
a membership ever since then so
I.
Storage representative from.
Are very close and office and
her desire to put in this year
of course.
This section and in the state
have offices always passionate
features at this is the
direction we're going in the
state and this is a very at the
State Land Office.
The house.
Yeah good morning madam chair
members of the committee please
go
after thirty five thousand
members and supporters.
Ago the West Texas this report
making the renewable energy
office appurtenant in the state
of that office thanks to the
existence of this office
leadership of commissioner fears
here Richard over the last four
years agency has increase
renewable revenue by fourteen
hundred percent more than the
number of factors and road make
a lot of these I about two fifty
to two hundred fifty percent.
If
the millions of dollars of the
income statement on this this
bill makes permanent or this
very much decision of so we
strong support as possible yes
for the.
Thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Hannah
filling unprecedented leave
workers New Mexico police stands
in.
This bill believe that the
support is to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions by developing
renewable energy sources.
The creation of this office.
Who
need to New Mexico thank you.
I
numbers of the committee my name
is Jim they should have mostly
renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico other
people notice is Rio the about
sixty members been around within
for.
The mobile office this is been
instrumental in the development
of large wind and solar projects
and also community solar
projects.
The success of the project is
brought revenue to the state and
local.
And we believe that making this
office president well keep their
good work going thank you very
much very strong support system.
Thank you any further comments
from the audience let's go to
the webcast.
Hughes.
What madam chair members
committee and can use with the
coalition of sustainable
communities.
Rise of Albuquerque Los crucis
Santa Fe County city tells town
and county and Los Alamos each
of our members look forward to
working with the land office for
many years to come and creating
of solar arrays around our
communities that we can all
benefit from thank you very
much.
Thank you.
How.
Everybody hear me.
The area of.
Okay thank you hi my name is
Danny County climate energy
advocate with conservation
voters Mexico and for reasons
REC today we strongly support
this bill and hope you do too
thank you.
I don't see any further do we
have any comments on the webcast
we don't have any any audience.
Seeing no further comments
Committee members.
Madam chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative I just have a
question of curiosity really
looking at this key asset is
services state and lose both the
state's does both states the
land could be used for either
solar.
Madam chair defer to.
Chair representative so full the
state scenes we over the surface
as well as the state hello there
are situations where we have
split the state.
Only in the service we don't.
The state so that the green.
In terms of ownership is where
we just stop service the vast
majority of our land is blue
which means we own bowl and then
there is a lady.
Brown which is our middle state
only I'm not sure that that's
indicated on here.
That last road and per cent.
Thank you thank you very much.
Representative Zamora thank you
madam chair thank you for your
presentation.
Laces on your first bill first.
So why.
Is an important we're calling in
making this program yes this is
codifying into law or what is
that chair Representative Zamora
deaths is confined to our and
the reason why we want to that
is this is the state of the the
function of this office and what
this offices is here it's right
now the revenues earned from
existing and future renewable
energy projects is expected to
be in the hundreds of dollars
over the life of the projects
are the place.
so what this also does is it
safe that office for instance
for these projects which now
have a record sixty five billion
dollars.
Just over the last four years
save our taxpayers and our
legislators from going in using
funding from the general fund
and and what does it is a
critical public services such as
education so we want to ensure
that this continues the state is
going to also we don't have any
changes in the future engine
thank you for that and madam
chair and madam chair and and
and Representative Lujan.
If it's a Representative.
If this doesn't get codified
into law.
The land commissioner.
Lose.
Representative Zamora yes
Representative faster enrollment
hello we need to fix our audio.
Thank.
Can you just.
The public webcast on.
Madam chair I did check my phone
and make sure it was showing up
on the phone because and then
the last.
Committee meeting that we had as
we did yes right before.
And it is working on this so if
you have folks contact.
Zoom and Harris but the webcast.
Right.
You're able to tackle
but I'm close to it so I can
response.
Thanks.
This the computer tech go to.
Yeah.
Representative over there.
Okay this call to.
Mostly.
This
is a.
Is.
Legislative.
This was in.
Representative.
Forties.
You an error please check we
have some comments that the
webcast online have you could
you check to see if the webcast
online the public we have
already in use.
If they can.
I already had in recent.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and continued so we worked I
wasn't asking the question if
this doesn't get caught
recording in progress.
This is on your side.
If if this doesn't get codified
in the law.
Does that money revert somewhere
else other than the State Land
Office or what have you know Sir
it doesn't get cut off until
it's too is projects over to the
discretion that commission and
those revenues of our duty it
currently will continue to do
that.
So.
What it is this makes it
Makes it gives our arms this is
projects continued to feature.
And I'm sure there's a lot to
that answer that we could part
goes for hours in that thank you
thank you madam chair and thank
you for your answer.
Representative Rehm madam chair
and Representative Lujan I.
unfortunately that several
questions but I think they're
mostly to go to your experts
some of the and so that'll be
good madam chair and.
Of Representative Lujan so I'm
trying to understand we you
already have a percent filling
this position madam chair have
for positions for FTEs there RT
of
and the officers yes yeah and
madam chair Representative
Lujan.
Has what I am saying this when
you go ahead new codified in law
this.
You make a very specific
description of the job
description.
And when.
Sure you want to expand that job
description to do something else
you know we find some other
energy.
I don't see the four years of
experience that.
So madam chair
Representative U. as in job
descriptions and and the.
I I don't these FTEs or
executive for.
Our other possible classify
positions to the state.
However in in changing those job
descriptions State.
The staff or more there's
already one that stuck with you
the state personnel office the
DFA where they come offices
descriptions today thank you for
two of the purpose of what the
function of the new skills jobs
are so I think to the staffing
any kind of issues Madam.
Representative.
Madam chair representative so
what we're trying to accomplish
here is putting in a a broader.
A statement in the duties of
land commissioner that the land
offices to maintain an office of
renewed G. there's already
language and more about you know
hiring petroleum engineer in the
oil and gas functions and other
areas so
that is a very broad statement
it does not say a you know it
doesn't micromanage
so when commissioner would be
able to
essentially manage that program
number that we commissioner is
in the future and that's
important
but nothing in the legislation
having the office would prohibit
or affect any other energy
source any other revenue string
the commission really focused on
kind of.
You know all of the above in
terms of generating revenue and
diversify our revenue streams.
Madam chair Representative Lujan
please don't take this opposing.
What I'm saying is when you cast
the stone changes you have to
come back and play with the
start of the year yes share and
I'm saying you already have that
I don't you may I I understand
you wanna you wanna specific in
language but sometimes I think
it's best to just leave it as of
this I I don't know if you have
a comment a little bit of on but
that was my call in that I would
say madam chair representative
you know what I need to streets
was growing and we have to make
these investments after sure
these investments into card by
something like this and so I
really of drives that okay.
Madam chair and the
Representative Lujan this is for
your expert so our renewables
will in the future.
Offset or replace oil and gas.
So what has your office looked
at as how to tax removals to
equal the amount of oil and gas
revenue if.
Representative we never reserves
that we are going to replace the
oil and gas with renewable
energy this is a in additional
revenue stream
you know we made two point four
billion last year there's no way
that we can make up for that in
the short term with two layers
G. that doesn't mean that
hundreds of millions of dollars
in renewable energy percent drop
change we make nine million a
year after ask I will culturally
seeing for example so you know
we had twelve million last year
with renewable energy so we view
this as a a growth area but it's
it's it's not going to be a
replacement with regard to your
question about taxi you know
really the question is are we
how we come up with revenue for
the state in terms of renewable
energy
when we do projects on state
trust so we get paid
essentially you know it's it's
not technically one of the
things actually it's it's one of
the ways we get paid like
program project is about four
percent plus we have a plethora
of other charges in different
fees for rentals installation
charges it secretary all of that
revenue.
Goes to help offset the general
so well it's coming from the tax
side it is providing that
impacted terms of offset
possibly with the government
needs to come up with funding
service so that is incorporated
you we try to have as high of
the numbers we possibly can get
get the most money possible but
also be considered because our
other place Texas Wyoming
you know whether solar this we
have competitive so we're trying
to get that that market I think
we've done a good job.
Madam chair in the
Representative Lujan and the
expert I forgot what you need
certainly Stewart Stewart Mr
Stewart continues give me I I
understand the
of.
The you know Google land part of
it in the and please you guys
are doing a great job I mean.
Look at our permanent fund you
know so I'm not I'm not
attacking that I'm trying to
understand that so what of the
energy that we produce it's most
of it going out of state and
then I'll make a compound
question by saying tell me about
how the tax season is on the
Energy Gorham St.
Madam chair representative in
terms of taxed backs out of our
of our
act but I would just say like
any other industry we want to
provide energy locally or
artificially propped locally and
we want to be next right for the
gas Permian basin right this is
we are producing and it's
exported its and national
economy it's international
market
same crew in need now our export
market for example wind it is
really just California so we are
producing more of some of these
projects you know part of the
other adding up in thousands of.
You know I think there might
want to two thousand what so
absolutely we are we are
exporting the best thing about
this
it worked we are our local
energy needs and we need to you
produce a product.
And and that's part of that.
Distaff launcher.
Representative we we're we're
not taxed.
It is your right now here is K.
right now we're.
We're looking to he has Mr
Stewart had mentioned in market
yes.
There are competitors and so we
want to see just as as mentioned
to as we're exporting gas
division.
This energy resources this is
this to become a copy for.
Thank you madam chair chair so
we're not taxing and the energy
that we're sending out of state
was senator to California.
Madam chairman I don't know that
there's an export tax
specifically now there are all
sorts of taxes that are that and
Revenue that is generated when
you have projects in New Mexico
those things and local state
either there are taxes
applicable that if you come in
solar companies okay I'm not
aware that there is an export
tax percent once again you know
on the Land Office side
you know from our perspective
it's if we can get projects on
state trust very diverse taxes
on the the state trust lands
that because we're generating
the government revenue and
that's offsetting the general
fund in the same way that you
would have a tax dollar company
so it you know I think that
that's our objective the
commissioners this is a strong
advocate of clean energy and
those things that also
automatically this is a life the
state of New Mexico.
Madam chair Mr Stewart again I
think what I'm trying to
understand how we're making
money US state and you know I
agree just look at the permanent
fund you're doing good but I was
trying to understand how with
taxing is on the production of
of of a lecture city but we move
on
Of.
Last summer I read an article.
And and I was unaware of the
windmills producing the energies
were killing so many rafters and
a company in Wyoming was fined
three hundred thousand by the US
fish and Wildlife for killing
eagles.
Can you talk to us about what is
so are we having that problem
here what are we doing to
mitigated any of that.
Madam chair representative use
the reality is that you're gonna
have conflicts with birds in
winter and that's something we
need to take serious and and
when these projects come before
the land office to submit
project plans the biological
reviews we try to go through you
know a process to ensure that
that those are minimized as much
as possible and that steps are
taken to ensure that there is
the least amount of conflict as
possible but that is an issue
and it's something that needs to
be addressed on a project by
project project by project
basis and and and our folks work
with companies to do that in
addition to any of our last C.
needs to comply with all other
applicables laws that federal
state.
On that.
Something that they would need
to comply with yeah the madam
chair I'm just in Mr Stewart I'm
just concerned that everyone
sees get something from the.
Is Mr Stewart can you give us
what is the percentage of state
land of the state.
So
gentleman Representative in
terms of renewable energy or
just we've we've got I think
it's twelve percent thanks for.
Twelve percent of the state the
state.
Representative required kind of.
Fifty after the fact thirteen
million acres general state we
have a nine million features of
services state with some places
just discussed we have bowl so
that number.
Com get tips.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
What thank you madam chair thank
you Representative the efficient
both for being here today
welcome to your first is to I
have yet to have the privilege
of doing you're doing right now.
Thank you so
I believe there is a figure that
you mentioned it was fourteen
hundred percent increase was
that all renewable service only
wind or solar so the agency has
increased renewable energy by
fourteen hundred percent that's
where the tire ages okay thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative and do you know
what that makes of our total
energy production in the state
of New Mexico I will defer to.
Representative I don't know
that.
We do have our director we.
I'm not aware thank you Sir.
Sure we will get back to okay
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I appreciate
your answer so with renewable
energy or sustainable energy or
whatever we're calling it these
days does that include nuclear
energy as well.
Madam chair.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and what a
geo thermal energy madam chair
again this is something is the
research.
Our fax to.
The future.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and so okay
regarding the energy transition
act passed in twenty nineteen
how does this bill help
accomplish the goals of that
piece of legislation madam
chair.
Madam chair
That's a very good question
absolutely this is the direction
confidence goals we have set the
ETA and has really set as far
has is Representative what to
say so this process if you'd
like to add.
If the.
It complements it helping us
Vance we've traveled renewable
energy on state trust land after
quadruple renewable energy four
years so alternately the more
stable energy generation
systems.
To okay thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and so
just the solar portion and see
if solar and wind do you know
which ones Egolf is solar Egolf
or wind so.
Information was half of.
Interventions that and.
Well so projects place right
now.
Okay so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative some
guessing with Baker according to
a parent yes and then your fans
have thirty three least
applications sixteen winter wind
and thirteen the sewer and
fourteen.
Excuse me just six and.
Projects in place right now.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so.
The office currently pursuing
both equally or is anyone taking
a priority Madam chair.
Madam chair representative so
wanted some reasons that have to
do with production tax credits
on the wind side at the federal
level that really got a lot of
the companies moving quickly in
years past back we are seeing a
lot more interest in terms of
Saylor we wanted to bowl we had
to ramp up in office the
commissioner created the office
of twenty eighteen we hire
people our staff so you know we
had to jump a little bit there
but we are seeing a lot more
solar interest.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and you know
it looks like that's the case
because what I'm seeing from the
VA I think the to six from just
the last shows that about thirty
percent of energy produces wind
and then that trickles down I
think so there's only about four
point nine seven percent so you
know I just to see a little bit
of a lopsided figure there is
like to bring that up for you
all and so.
Regarding Representative rings
question regarding while I and
these I think it's wind and
solar they both have a large
impact on wildlife what is the
the land office doing
specifically to ensure that the
solar producers make changes I
know some places they public one
black propeller on one of the
the wind turbines and helps
these birds CM coming in they
don't just ran through so there
any projects or solutions that
the land office is doing Madam
chair representative.
The question is.
Chair representative absolutely
agree as is the case with any of
our activities on state trust
lands on insurance.
Possible eight renewable energy
is absolutely no difference you
have that the issues first of
the nation's wildlife corridors
where solar panels can give huge
losses
that so as I mentioned.
Before project plans to in
office and our biologist and
others you know they create
Act that you know best practices
they need to be followed
to ensure that that we minimize
those conflicts as much as we
can thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and the
expert witness store I believe
and do you have those.
Let's start those things that I
could see the regular DO correct
see the policies.
Madam chair representative
we're.
Process appreciate the question
finalize the.
A yes management policy for
renewable energy projects and
that will be published but it's
completely absolutely but
they're all of
our.
We're transparency if there ever
any concerns about a particular
one we're happy to information
okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative so I
agree with you I think it's it's
it's definitely get this on the
books sentiment impacts
different species a little
different numbers it's mainly
get hit by these wind turbines
but back when there's a certain
air pressure in the air and it
causes certain heights it
actually makes the backs loans
explode.
And that's that the use of
pollinators a lot of more and so
we need to make sure that we
keep those in the state and
don't hinder their their
survival so I appreciate the
answers of madam chair thank you
so much thank you Representative
little yes thank you madam chair
Representative Lujan percent
like to begin by thanking for
Sanchez the school.
We visited New Mexico on the
road to
continues the work we've been on
this road to continue.
Energy transition act is that
started in nineteen and it moves
towards that goal of the
diverse.
I said I would like to.
And supportive of.
Institutionalizing
This this office in.
In.
Forgive me I have.
And representative thank but.
So I would like to have it.
Okay excuse.
Those and thank you chair
representative appreciate that
That question
I'd like to do that the.
A second okay.
Has mentioned by by chair.
Chris chin.
We need to we have a motion for
two passed we have any objection
to the motion.
Okay take role Representative on
you know yes.
Representative walked no.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little.
Representative right.
Yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
By Senator yes.
madam chair.
To pass.
Thank you madam chair.
Well I.
On the one where I.
Neither.
Welcome back.
Yes this you madam chair right
number.
From this is the P. line were
and I will today is general
Russell super you're going to of
New Mexico military institute.
One of the things that you may
not know is that each of you
have the ability to nominate.
A.
Student from your district to
intended not for military.
And the answer to that last I
have a this legislative
scholarship of the main for.
The general moles who used to
serve patients very bottom for
many years
to provide scholarships to New
Mexico students who wish to
attend New Mexico military
institute.
If you are a freshman in high
school.
The current law if you.
Get the scholarship for four
years of high school you are
eligible to get the scholarship
for your two years of junior.
And so this bill I to correct.
Situation so we've tried to the
four year limit off so that
students can continue their
education at New Mexico military
institute and continue to
receive an all scholarship for
up to an additional two years
for their junior college program
so accidents since the the bill
before you and if you like at
anything the manager thank you
yes this this is a very
important program New Mexico
military institute the
implemented in nineteen eighty
nine and has grown significantly
up to date on average we have
two hundred students from the
state of New Mexico every year
that are take that dollar.
I'm not sure this will help with
recruiting I don't know how
many.
Thank six years well but I
believe it will have a
significant impact on my
potential liability.
Students who right now so.
We had about thirty five percent
rule from high school into our
computer.
I think this will have Policy
Committee is positive impact on
that others no money associated
with this request.
We offer secure.
Okay thank you let's go to the
audience do we have any.
Forty comments in the audience.
Do we have a.
Comments on the webcast.
Any opposition.
CNN committee members are
representative of madam chair
since we're gonna.
Have Representative Nibert I
think he was a member of the
last two years we ought to make
you stay here while.
But no general.
We have new members on the
committee would you explain to
them what scholarship they can
give to a constituent so they
understand.
This program it's really a good
program.
We remove it as a group option
is saying all of those general
Richard Knowles.
No legislation fellowship it
authorizes all one hundred
twelve members of the
legislature both house and
Senate to send the student to
Mexico military court right now
the four years it's pays
immediately right off the top
fifty percent of the total cost
of education to attend when I
became president superintendent
we only had about sixteen
percent representation from
Mexico very broadly to it now
that the corporate rate of
thirty three percent of students
from Mexico and I think again
this will help us that number up
so each of you will receive a
packet from us
we nominate someone if you don't
have a nominee within your
district we will send you
suggestions of students who have
applied to school and meet the
qualifications for the
scholarship the after they that
receive this scholarship then
they have to maintain a certain
grade point average and certain
positive standing within the
corporate this as long as they
do that the scholarship for.
And as assistant program of and
I think the legislature the base
program funds over to your
playing provided money to the
delegation.
Yeah and madam chair but
generals explain is if you don't
have anyone in your district you
can get another person anyway
thank you madam chair.
Representative Chasey I thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Nibert in
general.
I just wanted to make a comment
a couple of comments I had the
pleasure of serving with general
loans and
He was
quite a gentleman and a real.
A real statement.
I.
Also have had the pleasure of
nominating.
Some wonderful students over the
years in fact one was the
granddaughter of the late great
Max call to his chair of House
Appropriations and she actually
left legislative district.
But for a lot of years that I
did not ask for my scholarship
designation on I just want to.
Let you know I am sure all
hundred twelve of us would be
willing to.
Do that regularly so
I using that better and with
that I just.
I think this is a great idea I
have could.
Extended family of choice my god
sons
one of his sisters graduated
from.
And is in college in Dallas now
in the works.
This is about that thank you
very much thank you madam chair
up to to address services case
of COVID.
What happens with the
scholarships when Representative
does not have someone from their
district and maybe the
information and get out it
doesn't mean that scholarship
goes on
the the.
Either those of us that have
more than six hundred ten
applications
those folks we can only do one
so those other ten or so folks
from New Mexico
will we'll get a scholarship
generally and the.
Folks at the institute will try
to match the rest of it receives
recommendations with the
scholarships that are available
so I'm sure here there are
hundreds well
provided scholars even though
you may not know who your
particular person to sponsor
some but somebody's going back
to see but it does give you the
opportunity to select from our
if you don't them then the
answer to try to match those
Mexico.
Students up with the
scholarships or grants to at the
fact of scholarship.
Chair I could add to that one
again when I first came here we
were actually only using about
seventy of the scholarships per
year because they were
absolutely the restricted to be
used with in your district.
Did not.
Could not have a candidate it
just went use and I came back to
you as a body and asked for some
latitude on that again gave it
to the show will be live on is
initially is your
dollars the pharmacy or the
pharmacy they get off work.
July one until we begin the
school year which is what we
always want to simply try to
fill those that we don't have a
nomination again Representative
not perfect we look as close as
we can get to the thank.
A neighbor County and
neighboring cities.
Suggestion.
Allow us to use that nomination
but that's one of the reasons we
were able to increase the
participation of New Mexico.
Sixteen the court over the.
Hi now watching all one hundred
and twelve dollars.
Thank you thank you
Representative walk thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I want to say
thank you for putting forward
this piece of legislation thanks
very important at so many
friends that I see go their own
with their so I just have a
quick question about folks that
are already attending school
would they be eligible for this
scholarship if they don't
already have it Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative this
was take the four year cap off
so if they were a senior in high
school and we're choosing to
continue their studies New
Mexico military institute
capitals office would qualify
for their first and second.
If they were very just starting
out at the institute in their
senior year of high school it
would not apply because they
would not be able to be there
for four years as.
They would.
This is a please reach that Max
but for freshmen who started at
the institute.
Want to go to junior college.
This will allow them
to see.
So
is where they are.
Really only affect freshman in
the current class
well I guess that's on your it
would affect everyone who
decides to go to college all
right Sir.
Yes that we use the.
Three three years.
Actually here or to.
On.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative thank you
general personal all of you for
being here and I fully support
about thank you madam vice chair
representative ring.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and just a
couple quick questions the
growth in your New Mexico
students madam chair general is
so impressive and and we do want
to encourage that I had a
question about whether it's
possible for student.
A high school graduate in the
state of New Mexico who did not
do their four years at the
military is to can they apply
for the junior college portion.
Madam is yes ma'am of we have
the number of students to attend
the the high school in their
local district to one stay with
their friends but in a tend to
call us and some of those are
our athletes and they come
because we've offered an
athletic scholarship if I date
this eight point out the
administration was with your
college of.
In addition doubling up the NC
double a.
As long as you offered an
incentive to everyone into
categories in it's not
considered
at the against you in terms of
fellowship.
So for all New Mexico students
who want to attend junior
college in place for with us we
would lead by giving them the
renewable scholarship which I
can offer actually immediately
fifty percent of their cost of
education to attend in a lot and
now with the opportunity
scholarship we basically offer
them a free a free scholarship
which works.
The most recent one that we have
New Mexico state graduates in
two years DA this place for us
to adjust to the national
championship and the mobile just
completed the the ball game
okay Mexico state so we again
with very close part at where we
can recruit athletes some of
those come just for.
The question.
Thank you madam chair thank you
general well I think you also
answered my second question
which with the.
The opportunity scholarship in
combination with the nose
scholarship.
The state even further the
percentage of New Mexicans
taking advantage of our military
institute into college that so
I could add to that that is
again I think everyone knows the
opportunity scholarships for two
students this last also need to
find other means of funding the
education for.
This will allow us to.
The pressure on the opportunity
because now we're meeting with
providing fifty percent of the
scholarship results we would
have been well I felt.
Okay.
Did this help that if you will
to relieve some pressure on the
opportunity by the state can
fifty percent of the calls all
day.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative right.
Madam chair to pass
Representative.
We'll go to Representative
Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and
representative can explain one
more time what this changes the
qualification on.
Does not change Madam chair
representative that changed
qualification changes the number
of years that a student would be
eligible to receive a
scholarship so thanks a cap off
its captive for years now so the
student to spend all four years
in high school most.
Would not be eligible to
continue that so if you were to
years of junior college so this
remove that cap so they could
continue to receive that
scholarship to.
Thank you thank you for that
madam chair that's all my
questions thank you we have a
motion for two passed by
Representative three the second
by Representative the law do we
have any opposition to that
motion CNN Representative you
have.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Please come and.
Thank you.
Madam chair members earlier the
Representative lofted you would
like to be sitting in this chair
an opportunity coming up.
It was.
Okay night for.
I think in house.
Three Mister Walker I think.
On that.
Your.
Representative Garber's the
representative of the fifty
nine.
The bill before you is actually.
Three this is the bill through
the bill we heard last week
regarding the emergency powers I
will repeat the arguments of
this tell you a little bit about
the form of the Google is number
one this legislative for
constitutional.
Very.
To.
House Bill.
Eighty
The other differences
and I and.
Probably one of the ones that
would in order for us to change
the governor's order in this
right requirement for another
three yes members and to modify
the executive order directing
and house bill the this is
simple.
And explained the.
LOL and we encourage or support
for this bill thank you.
Okay thank you.
They're sporting products from
the webcast.
do we have any opposing
comments.
And committee members.
More of a motive just a second
we have to pass
sentence.
To.
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair representative once
again.
I want to state money opposition
to this because of that you're
presupposing that within ninety
days I'm going to know exactly
the science of whatever
emergency there and I don't I do
not agree that we will.
When this body is an equal
branch of government.
I will support.
But until that time.
Right now the executive has the
power and duty to preserve and
protect the health and welfare
of the State.
And the science would have.
precluded of this epidemic which
is really not over.
would have precluded a safe
return to a legislative session
within ninety days we did not
know that.
That we were how to mitigate the
danger there was no vaccine yet
and I I just think just madam
speaker were about some of the
measures that were taken I think
it saved.
How was by and I will not ever
so tell with I.
Until we are a more professional
provided her and are able to hi
to questions and we just
probably not going to happen
time but until this
legislature's equal branch of
government
we have to rely on our governors
of all the science something.
Thank you.
K. E.
we have a due pass motion by
Representative Zamora second by
Representative we.
The state will Representative on
in order no.
Representative block yes Sir.
Representative Chasey.
No.
Representative Hochman Vigil
not.
Representative little known.
Representative right yes ma'am
yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Budget Figaro yes.
Madam chair Johnson yes.
This.
Representative Nibert it has to
pass.
For both thank you madam.
I.
Thank you to.
This bill is a house joint
resolution one.
Thank.
Yes yes right thank you madam
chair thank you.
Natalie Figueroa your last year
Representative in house district
thirty I am honored to bring you
this morning house joint
resolution one which would bring
before the voters of New Mexico
in the office the opportunity to
create a truly independent
redistricting committee.
And we're diving into the
resolution we need.
Co sponsor who is not here he's
thinking tax bill track come
later.
And our experts this morning on
rights he had asked that could
record of the New Mexico state.
On my left hand.
Balance the reflective in in
first and current vice president
of the last two.
Now.
We have another.
Well no.
Of the answer the big question
why.
Why do we needed redistricting.
Madam chair New Mexico's.
Districting process.
It's a concrete and a
considerable fiscal report
restoring public trust.
Process citizens across the
state have called for it.
and have joined our process in
this last time.
In two thousand twenty two.
Seventy seven.
New Mexicans.
Stated and this is a cost age
groups across parties and across
genders constantly moves and
said.
Districting process so this
resolution.
The issue one of the.
For.
Let's be absolutely clear it
will not remove politics from
the redistricting process that
is not possible.
But it will remove the parent in
the this conflict of interest
that we have a New Mexico and
allowing legislature to drop our
own lines.
Districts and essentially to
zero dollars.
You all off to her.
Voters should choose their
elected officials not the and we
re.
In our last process.
New Mexico took a.
Transformative step forward with
the citizens redistricting.
And this joint resolution is to
honor that we're and this is the
staffs some of the work of an
independent group remains.
It is not approved or changed by
legislators.
That that act just was
incomplete to did not have that
lasted.
So.
The other question most often
two ingredients right now and
here is why do this now we don't
have to look at in the district
the for seven years.
Any answer is because New
Mexicans across the state are
focused on the issue right now
they had this recent chance to
be involved your excited and
they want this the next step
take.
How we just gone through this I
hope we also.
Read the process to work and
what needs to be changed so now
is the time to address all of
those pieces and craft
legislation.
It is strong and for your policy
set for the next redistricting
side.
Thirteen months to.
Introduce themselves anything
they need to say and then madam
chair I left with.
Into the actual resolution and
look at a piece.
State initiatives respect your
time.
And while selection for
organizations leading do exactly
this.
Time processes.
Thank.
Madam chair and vice chair.
So if you look at the please a
lot of here is actually the long
filling in at this morning I
think it deserves a moment to
look at all the steps.
Concerns with how this
independent redistricting
commission the.
So that is well sorry session
one is for you current
constitutional.
Section A. B. C. and and changes
section.
Feels that languages process.
That is the language that.
That is the language that
Requires a constitutional
amendment because it says the
legislature be more statute we
apportion implementation.
So that is stricken out in
sections the new language.
It says the districting
commission will be established
by August fifteenth of the year
ending in zero so that they have
to do their.
One of the last acting chair is
at the time.
and part of that was to the
COVID sentences little.
But we
hear plenty of time
to take the.
The independent redistricting
commission proposed here would
have members this.
Transaction details you through
all of the appropriation.
the restrictions.
Can be.
I'm sorry could you say I'm
looking the sections are numbers
and so I'm wondering cases of
subsection.
Of.
Yes it is to.
happy.
The terminal.
Here at the station through who
can and cannot be a member of
this.
The.
The state ethics commission.
Bills that.
This is paragraphs do bills that
will of thirty eight nominees
for the commission.
Question right here will.
Hi.
Law offices process.
here and we had to hand.
Thank you all we need to have in
front of you speaking Madam
chair of the past and I will
just continue in the interest
of.
Thank you okay.
So refuse section.
You paragraph he
would look like and why is.
UCP.
Yes the ethics.
New Mexico if mandated I.
Then it didn't take no action
unless these two members of each
of the major two largest
parties.
Come to it.
It is the only such organization
right now it's in our state
government.
But that would require.
That this pool creation.
Nominees is barked orders.
From the very beginning it has
bipartisan because the ethics
commission's actions must be
rate payers they cannot come to
a decision without two major
parties agree.
They create that pool of thirty
eight.
And after will of thirty eight
is presented to legislative.
The speaker of the house and the
house minority leader the pro
tem and Senate minority leader
each have the power to strike
two names off the.
That would be a total of eight.
That they can staff.
Then the remaining pool of
thirty goes back to the ethics
commission.
Handing to the commissioners.
The value of this is to lead an
issue we saw with the services
through the.
Committee.
There was an assumption that
legislation was drafted that
we've talked to each other and
plans.
There we need to make sure we
had to graphic ethnic gender
diversity on this committee
turns out with the dual top
tubes so we have with
Lack of diversity that we
intended to be.
When the ethics commission lots
of that thirty.
They're instructed here
language.
To consider ethnic
to consider Geographic to
consider the diversity in the
state of New Mexico.
To make sure that included.
In the independent district.
For up to.
Section two party.
The other additional inspection
section to party.
We're asking these appointees
take an oath of office the
state.
Is
that they will do their work
there and partial.
Supporting the constitution of
which this language will be
marked it appears to.
And then we'll take.
Publicly in the health to with
the same way we are.
Corrections GNH deal with
vacancies should be a right and
see on the commission how the
financial.
If someone should need to be
removed.
Those considerations hopefully
would never come to pass but
have to be considered in the.
In section two H. the
redistricting committee so the
ballot for twins.
In accordance with and now we
are on page six.
The same district.
That this is redistricting
committee used in our last
article Senator traditional best
practices of redistricting.
One difference would be page six
line nine.
Total deviation plus or minus
five K..
Act.
in our last correct so we used a
total deviation ten percent.
And we ended up with maps that
were in some places nine seven
in other places positive three
so the deviation remains similar
to this proposal maximum ten
percent but this limited to
maximum maybe five plus I.
That's one difference I want to
be absolutely clear madam chair
if with any changes that are
proposed in the process.
The other main difference here
see on page seven.
And that is section two J..
Same as the citizens
redistricting committee.
If we have an independent
commission under this proposal
they cannot use rely upon a
reference arson dental tell the
massive made in the chapter to
make sure we're not violating
any federal law.
It's been half point it looked
like the commission lasted with
a commitment and replies but
again without using realligned
or referencing artists.
And item number two there.
The redistricting commission
shall not consider the voting
and.
This.
That is also of the difference.
Okay.
Reserves in section.
To.
Two nine.
Members of the public is across.
The redistricting commission
will have public hearings around
the state.
Together the improve.
In the Houston.
Westminster based on an in.
But they cannot subordinate the
best practice principles.
Submit those to those that
since.
That is the gist of this piece.
And and and or common language
in the what is funded just like
it's funded every time it's
funded by the state legislature
in the ten years when we have to
do this.
Commissioners will for per diem.
Page nine paragraph the
commissioners are required to
disclose communication.
The.
Parents and the possibility.
Right manager usually pieces of
gear one thing we stand for
questions alrighty let's go to
the audience do we have any
plans to do this morning.
And let's go as quickly as we
can thank you thank you madam
chair my apologies I don't know
I believe we have to do it now.
On the bill so with that and
then.
This movie for discussion Hey
absolute and then and then it
built Representative Chasey.
If.
Has motion to.
And then the bill all second go
head Representative vice chair.
Send your message amendment okay
thank you madam chair page two.
sixty.
And that is because.
It is.
And that is because the person
has.
Have to do definitions.
This language in the
constitution gives the
legislature.
The power to raise about
district.
But it's also potentially it's
never been used but it could be
used to decide that the state of
New Mexico eight more than
seventy Representative for more
than thirty two sorry less than
we could decide it needs less
than.
And HM one did not want to
remove that that power from the
legislature.
So the language very certificate
thank you Jeremy in the
amendment.
Says.
The legislature revised
statutes.
Members and.
Number of members in the
members.
On page four line fifteen.
Yes Sir from.
Just absolutely clear that the
intent of the.
Nine commission passed three
members from each of.
And three more.
And pays a line a just to make
absolutely clear.
And approved.
Is replaced with these plans
developed by the district.
For what we're talking.
Thank you madam chair that's the
amendment.
Since.
Thank you.
Madam chair because this year's
yes what.
The
representative hard for good
morning.
And giving that my committee
members a few seconds to review
the amendment.
Senator.
Mentors as.
By Representative sorry I missed
this there was some out there
that was distracting me.
But you're starting lines that
are strictly.
So.
On
the first page.
Madam chair and representative
you're absolutely correct and
perhaps the amendment should
simply say insert and use of
section.
In between line sixteen
seventeen.
Would that be the more correct
way to do that.
Yes that's probably the right
thing.
Madam chair I'm not an expert on
stature construction but I think
so but you don't want to strike
which is stricken because then
you're.
Just.
Madam I think the drafters
sentences clarify those those
lines with mainstream.
What.
The
motion to active management.
Time.
Madam chair just to be very
clear on the minutes we just say
on page two comma.
Insert following that section
and for that.
Between certain lines between.
So would be between.
Funds.
And this is what probably madam
chair would have to be fixed by
the.
Analyst
between eight thirteen and
seventeen.
Mr going to.
And insert a new sub section G.
which bank off of.
Concern there out the following
new subsection not parts right.
Madam chair can we stay on page
two we're lines fourteen to
sixteen right and then left in
their entirety.
She needs.
Okay can you say that again this
to mines fourteen years sixteen.
Are strict and tired to the
in order to insert included the
following subsections.
Yes by.
Does that sound better
Representative Chasey.
I.
I think.
I don't know what the right
thing thank.
We need to do the other parts
of.
To.
Full of natural law is
frequently expressed.
Your decks two thousand two no
one should be a judge in a
matter in which they are
themselves concern.
Now I have one this legislature.
Long enough to have developed a
great deal of admiration.
For you and the work to.
Even those of you with from my
very solvency.
Policy issues seems to work hard
and honestly.
Work.
Good.
As you see it.
But there are some matters of
concern to New Mexicans.
Former should not be the judge
if you are a result is.
Please let the citizens of New
Mexico I just passed to a
disinterested body thank you
thank you next please let's keep
their comments to two minutes.
Chair of the committee I said
K..
A professor emeritus.
Mr river.
Where my interest in this issue
we district driveline and
creating maps of with.
Equity I represent the The New
Mexico first redistricting task
force co chair for the last year
and a half with the
We're following out of the work
that was done by justice John.
And judge Kennedy as created
prior to shares Mexico chair of
this Task Force.
I just want to add the process
has been good for the citizens
of New Mexico because.
Two and education of a wider
section of our populations
regarding their responsibilities
as citizens as voters
The continued education of our
citizens.
Will be is this legislation
With increases of participation
of.
Broader cross section of
services New Mexico this
process.
Encouraging you to support this
House resolution thank you thank
you next.
Thank you madam chair.
Good morning ladies and
gentleman of.
Your account work I am the
project coordinator for fair
districts with Mexico four years
now.
Thank all of you for being part
of this conversation as well as
the experts with us here today
thank you.
To be fair redistricting should.
This about my party's issues.
Or about.
Issue.
About one issue.
Which is redistricting stills of
the electric.
One twenty poll voters showed
that seventy seven percent
wanted an independent
redistricting commission
separate from the legislature.
We think the twenty twenty to
station for passing the
redistricting act this is
disturbing Committee led to a
rate increase in public
awareness and education.
The very.
Hello this is the first today
that's the next step in building
electrodes confidence.
In New Mexico's political
process I passing H. J. R. one
and letting the voters decide if
the voters want an independent
process.
Lastly members of the committee
please review this you provided
which lets the organization and
she individual public leaders
who support an independent
redistricting commission.
Thank you ladies and gentleman.
Your vote for it to pass.
Next please.
Thank you madam chairman of the
committee hi Mrs brown also
director for common cause New
Mexico also for supports for
speaking to their electors that
the other way around as a
representative mentioned
earlier.
This is wrong this that are
beginning to adopt it
redistricting commission those
are neighbors in Arizona and
Colorado personally I did work
with the black communities here
in New Mexico during the twenty
twenty ones redistricting
process to make sure one of the
requirements in that process I
have
We interest reserves of was
reflected in our black
communities that would not have
been possible without citizens
redistricting commission
wouldn't be possible without
independent redistricting
commission which is why we
strongly support house
resolution one and do you
believe that a lot of your
decisions also support this bill
thank you thank you for the
comments.
Madam chair members of the
committee hello Girling
president of the league of women
voters New Mexico and we have
already given the committee
handed out so three.
He believes that the
responsibility for redistricting
should be best.
In an independent redistricting
commission.
We support redistricting.
The New Mexicans.
A meaningful basis letting their
representatives and facilitate
hold government accountable.
Thank you.
Thank you any further comments
from the audience supporting the
bill.
Seeing and also to the webcast.
Mr chair my apologies that I was
supposed to address that to
particularly people who have
time constraints in our
background experience former
Chief Justice at topics to
businesses dissecting Committee
and again to get the value.
are there in.
The professor has to get back to
class contains more public
comment for okay.
Online.
She was a professor.
It is not as out to stir Chavis
what was the profession maybe we
be the case Santa.
Position of the assumptions okay
we Mr and who's the other one.
Java's and taps at Chavis.
Mr Chavis you began.
Representative I believe justice
Chavez was in his remarks
writing.
So it's possible.
But I believe he's from Mars to
the committee.
Madam chair.
I hold in the hand I'm gonna go
ahead and go back to her
Mr Chavis we will reach your
remarks any time I go back to
Curtis.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kurt regular on the director
of Lutheran affects
administrative New Mexico with
an average morning also
expresses the position of New
Mexico compensate churches I'm
here today to stand strong.
As organizations we believe that
all residents of our nation and
specifically New Mexico have
responsibility to make
government function well not to
abandon Our Democracy but to
engage in a spirit of robust
civic duty during the recent
redistricting process we saw
robust civic duty from citizens
across the state as a voice
their thoughts and shared in the
effort redistricting is often
tire we were primarily in hands
of legislators we witness the
office.
And damage to our democracy for
America to gerrymandering of
legislative districts are
encouraging you to support HDR
one now and not to push this
decision down the road thank you
for this opportunity to speak to
you this morning thank you next
we have R. T. Kennedy.
These are madam chairman
committee my name is Robert
Kennedy and along with some
former Chief Justice of Chavis I
would say co chair of the New
Mexico first task force of
twenty twenty on redistricting.
And
That we certainly undertook our
work with the end goal of the
constitutional amendment to be
passed the reason for that is is
actually manifest after after
two thousand and twenty one.
a nonpartisan elections
Commission.
Has taken the
has taken the self dealing
politics out of.
what what is one party
Republican gerrymandering in
Michigan and has even up the
score giving voices to
everybody.
And protecting all political all
political parties and their.
And in their district.
The principles involved New
Mexico first passports
recommendations are clear.
The of the purpose is to protect
communities and that political
parties committees of address
being racial economic
environmental select from
competing maps
the nonpartisan nominating
committee we had a twenty twenty
one
what are far beyond.
what was done by the legislature
Ms and considering thousands of
maps that have been open and
transparent process.
it was data driven the public
input and open meetings showed a
concern for the citizens of New
Mexico
that would protect the seventy
seven percent of New Mexicans
who favor an independent
nominating commission and you
can't get the seventy seven
percent without having a broad
swath of of all sorts of public
interest across political
parties madam chair members of
the committee thank you very
much and that I urge you to pass
if you want me to read the
justice Chavis and statement I
would be more than happy to
because I have a.
Or as well.
Madam chair if you would allow
it is okay you can go ahead and
re statement.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Edward jobs
our service chairperson of the
twenty twenty one so this is a
redistricting committee I
support and ask you to vote in
favor of house joint resolution
what.
Redistricting is about the
important right of voters to
define their communities of
interest of such interest
involved over the preceding
decade they should be heard on
their values needs common
interests and the perceived
boundaries of these interests
and what they believe about the
quality and quantity of the
representation out of there
about population ships within
their communities the C. Garcia
had a mere four months together
public information submit a
final report to the legislature
during the last redistricting
cycle the process was relatively
successful but should be
improved H. J. R. one will
vastly improve the process
because for one thing the
commission will be established
and commence its work on August
fifteenth twenty thirty which
will be almost a full year
before the C. Garcia was able to
begin its work during the last
redistricting cycle The earlier
beginning increasing speed
increases the opportunity to
solicit applications for
membership on the commission so
there is a part appropriate
geographical range of racial
ethnic political and gender
balance it will also allow the
redistricting commission to
organize itself so it can
educate the public regarding
redistricting and how the public
can actively participate it will
allow the commission to fine
tune the public comment portal
and public mapping tools meeting
venues and schedules can also be
developed with public input the
process will be completely
transparent the public will see
what maps are drawn based on its
input will be allowed to
evaluate comment about whether
the commission capture the
public input for any given
district our experiment in self
governance governance is taking
a hit the stage for a variety of
reasons.
Mexico allowing the voters to
decide whether they prefer
redistricting you performed by
an independent citizens
commission or the legislature
will signal to the people of New
Mexico and other states that we
do with the chair what our
borders thing I may think of
independent commission is a
great idea but that decision
should be given to the ball left
to the voters excuse me about to
any one person or any one group
H. J. R. one gives owners a
choice are respectfully
requested order they were
allowing both side how they
prefer for redistricting to be
performed thank you Edward
Jones.
Thank you Mr Kennedy.
Now we'll go on to.
Lora Lohr seraph.
Thank you madam chair.
My name's Laura the Cerro and
I'm speaking on behalf
progressive Democrats of New
Mexico the central New Mexico.
We stand in full support of H.
J. R. one.
And in the interest of time
because of your important work
I'll just say that we hope that
you will benefit J. and that we
believe H. J. R. one is our
chance to prevent gerrymandering
create rules that apply evenly
to both parties.
Send a message that voters come
for.
This is a very important step
forward and we hope you'll pass
it thank you thank you do we
have again Sanchez webcast now.
I don't see again I will say
well on the webcast for opposing
comments.
C. and then we'll go to the
audience do we have any closing
comments I don't see any hands
so Representative Rehm thank you
madam chair
Of the just a point four one of
our
members of the audience so
there's a U. S. Supreme Court
recently that said that you
could do.
But you shall keep communities
of interest together so.
For that person
Madam chair representative
representing well this all while
outside groups or individuals to
submit maps to the legislature
that were not approved by your
commission.
Madam chair representative you
know maps under this proposal
are submitted to the legislature
at all.
Not by the independent
commission and not by outside
groups the independent
commission Madam chair
representative create the maps
and it's done it goes to the
secretary.
Madam chair and
Representative.
So I look at.
Ten years ago but this year and
we did districting.
And.
I think that the public you know
says forty an independent
redistricting committee would
commission would be really good.
Whole politics out so I looked
at those independent
commissions.
the states that have those they
were involved in lawsuits.
So you start looking at who owes
who they selected to be their
members and you look at what
you're proposing here.
And as politicians selecting
members to select other members
to be on there.
Unfortunately we don't get the
politics out of.
So do you go ahead and say well
we'll all.
Well okay now we made them all
all of this.
I don't know how to me a truly
independent redistricting
commission with no political
influence.
our.
That
this is the power of the
legislature I looked elsewhere
do you know what the other one
and I didn't resolved lawsuits
and for that reason I can't
support but I I see as one of
the right
and gentleman of doctors.
So please.
Representative are for Madam.
Thank you madam chair members of
appreciate your comments I I
guess I just want to.
Share a little story that I
think will be from almost
everyone here because it
happened years ago.
That helps press enter stand
what I believe this is for us to
do.
The end of the session before
the redistricting session
Representative Dow has a bill to
establish in the district.
And should total total support
published from many people ended
up getting stopped.
And it was a bill.
And it was kind of a monumental
effort that she worked on the
scenes with a lot of folks the
public to revive packages.
And started moving again.
But at the very last moment she
agreed to an amendment.
That took all of the.
For this issue from that that
commission all the power we
commission.
What we saw what we saw was that
commission put together
Senator Max.
And when we came into the
special redistricting meeting up
special session what happened
was maps.
They were torn up and thrown
away and we looked at
and Services ready maps that
were put together by.
By different groups and there
was really all said one person
who controlled the entire
process and round these maps.
Now.
Being the engineer that I am
just being a total geek and nerd
I have a cryptographer during
this process mental I want you
to big piece remains.
I want.
She remembers the crap out of it
in favor of Democrats.
And I want to make you an active
jury members the crap out of our
state for Republicans.
Once you have.
That.
Senator speech minimizes the
ratio of the proof.
There are such a major districts
Representative.
Not be strolling around worked
this.
And the the revelation it off of
that vehicle as the tiered
intervention.
The same number of safe
democratic and safe Republican
seats with the exact same number
gentleman for Democrats or
Republicans.
But the middle shape of
interest.
The twenty seats they were kind
of leaning Margarete.
The split half and half.
Industry leader public industry
there is more Republicans
meeting and gentleman or
Democrat was more Democrats but
if you interest the split half
and half.
And that Matt almost perfectly
aligned with the redistricting
commission map for.
And so to me that said that
redistricting commission worked
they were able to build a map
that will best opportunities
interest and not politics.
And I believe.
That is it doesn't matter
whether you're publishing
control state or Democrat
controlled state.
Jury members law.
I believe this is not once
activated several steps in the
right direction for all.
Madam chair representative
thanks but.
quite there.
Thank you that Representative
Chasey thank you madam chair and
thank you Sanchez and and expert
witnesses I appreciate it I I
just.
Kind of of a question first
that's not about for ages and
that is.
It appears to me that this is a
rather sensitive constitutional
amendment rather prescriptive.
And my experience with
constitutional amendments is to.
Whatever goes to the voters is.
Somewhat.
continues.
The information but it doesn't
come.
What I would describe as
enabling the language and.
So it seems to me that this is
more the level of detail in here
is more like an enabling statute
after the voters say yes we want
this so that's that's a COVID
to be.
And.
Mr.
All this the constitution and I
was looking online and so on.
Tell you my.
Experience with last year's
history for the district
committee.
And that is that they.
Popular do that the bill was
hung up in the Judiciary
Committee there were
Representative Dow had a lot of
democratic sponsors on the bill.
And.
I I I started keeping a record
of how many times the Sanchez
asked to have the bill rolled
over so that we were not holding
it up in the Judiciary Committee
and yet there was debate on the
floor this and I was in a trial
virtual trial and and another
channel.
this is.
For us my.
When that happened and and my by
here was trying to get the
information of the floor that we
have not been sitting on the
bill we had in fact.
The whole held over the
requested Sanchez.
And I will agree that.
In order to get past there was
an agreement to an amendment.
Now.
My further recollection at least
the discussion in our caucus was
that we took the how math.
And the only changes that the
house made were those requested
by the tribe's.
Who came together after.
The map was completed we
completed a doctor I.
Many.
So
In fact.
I lost.
This brief things and I say it's
money if the house district I
represent I have been a number
of very active participants to
political scene who were in that
precinct I thought of.
Shoot and.
In a perfect world.
got away from me but but it did
and so.
That is.
What I believe I voted for in
the house now and we generally
and then this is this is
probably political the house
doesn't generally messed with
the Senate maps and they don't
mess with our so.
I've never felt like I drew my
own district and I've been
through three redistricting
because I ran in a district that
existed.
And then the.
It changed a little bit and two
thousand one.
But that also into sports but
not for the most of not the most
of it was
Maybe if American
representation was the only
issue and that redistricting in
twenty eleven the court through
the lines.
And so I feel and this is the
first time.
we didn't go to court on
legislative maps.
But that.
And I felt that the committee
did a great job and I was
pleased with that and I think
the public appreciated the
implied.
And I was also happy to support
the changes that are supported
in the native American request.
So that's my experience and I
heard I've everybody saying
we're so well so I'm saying so
why are we changing it now and
you're saying well we have seven
more years until this happens
again okay I get.
But I do have a few questions on
page three lines fourth fifteen
I.
You have said that.
Not the.
Federal or state elected
official.
state agencies had relative in
the first degree of
consanguinity and so forth and
so on.
And yet we've got judges here
and judges are elected at some
point in our process and.
I I guess I wonder why a former
legislator one of our
commissioners this time I recall
that but commissioners or
Cadena.
One of the appointments.
Was a committee member who had.
Had a.
The third point to the state
legislature I think it was
helpful.
To have someone who'd actually
Sir south
and then there was someone who
served a long time sorry who was
on the up.
The governor disappointing.
But
some just wanted.
For those of you who drafted
this why is it that you can have
a former legislators are elected
officials.
Madam chair representative
Strong debate about that and and
there were many in the process
of building this legislation
manager who wanted that banned
because no important elected
officials legislators Mennonite
and the ten year within the last
ten years was a compromise it is
beefing it up from the citizens
redistricting committee that did
have a limit already five years
and but it didn't go all the way
to the end of the time.
Thank you.
I want to say that I believe I
don't think anybody.
Those of us who have
reservations here who who
believe that gerrymandering is a
good thing.
If this were Michigan if this
were North Carolina if this were
taxes I get it.
It's not.
We don't have a legislature
that.
Vastly this represents our
population.
And and and there is always held
up as a standard and I I grew up
in Arizona and
My uncle was a state party chair
for the Democrats at one time
that he never put Alexion to the
legislature.
The list of public industry but
I was just checking because.
and don't in Arizona.
There there are able and have
been let's see how many years.
Seven years in the last.
Twenty.
I had a democratic government.
And they currently have a
democratic governor democratic
Attorney General democratic
secretary of state.
And they've got an independent
redistricting commission right.
No changes and the legislature
Republican control from actually
from nineteen ninety two.
So it's really thirty years not
twenty eight point nine I'm not
doing.
A school.
Look at that I just know that
there's.
The legislature.
Does it seem to reflect the
States ability to.
from the guys.
Michelin's Democrat.
So just.
A point of interest stature.
I heard were open mind than I
did before politics became so
decided instantly.
And I I find it concerning.
For myself who I am more rested
and I do support progressive
causes.
That I'm concerned that those
things would be diluted.
And much to the joy is.
Some of the proponents but not
all of your mind if you are are
you know like I looked with
horror at North Carolina and
Texas and.
And some of those states and I I
think that's where you're coming
from and it's.
Very term of.
I I'm
first of all I think it should
not be a long and able in
statute when it is taken to the
voters.
And
I I think that it worked well I
was happy to do it but.
As.
As we've talked about what we're
talking about
professionalization we're such a
we branch of government I think
you're gonna find a lot of us
the server we don't want to give
up.
The only
the only part we have.
But I also don't find and I I
haven't found this with the
either party that they've been
That we disenfranchise certain
And.
I I can't tell you how much I
appreciate you Representative
Figueroa and you Representative
Harper and I know
you.
You are true believers.
And
She to work thank you Mr thank
you Representative little.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Lundstrom
I was projected to that keen to
work with that twenty twenty one
citizens redistricting committee
specifically working with native
American tribes to the.
Draft and proposed amounts.
And I do appreciate the house
and go quickly to this do
appreciate that the house was
more receptive to this and
He
was able to put their
differences aside and accept
this except the magical
Committee was accepted that
was not proceedings have reached
our office it became very
contentious it took much longer
than was anticipated take
You were hoping at all for you
will be quick resolution to this
movement within a couple of days
for the special session and
ended up not directive over full
through the week just about.
So in my experience that it was
a great first step to citizens
redistricting committee was a
great first step but it did not
complete the process as we saw
ultimately.
So
With the information that we had
for photographers from expertise
to provide this information
this.
Ultimately helped and moved
forward.
Avoiding what have been
described the woman chair
representative Representative.
With lawsuits because I'm where
I was not involved in twenty.
Redistricting but I am aware
that there was a loss in twenty
eleven of us to leave and had
boundaries drawn that were not
reflective of the Legislature
were not reflective of the
public.
Infants and so I think that
this.
This this budget proposes.
Would complete that process and
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank Representative.
Respond to.
Chair Preciado communes both
representatives.
With the right to to tolerate
circle back a little bit to the
length of the solution.
This longer than constitutional.
Well
Thank all over but then the
constitution by a.
Do not putting language in there
with leave it open to.
Essentially the situation we
have so it seems like this is
they're required to do it.
And I do think we'll leave it
there for now thank.
Legislation.
Thank you thank you madam vice
chair to have further comments
from committee members
representatives lost thank you
madam chair and thank you
foster's of this bill you know
I've spoken to you
Representative you know a lot
about this and you know I want
to get to the point where I
can't support such a bill I I
unfortunately feel like there's
a lot of pearl clutching the
legislature regarding the power
of the redistricting and with I
feel like to some people's
chagrin this bill would take
away that power but I think it
would back to the people which
is where it belongs chair but I
do have some concerns about the
bill would also agree to try to
talk to you about.
So I'm going back to some other
comments about terrorism there's
a redistricting commission and
actually.
First make a legislature madam
chair representative you'll see
it's actually gone to one or two
seats for Republicans barely
hold the house and the Senate in
the state of Arizona for it used
to be at almost a super short so
I would contend that that point
is moved in my humble opinion.
And the New Mexico I think in
some different places especially
Albuquerque I think.
Their massive.
Swaths of the population who are
under represented at least in
that metro area down in Los
crucis near where I live madam
chair representative so I would
just content with those
inaccuracies be put in the
record and so going to your bill
here.
On page four.
Line I.
Retired judges or justices as
the counties.
And I just have a little hard
for me that is I I know judges
who can be pretty pretty darn
partisan to put it.
Very likely and so I would.
Ask you to consider potentially
an amendment to that.
To let some be stricken I know
that has to be checked by a
judge justice madam chair
representative but I would
contend that that could still be
partisanship they are many of
them are part of your life.
Did you have any comment on
that.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
locked the the idea behind
language station to.
There are some major retired
justices that that would apply
in the system distribute
committee publication process
only to retired justices applied
and you know the judges are
likely to speak among
themselves.
As to whose line for this and so
we're is that the pool will be
very small and if the
Legislature sufficient
infrastructure justices and
there would be a share of the
constitution sure that's that's
the idea of.
Madam chair thank you
Representative do you think
there would be a good it would
be good for the provision in
there that says if those two
tools restricting.
The application process would
reopen to allow for only judges
or justices to further applies
this commission madam chair.
Madam chair go head to be Madam
chair representative what this
means that's a concept but again
the.
The full judges and justices
like the to the very small less
than a handful and so it's yes
Sir Representative Chasey is
point the the the languages is
already long because it is
intended to be self self
executing and and I would I
would caution the committee from
adding procedures behind
procedures in place.
Along constitution.
Part of it and then.
I do like your your concept
There
is.
The manager Representative.
I would also add here is that
the in the.
Rural communities here is
created at the.
And.
Commission wired.
That at least two members of
each party three on a course of
action so if there is for St
street cars.
It I hate to put those words
together right but if there
would be one
it would likely.
That's that's the state.
At appropriations state.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and so
I mean I agree with you on that
point I was part of the
redistricting commission process
long Representative little here
and we we both that now this
committee rooms and heard all
the testimony and I think it was
great but at the end of the day
just as Travis is mapped to the
consensus map I believe you very
fair.
That was thrown out of the traps
by this legislature.
With census map but he worked
with native tribal pueblos on
and we still program from a
partisan map that that stole the
second congressional district
from the people that districts
my.
Representative so.
On that.
Going on to build a lot of
concerns here
of the committee.
For the makeup of the commission
there's no requirement in this
piece of legislation for them to
be active voters or voters in
the past.
Madam there is they must be
qualified electors.
Madam chair representative will
qualify elector in the needs of
their voter.
But not specifically in recent
times am I correct in that madam
chair representative.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair representative I
just have a little concerned
about that if someone who is not
participate in that in the
pharmacy or are the public
system of government they have
it I don't see the point of the
numbers Madam chair
representative so I would just
urge you to consider that as a
potential amendment fair and
then another one would be
there's no requirement that
they.
be of particular party.
For a certain amount of time
doesn't say if you have to
Republicans for ten years.
Okay maybe I'm reading eight
zero nine last year.
Okay.
How so how long is that Madam
chair representative to use
chair.
Okay.
Madam chair representative now I
think that a decade to teens
that party before this and they
could potentially be a Democrat
who wants to be the that one of
the Republicans on the
commission and get.
So I would maybe length in that
amount of time Madam chair
representative.
You just think about that.
Okay and then on page five lines
two through three.
Is clarifying language I would
propose on this.
I might propose something that
says the the state ethics
commission self neglect
commissioners that are free from
perceived or real conflicts of
interest instead of impartial
fashion which I believe is a
little bait.
And there's no definitive
partial fasting.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if you're waiting for
a response one of the reasons
this particular rate which is
used is because the mayor's
In use the language we swear to
in executing our duties in an
impartial fashion and that is
the oath of office we're asking.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and then one
other concern I have about this
is.
The ethics commission being such
a large part of the selection of
the candidates they have the
final say.
I know that they do a great job.
However you know a lot of the
cases that go before that they
never go to the full commission
Madam chair representative of
the time we go to a judge who
makes the determination of
whether just throw something out
so I'm sure if the actual
commissioner of that commission
works using these individuals I
would have a little less Harper
and I would hope that that's the
case the case madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative yes
it is that's what yes I this way
in the constitutional most of.
Some good.
Well I guess those are my
concerns my main concern is you
know I'm trying to get toward
supporting this bill I'm still
thinking about it so I
appreciate your input and your
time today thank you madam chair
Representative okay
Representative Zamora and and
Representative little.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill forward.
I know you worked very hard on
it.
Can you give me your title in
the.
Jennifer Harris director of the
commission chairman.
Madam chair and gentleman it's
did you see any ethical
violations in the redistricting
that just occurred.
Madam chair representative
so more
I did not I'm also noted that we
need to talk about any pending
complaints against members of
the legislature madam chair and
Jeremy I believe.
Then there are a lot of fun.
Can you talk about the number of
complaints Madam chair
representative market there
there are not complaints.
The commission but if there were
a lot of time.
Thank you for your concern and
thank you madam chair and
gentleman for that.
Representative.
Were you happy with the
redistricting.
Madam chair representative.
Because I have worked with
Representative Dow creating the
citizens redistricting I was
incredibly happy with that
portion of the public included
in the transparency that work
rocked to the district the.
Madam chair representative
hearing this bill because I
think we have to go that one
step further and remove the
conflict of interest.
And independent commission
created the fundament Stefflon
Kerry his.
And and madam chair and I
appreciate that.
By the bill was caring forward
but madam chair and
representative let me re.
Reward my question a little bit.
For you comfortable.
With the results of the
redistrict Justice.
Madam chair.
I.
Pursuing this bill for exactly
the reasons that the people of
Mexico deserve it the.
I want to dependent that.
Might come.
In making sure that the voters
of New Mexico.
At have cleared.
And and madam chair and and
Representative.
And my concerns are that.
The the legislature would lose.
Any power authority to contest.
If they see that something's not
right with the redistricting if
a.
Missions.
So that's.
A pretty strong concern.
I was not happy myself with the
redistricting that the.
In the voting that.
Which comes out for the federal
side of this country.
It states that.
The deviance isn't in in in.
When we redistricting.
Should be split.
Evenly across minority.
Costs money orders.
For some reason all the
deviation.
Went to the native Americans in
the northwestern part of the
state.
We debated that in committee.
And after the debate was over
the demographer for the for the
natives came up to me and he
was.
Pretty upset because I was in
that pretty hard.
And I asked him I said what how
did you wind up with all the
deviation.
For the natives and we just
Hispanics didn't get any.
His answer was to to make a life
for.
And I told them of limiting you
have that and argue.
If you ask for it and they gave
it to you was given to you so.
We accept.
My district.
Was the only district in the
state of New Mexico.
That a bill.
Was.
Hold on wrote a.
To change my district.
Why would that be.
The answer to the bill to the to
the the people of all the bill
forward we're trying to move the
bill forward was that because
that district.
Each.
It's supposed to be represented
by Hispanic.
That district was.
But into play and designed.
To be won by a did Hispanic and
and that's done in the in the in
the.
Drawing of districts to give.
Minorities and equal proportion
of representation according to
population.
So why.
Do I have complaints about the
redistricting not.
Look at me who am I.
Hispano.
There's no question about that.
But the that these poll for more
seats are school for more seats.
And we run into these issues
when we come into redistricting.
And I don't know that your
bill's not the solution but I
don't I don't think it is.
I I want fair representation for
the people to stay in New
Mexico.
But I also want the fairness.
To come from within parties the
parties to be treated fair.
When when when a party.
Has the amount of seeds.
The different the difference in
the seeds the amount of seats.
Like we see it today.
I think then.
We look and see what happens in
this past redistricting.
There was gerrymandering you can
go back and the math.
Communities split in half.
That should have been split in
half.
And on the congressional side.
I believe that was on the court.
For sure and the rest tomorrow I
don't know what we can when we
can we can we can't win because.
Because of the party
affiliations and how
does the redistricting.
I have I have I'm hesitant
about.
This bill I I think it's a good
bill.
And.
Of course you've got you've got
Public and democratic system
here question this bill which is
good.
I just don't know the answer and
I'm hesitant on.
On which way to go with.
Should we be dictating right now
for the next.
Read.
That's that's a question of my
heart also.
Madam chair and representative
no I don't have the.
The answer to this year I'm
going to be very interested and
see how money.
Colleagues in this committee
vote.
And the that's all my comments
and.
Madam chair and thank you
Representative.
Representative.
Madam chair and yes
Representative I think.
You've gotten to the core of
the.
And you have in in the census
making arguments
for me that.
In the legislature bill was
proposed to to.
What the independent commission
would.
Prevent the legislature.
Changing.
Thank you mentioned are full for
hours and the full for these.
That is the nature of our
political process we are trying
to do.
We step up and say we want to
run for office and then to turn
around and asked us to set all
that aside and make
redistricting their independent
zoom we use the most that's why
this is one particular case
where the job go outside of us.
Madam chair of.
We're gonna see built in this
big meeting Monday.
About.
You and the balancing power in
the legislature and time off for
the but you have also stated
madam chair representative needs
to be with the.
This.
The voters are asking us to do.
And we represent that way for
the people in our districts and
they have ask for this.
We
will go they wanted.
This joint resolution chair
doesn't make it happen.
It just puts it before the
people.
And that is a reasonable step.
Representative widow.
Thank you madam chair.
I
would like to.
For do you have.
Motion for two passed by
Representative little.
Session.
Question.
These
questions.
By his.
Presacral.
Representative no if.
Representative black.
Pass please.
Representative Chasey no.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative.
Representative Zamora.
No not like to explain the
answer my vote for.
Representative fox.
I will go yes but I'd like to
explain echo.
Question Figueroa yes.
Johnson yes.
To to pass by the two we have to
pass Representative.
Representative Parker.
Committee experts and we have
some more if thank you madam
chair.
I think you have the perfect
bill.
If you let the independent
commission
Drop the maps and then let the
public vote on the men's.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
Thank.
Because I I support the concept
and I know there's a lot of
problems here but I did want to
pass it on so we can get picked
up in the next committee I think
you still have a lot of concern
I do think it's a good concept.
It are definitely thank you.
Thank you and I'd like to add my
my comments thank you for
bringing this bill forward I
think it's Xerox.
I myself.
really have to fight for the
district.
And it's still not.
Still with.
In the
field still could have been
better.
The delay a closing comment.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Regions across the state the
reason for.
Thank.
We are.
Everybody has a great day.
More from this section.
But the president.
Is.
This
number.
Across the state.
Yeah.
Yes I.
I.
Los.
This
Yes I.
When I sent.
Yes.
Yeah.
Some of the.
Hi.
Yeah.
The.
The shares.
It's such
as.
Office
is.
Around the time.
The.
Is.
What
