As well as for today's
invocation Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker this today about of
prior prior that I think most of
us know it's always been a
favorite of mine.
Lord make me an instrument of
your peace where there is hatred
let me sow love where there is
injury pardon or there is doubt
faith.
Where there is despair hope.
Where there is darkness light.
Where there is sadness joy.
When master grant that I may not
so much seek to consult to be
consoled as to console.
To be understood as to
understand.
To be loved as to love.
For it is in giving that we
receive it is in pardoning that
we are pardoned.
And it is in dying that we are
born to eternal life amen.
Gentleman from Chavis and he
noted over six thousand lead us
in the pledge of allegiance.
Julie from earlier percent
Sari√±ana with the pledge The New
Mexico flag.
Good morning members.
Mr speaker I move a good doctor
over to business announcements
and miscellaneous business
innovation is so ordered.
We shall not speak of it came
yesterday.
Never again.
The gentleman from.
Colfax K. hardy where some again
and you Representative
Chatfield.
Mr speaker I have a memorial is
that what you're talking about
absolutely Sir please.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that memorial thirty
nine.
Be removed from the speakers
table and be made the next order
of business in objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker would you give me
that point that the record
reflect that elections are for
placing House memorial thirty
nine final passage of been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Mr speaker Las Vegas New Mexico
is one of the most historic and
very dynamics communities in our
state for twenty five years it
was the end of the rails on the
way to Santa Fe for twenty five
years there were people like
Dave wrote a ball Jesse James
doc Holliday teddy Roosevelt and
his rough riders it is probably
a place that I enjoy going as
much is is any place in this
state is filled with history on
one side of Las Vegas is the old
Las Vegas on the other side the
newer Las Vegas that was built
after the rails coming in I am
honored to be able to bring
forth today a memorial honoring
the people that are that live
there today who are the strong
the ambitious the survivors of
many years of of living there
and even for a recent fire so
just really honored to bring
that for today.
The chief clerk please read the
Moores.
Click to read.
House memorial thirty nine
introduced by representatives
Chatfield Castellano and Sanchez
the memorial declaring February
thirteenth twenty twenty three
Las Vegas stay in the house of
representatives and recognizing
the status as trailblazing
through success in education.
For as Las Vegas was founded in
eighteen thirty five thousand
Spanish land grant called a
stress in your to do list of
molested us Vegas commanderies
and whereas the Spanish settlers
who founded the community roots
going back to the seventeenth
century.
Address the acequia Madre in Las
Vegas stands as a testament to
more than one hundred fifty
years of resourcefulness and
ingenuity and we're as Las Vegas
was a key rest stop resupply
point and protector of the Santa
Fe Trail serving as a hub of
commerce and lifeline between
the growing west and eastern
parts of the United States.
And we're as Las Vegas can be
described as innovative and
unvarnished having courage and
resolve strength of character
fortitude determination
perseverance and endurance and
more as Las Vegas is going
strong foundation for private
sector growth and the
sustainability of small
businesses and whereas Las Vegas
is committed to building a
foundation for economic growth
and restaurants Vegas las
Vegas's can do attitude will
help us biggest move forward
provide quality of life and
economic solutions and expand
homegrown companies.
And we're as Las Vegas is
authentic assets will remain
it's cultural foundation and the
horsepower to drive tourism
industry and growth and has Las
Vegas offers a multitude of
unique shopping dining musical
and cultural experiences and
adventures and whereas Las Vegas
continue to continues to attract
and maintain cruel historical
characters including the boxer
Jack Johnson Jack Johnson
McDonnell who lived at Herman
speak more popular historical
characters such as doc Holliday
the kid right and Jesse James
and were as Las Vegas and San
Miguel county have more than
nine hundred buildings on the
national register of historic
places and we're as Las Vegas
and San Miguel County are on
match as an inviting incredible
tourist destination with provide
historical tales economic taking
Mexico character and easy access
to other local historic sites
and outdoor recreation and
responsibilities and Sierra
County are beacons in the land
of enchantment set aside from
its historic and tourist
attractions Las Vegas is home to
many critical state institutions
and were as such institutions
The New Mexico behavioral health
institute in Las Vegas the state
owned and state operated
psychiatric hospital provides
critical medical services to the
state including long term
nursing care for the elderly and
disabled residents of
disincentive wealth of knowledge
with I major educational
institutes institutions Mexico
highlands university community
college United world colleges
across the city public school
district in west Las Vegas
public school district and
resins educational institutions
of gems of the city and
crucibles of learning teaching
and discovery function for
Amanda northern New Mexico and
we're as Las Vegas and San
Miguel County are committed to
the cultivation of growing film
and technological economies for
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the distinguished
history and heritage of rustic
because San Miguel County be
recognized for the resentments
of.
What the expressed for the
business and film industry for
its efforts to create jobs the
term and to promote the people
and attractions of northern New
Mexico and for the results of
the February thirteenth twenty
twenty three to clear the last
to stay in the house of
representatives for the resolve
the copies of this memorial
transmitted to the murder of
Australians.
Members of the city council run
status and the board of county
commissioners of San Miguel
County.
On the memorial the gentleman
from some again in terms of
percentage of testing in a thank
you Mr secretary general Mr
speaker I yield.
It's a pleasure to
a representative from the heart
of San Miguel County which is
Las Vegas
this is because as you guys all
over there's a tree on your.
In front of you guys
but that's not my fault all
right now that is conference
begins fund those governments
are awesome I hope you guys
enjoyed I'm in a Las Vegas has
been through a lot the last year
I'm very proud to say that I
serve that district I serve it
with pride and honor we got some
great people here from Las Vegas
I like to recognize when we
Trujillo.
Senator.
Yes.
Las Vegas school board member
Christine.
Once Las Vegas cris contenus.
Yes Representative misogynist
the superintendent.
What I who is our president of
United world college there in
the beautiful Las Vegas the
castle is a great place to film
the evil there thank you for
being a sort out and also blasts
from the least hello this.
Just a little worked up
At the shelter to shelter the I
started John was very very
involved in making sure people
are fed things are going to
believe that they needed I just
want to come forward voluntarily
wanted to our community
publishing thank you so much.
The house.
Representative media also have a
few a couple of guests in the
gallery as well for this special
day we've got Brianna Martinez
from the community college.
Others but a different other
another another percent so hold
off on those for the debate on
the memorial the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Seah
SS as the most because a.
Gentleman from.
All those counties please you.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you.
Speaker and the.
Gentleman from the Raleigh area
as the non speaker it's always a
pleasure for me to kind of a.
address the chamber when it
comes to some you get a County
the state of New Mexico has the
most speaker because my roots.
Kind of going away deep in that
area Madam speaker you know the
status was granted spent the
Mexican and grant.
right around the turn of a the
transition of power from Spain
to New Mexico and I want to say
that grant was issued on
eighteen twenty three or sell
and there was a group by the
most because of people from.
From this on the bottle.
That's where the families
mainly
came from in terms of the first
settlement in two Las Vegas was
from some media that the the
bottom.
And in that group of our
families was my great great
grandpa.
Fund of yours my essay.
And the the that is the most
because the gentleman that led.
The incursion into the the Las
Vegas area to settle it was a
set of aka.
And as the most because of a.
The the the contingency included
the.
Spanish families that also
included in the set of families
as the most Baker.
In use at all as a were.
economically uprooted Spanish
speaking Gonzales size
economically uprooted brought in
an Indians is the most Baker.
And that that group that
secretary of the new settlers
comprised in many instances a
large push portion of the
families that settled.
That were granted the Spanish
and Mexican land grants as the
most because what's more speaker
make a long story short.
Center I'm calling in with his
family's.
Vacated Las Vegas because the
committee one have any part of
any Spanish settlement in that
area so there is to setting and
that a lot as the speaker.
And about four years later they
tried again this time under the
auspices of my that that I went
to my great great grandfather
funded us my essay and they were
able to finally settle that
portion and one was my as it was
known as on.
Kind of a.
Mediator of peacemaker.
In that whole area.
Because of this authority he was
I've got them I Mr is the most
Baker the Las Vegas Land Grant
and I've got in my yard which is
not a regular more tight leader
of the land grant they had
judicial authority to settle
disputes as the most eager.
so that's that's what I wanted
to share with the body that the.
That lasted us with the most
because I wasn't living in that
city school of which I'm also in
their I'd be little messing us.
That's that's my second home you
know from from where presently
in the side and so if ever I
make a move anyone New Mexico
it'll be to to Las Vegas is the
most popular just one last note
about the industry with my great
great grandpa.
Right after a.
The to do it will be I'll go on
then this admission a turtle
government government there were
a lot of these of Ford's a lot
of forts that were established
around the Las Vegas area.
And my great grandpa
Was also the first.
Officials that was sworn in by
the new government.
And that happened in nineteen
forty six when general Kearney
came into Las Vegas on his way
to kind of protocol conquer.
Mexico in the southwest.
And
I was greeted with open arms by
my great great grandpa who was
kind of my lord at that time in
Las Vegas to see more speaker
R. Peroni actually swore in my
great great grandpa as the first
official.
of the dog.
Of the new territory.
And then also proclaimed that
the class and sent and I spent
us that now New Mexico was under
the authority of the United
States.
Territory.
Just last week
General pony didn't do that in
Santa Fe.
The in Los Vegas.
And that is the most because
Shortly after the Americans kind
of establish the fords similar
speaker
there is a lot of abuse by some
of so American soldiers in the
town of Las Vegas.
And and they were also not
making timely payments to the
merchants and there is a point
of right.
And sexual abuse of some of the
native Hispanic women by some of
the soldiers.
And my great grandpa stood up to
them.
And basically
Ordered all the merchants to
stop making to stop orders for
the forwards until they paid in
a timely manner.
And that there is some
consequences.
That followed after that.
But this amounts because that's
a type of our individual my
great great grandfather was and
And that is one one historical
figures in my family and
And I can trace its heritage
All the way to
You know to the thirteenth
century twelfth twelve century
in Spain is tomorrow speaker so
again the gentleman from the
rural area thank you for reading
this far thank you Mr speaker
for listening to my many of
historical significance but my
great great grandfather in the
Las Vegas area and I also
welcome all the officials
Senator official from that area
and I I can get into that I I
finally related to them in some
way or another estimates because
thanks again estimates because
ladies and gentleman the house
thank you gentlemen there is
further debate the gentleman
from Colfax wanted estimated
those Representative Sweetser
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
I'm gonna be real brief I just
I'm proud to be on our ten year
off
born and raised in the Espanola
valley and the anyone that's
gone to school at highlands UNM.
Or at a state you know the the
Los Vegas people always hang out
with the Espanola people
we're one in the same we have
the same accent it was asking a
from Las Vegas are you from
Espanola so I'm very proud of my
accent and I'm proud to consider
these guys my brothers
I've been going to Vegas for the
last thirty years of my life
performing in the bars with my
band from the end of Las Vegas
to the Civic Center site is
school times.
I just want a technologist the
guests today and I'm proud to be
an attorney along with these
guys thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen and and before
there is small for that
originally from Bernalillo
Representative more to go.
Mr speaker and members of the I
too am very supportive of this
memorial and I just want to
mention that my ex husband who
is deceased was born in Tokyo
which is about twenty five miles
out of of Las Vegas and his
family and and my ex husband are
are.
Well he is buried in Trujillo
they have a family plot on the
ranch and I just want to mention
that Billy the kid's mother is
buried just down the street from
there and I think that those are
things to just recognizes that
people from Las Vegas people
from aspen all of which I was I
was born in Espanola area
very much the same culture and I
just want to recognize the.
Representative I'm rose
Castellano for bringing this to
light and and celebrating our
small towns thank you the
utilities see no further debate
the gentleman to close.
All apologies are generated from
Bernalillo sorry Mr speaker I
kind of jumped and made her will
the gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I yield Mr speaker
and gentleman listening to
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia talk about
his family made me realize I
needed to claim I have extended
family from Las Vegas why
because
Up in New York actually came to
UNM for medical school and met
her husband there and her
husband was in the first
graduating class of medical
school and he was born and
raised in Las Vegas his family
it was one of and not it was not
uncommon to have on Russian
Jewish families in that area as
well and and that is Fortin and
Rachel Fortin was a city
councillor in Las Vegas and it
was such a complicated thing for
me to say my cousin's mother in
law I just started calling on my
end and when she would visit may
have the legislature she knew
when she came here she knew
everyone everyone from Las Vegas
and the both Rachel and her
husband are buried there in in
the cemetery and I I'd feel like
I I have such a big space in my
heart for them and I'm very
happy to help celebrate this day
thank you Mr speaker thank you
seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker I now move
that house memorial thirty nine
do now pass.
To an as unanimous consent to
search.
Thank you Mr.
There's been a motion to show
all members of the house present
voting informative seen
objection it is so ordered.
Final passage of house memorial
thirty nine table is now open.
There's a there's a board glitch
that we've been dealing with all
morning not to worry everybody
will be shown holding in the
affirmative.
Loser close level of seventy
eight in the affirmative and
negative house memorial thirty
nine has duly passed this house.
Did you leave from Bernalillo
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial eight be removed from
the speakers table you made the
next order of business in
objection it is so ordered.
But the record reflect that
election Sir for placing House
memorial.
Eight I as it has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentlelady to explain the more.
Thank you Mr speaker house
memorial eight celebrates our
national board certified
teachers national board
certification is the most
respected professional
certification available in
education and provides numerous
benefits to teachers to our
students into our schools
national board certification is
designed to develop retain and
recognize accomplished teachers
and to go into generate ongoing
improvement in schools
nationwide the National Board
certified support believes
higher standards for teachers
means better learning for kids
Mr speaker I do have some people
on the rostrum.
Please you can get in
introducing the only.
Thank you Mr speaker all right
we have five national board
certified teachers form a brand
new so we'll start with those
winds I announce please stand up
the first one is Rebecca everado
out the tar.
From us to the public schools.
Sir.
Three white for Russell
Independent School District.
Catherine Malone from for me to
minutes miss schools.
And Michelle Haag from
Albuquerque public schools these
are brand new national board
certified teachers and we have
one
Cindy Carr from Cimarron
municipal schools who is renewal
that means she was first you
already had a national board and
she renewed renew the
certification so thank you all
for being here I'm a proud
national board certified teacher
in mathematics so I know how
hard it is to get through this
certification and I just want to
thank you and congratulate you
for all your great work thank
you.
Mr speaker can I get the more I
read to read.
House memorial eight introduced
by Representative serin Jana how
to meal Figueroa and Google on a
memorial declaring February
thirteenth twenty twenty three
New Mexico National Board
certified teachers recognition
day in the house of
representatives well as the New
Mexico National Board certified
teacher network was established
in two thousand one to promote
national board certification for
New Mexico teachers and to
promote accomplished teaching
throughout New Mexico address
the New Mexico National Board
certified teacher network
advocates for leadership
opportunities for national board
certified teachers and education
thank you and educates teachers
about the national boards body
of knowledge and rolls the New
Mexico National Board certified
teacher network also supports
candidates through national
board certification process
celebrates achievements offers
opportunities to all constituent
groups and supports and
recognize recognizes all
national board certified
teachers in all school districts
in the state and in the
legislature and we're as the
national board certified
teachers are nationally
recognized as being among the
best teachers in the profession
more than sixty nine percent
remaining in the classroom after
twenty years of teaching and
whereas national board
certification is a rigorous
process that can take three to
five years to achieve and
requires that applicants
demonstrate competency across
three performance based on means
and pass a written test of
content and pedagogical
knowledge and well as a
comprehensive study conducted by
the national Research Council
from the students of National
Board certified teachers greater
gains on page on achievement
tests over time than students of
non certified teachers and New
Mexico students of National
Board certified teachers have
shown fifteen to eighteen months
growth in one school year and
whereas in New Mexico has one
thousand four hundred sixty five
the national board certified
teachers economic certified
since nineteen ninety five
across numerous public school
districts of Indian education
schools and charter schools with
many national board certified
teachers and National Board
candidates so.
In title one schools and were as
one hundred sixty three National
board certified teachers were
successfully renewed
certification cycle and eighty
six new national board certified
teachers were certified and rest
New Mexico ranks twenty first in
the nation for national board
certification eleven for
percentage of board
certification seventh from the
national board certified
teachers and sixteen for
national board certified
teachers who have renewed their
certifications the six and two
tenths percent of all New Mexico
teachers having achieved board
certification.
And we're as the Albuquerque
public school district Santa Fe
public school district Las
Cruces public school district
where Rancho Public School
District and Los Alamos public
school district of the New
Mexico school districts.
Highest number of national board
certified teachers now therefore
be it resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the February
thirteenth twenty twenty three
be declared New Mexico National
Board certified teachers and
recognition day in the house of
representatives to the knowledge
of the champions of all national
board certified teachers and
their contributions to learning
and growth of New Mexico
students and would further
resolved that copies of this
memorial the transmitter burner
and the secretary of public
education.
Is there debate on the morning.
Well as a representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo the
old yes it and I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady to send US tennis
support for the this memorial
Ms educators we we talk about
the impact that they have into
our classrooms we talk about the
process and these guys have gone
through to perfect their craft.
And you know we know how
effective when it is far as a
good teacher in the classroom
what it makes for students our
students our future the most
important resource we have in
New Mexico and so I I commend
of.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo from
neighboring in this in addition
in the funding former there's
actually additional revenue that
these national board certified
teachers can bring to the
districts so I I I think that
that's a wonderful because I
want to congratulate and commend
all National Board certified
teachers the end in their hand
or the listening and I think you
thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker.
There's further debate generated
from Santa Fe representative on.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
guild Mr speaker yes gentle lady
I I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I too want
to stand and and complete
support of of this memorial and
recognize all that it takes for
our educators to go through this
process I have one of my very
best friends in our Albuquerque
public schools who took three of
the four components in one year.
And I am the I was there is a
propose a reference of support
for her and saw how taxing it
was built how committed she was
and when she finally got she got
through it all how significant
it was for her her family and
for our students and I want to
commend and thank all of our
educators who've gone through
the process thank you Mr speaker
thank you I see no further
debate the gentle lady to.
Senator Fontana thank you Mr
speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo guilt I yield to
the gentle lady thank you
I think this is Mr speaker that
this is something that is very
important to a lot of not just
teachers but also counselors and
we're trying to make it so that
we can expand to all National
Board certified
of qualifying educators in so
having this state is really
special and really appreciate
you bringing this forward thank
you.
A yearly provided from under the
bus and the violence of the for
those are present evidence thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady yield I yield to the timely
thank you
thank you madam when we were at
the Landel foundation did
educational research we realize
the best money we could spend
was in professional development
for teachers if you want to
spend good money invested
teachers invest in their
development I'd like to
congratulate all the teachers
and certainly the teachers on
the panel for their work this is
not an easy task it's a three
year process it's very difficult
to and us so we know how smart
all of you are right now
because it is it is a tremendous
undertaking for each teacher in
the line of foundation began
really in later years paying for
everybody's tuition if they
wanted to go through that
program so I commend the US
speaker I commend the lady for
bringing this legislation
forward and I think it is very
fitting that we honor all of
them thank you Mr speaker thank
you ladies.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker I now move house
memorial eight do now pass and I
now ask unanimous consent to the
house that the record show that
the role has been called in all
members present voted in the
affirmative has been a motion to
show all members of house
present voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial eight the vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of seven in the affirmative zero
in the negative house memorial
H. has duly passed this house
and graduation thank you Mr
speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo for
instance.
Mr speaker although I think the
house will want to have a
special occasion to honor former
colleague at a later time at
this moment I'd like to ask for
a moment of silence in
Recognition honors memory of
John Paul Taylor our state
representative who was probably
the most beloved member of this
body who ever existed he was our
conscience and if we can have a
moment of silence now and then
perhaps we can honor the
gentleman at a later time thank
you Mr speaker please rise for
Melissa's.
Thank you members.
Thank you gently thank you Mr
speaker.
I move echoed about order
business third reading of
legislation.
To no objection it is so
ordered.
Members are gonna do one item
this morning before breaking
into joint session is a gentle
lady from earlier ready and item
number five.
Is Mr speaker you take me to
that point the record reflect
that election is serve replacing
house bill seventy eight is
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
amendment debate for
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
house bill seventy eight as
amended removes the sunset
sunset date of a distribution of
the gross receipts tax to the
state aviation Fund while also
increasing that same
distribution of the gross
receipts tax with that I stand
for questions there's a big the
generated from going on a trip
to the Ferrari.
See you there is a bit on the
bill the gentleman from someone
resembling.
Thank you Mr chairman does
agility from Bernalillo yield.
Yes my good friend from San Juan
County.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady just a this is a simple
Moving of a date is that correct
since that day.
Mr speaker and gentleman not
just it is elimination of a
since that date and it also
changes the gross receipts tax
distribution to the aviation
fund of the state.
Thank you Mr speaker this one
does away with the with the
sunset all together Mr speaker
gentleman yes it does thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady why
what was the need for a limiting
that sunset altogether.
Mr speaker gentleman usually
when the Legislature implements
a sunset date to a distribution
it's because we want to be able
to have the legislature come
back and
recognize and take stock of
whether or not that particular
distribution is working if it's
an effective way for New
Mexicans to be spending their
money and if it is should be
continued down the line.
Thank you Mr speaker lady from
Bernalillo so this fund could
you explain the funds the
members we have a lot of new
members in here and and maybe it
would be worth their while to
understand what the fund does
chair Mister speaker gentleman
from San Juan County what this
fund does is there distributions
of the state gross receipts tax
it funds about thirty percent of
all aviation activities in the
state that means aviation safety
that means ample airport
infrastructure that means
increasing of air routes
throughout the state especially
in our our rural parts of the
state so essentially helps fund
aviation throughout New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker lady from
Bernalillo so for for rural
counties in rural airports
there's funds in their their
monies in this fund to help
subsidize a little bit
Routes that may not otherwise
exist from some of the rural
counties that correct Mr speaker
John and it's a little more
complicated than that we have
other funding mechanisms to help
expand routes especially I don't
know if you recall the last
couple years we did the rule
error and Hanson Act which
actually did go to expansion of
routes what this particular
money does to the gross receipts
tax distribution is it helps
keep the infrastructure that is
needed for the expansion of some
routes that we keep the trains
and planes running on time so to
speak.
You Mr speaker I do believe this
is probably one of the
Funds that has had a sunset in
the past that
would likely have this was not a
fund that we would want to have
dependent on a sunset so I look
forward to supporting your
legislation thank you Mr speaker
couldn't agree more on to the
debate generated close.
I thank you Mr speaker I now
I now move that house bill
seventy eight as amended do now
pass.
Our final passage of house bill
seventy is amendment of hell's
with limited is amended the vote
is now open.
Let's let's close.
Those close by would have sixty
one in the affirmative is here
in the negative house bill
seventy eight as amended has two
thousand house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we got about
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered.
Members we plan on having
evening floor session this
evening though I've we've had
the conversation with minority
leadership and major leadership
we plan on coming back after our
joint session at five thirty to
take up the number of bills
we're gonna start with house
bill ninety.
which was pushed off this
morning's agenda because of
some technical issues with the
board and sometime issues and
and the gentleman from Chavis
has a
show in Tel for that bill it's
about three hundred pages long
so I hope you'll read it between
now and then.
Other announcements the gentle
lady from Valencia.
I believe we have some guest.
perhaps in the gallery.
What about William that are here
to visit as would you like me to
recognize them.
Yes Mr speaker.
We've got students from Berlin
high school of medicine Aaron
dot is and I just as metals
David goes to you of the end of
the CM Caleb anymore this is
available on the Basel Samantha
guy it goes Samantha but what is
merely a man Jack in the middle
shy provided they on a goal is
Isaias Sanchez element a goes
into Kauffman and their agency a
sponsor from Berlin high school
misty thought is welcome to the
house of representatives.
The other elements gentleman
from billion or percent of small
thank you Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting at one
thirty or fifteen minutes
following the joint floor
session will be taken up one
piece of legislation Senate bill
six thank you Mr speaker in room
three oh seven thank you
gentlemen is delayed from
earlier Representative Sarinana
thank you Mr speaker I just want
to recognize is on this
basis may assistance here also
and I can recognize that there
out in the gallery messa
students from is on a high
school welcome to the house.
Thank you Julie J. lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil thank you very
much Mr speaker your house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
will be meeting tomorrow nine AM
in room three oh five we're
going to be looking at the tip
so good stuff see their members
take note.
The gentle lady from.
Los Alamos son the FAA and
Sandoval Representative Chandler
I thank you Mr speaker your
house Judiciary Committee will
be meeting at one thirty or
fifteen minutes after the floor
session to this morning in room
three oh eight.
Three oh nine.
It's a very my office get my
office but I try to accommodate
Mr speaker if I could thank you
ladies deleted from the nana
Representative Gallegos thank
you Mr speaker has Congress will
mate at one thirty or fifteen
minutes after the joint session
and we are and three seventeen
members signaled the lady from
million or percent of Ferrari
thank you Mr speaker your house
the consumer public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow at
one thirty in room three
seventeen members signaled the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Sandoval Santa Fe and towers
Representative Cadena thank you
Mr speaker here has a actor
culture sec is a and water
resources for me tomorrow
morning room three fifteen at
eight thirty.
Member states no.
Delayed from dollars
Representative Ortez thank you
Mr speaker your house rural
development land grants in a and
cultural first committee will
meet tomorrow at nine AM I don't
know what the of the remember is
I never remember this we can
help you gentlelady hater much.
That would be rural number.
Three.
Phone nine thank you Mr speaker
that room.
Members thank you know meeting
in that room.
In other announcements I have a
couple announcements Legislative
Council Service the joint rules
of the Legislature require that
all requests drafting bills must
be received by council service
by five PM Monday today
in a bill requests have to be
received by council service by
five PM today.
Note that the deadline does not
apply to memorials for
resolutions which may be
requested at any time.
The deadline to introduce bills
to our esteemed Madam chief
clerk will be Thursday February
sixteenth.
Everybody got.
Very well.
Folks were waiting on the other
chamber.
So we're going to go do some
housekeeping we're going to some
committee reports this morning.
And then we'll see were after
that gently formerly of the
kind of that order of business
committee reports to no
objection it is so ordered
thirty three.
Mr speaker your consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill one seventy
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that a due pass and that's
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair.
Moved for adoption reduction of
federal committee report on
house bill one seventy of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Apple's name yes of a committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker consumer Public
Affairs Committee too it's been
referred house bill one eighty
has had it under consideration
point same with recommendation
of do pass and that's referred
to the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair move adoption
production of federal committed
put in house bill one eighty all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was named the as I have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to ms been
referred house bill one eighty
two has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
and then for the government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair move
adoption reduction of fable
Committee ported house bill one
eighty two of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Is a yes have a committee report
up to.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill one ninety
has had it under consideration
would report same with
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair for adoption for that
option available committee
report on house bill one ninety
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose maybe the as have a
committee report opted Mr
speaker consumer public affairs
committee to is been referred
house bill two eighteen has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation to to
pass as amended and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair move
adoption reduction of federal
could report on house bill two
eighteen of those in favor say
of this and I was named the as
having committed for adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two twenty
has had it under consideration
reports it was recommendation
that I do pass and that's
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee respectfully
submitted a visible Thompson
chair move adoption reduction of
federal committee report on
house bill two twenty of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose day the as have it could
report on to.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two thirty
has had it under consideration
point I was recommendation that
it to pass an answer for the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption and
doctor Phil Committee put in
house bill two thirty of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe just have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee too is been referred
house bill one eighty nine has
had it under consideration point
it was recommendation that a do
pass as amended industry for two
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andr√©s Romero chair.
Mr speaker I move the adoption.
Production of federal government
portal house bill one eighty
nine of those in favor signify a
state line.
His name the as having report up
to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
chairman referred house bill two
zero nine has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for the health and
Human Services Committee
respectfully submitted G. Andr√©s
Romero chair.
Mr speaker I move the adoption
option of him becoming part of
house bill two zero nine all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose maybe just have a
committee report on to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
two sixteen has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation added to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andr√©s
Romero chair Mr speaker I move
the adoption for an adoption of
federal committee report on
house bill two sixteen all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe just have a
committee report up to.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill two thirty
two has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation to do pass as
amended and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair.
We've adoption reduction of
federal committee report on
house bill two thirty two of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose make the as have a
committee report on.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill three
seventeen has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation added to pass as
amended and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair the the Dobson reduction
of fable Committee portent
husband three seventeen of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe just have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee tomb
is been referred house bill two
zero one has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that a do pass as
amended finance referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson share this Mr speaker
move adoption reduction of
federal committee Porter house
bill two zero one of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Was made the just seventh report
opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee
too is been referred house bill
two zero seven has had it under
consideration parsing with
recommendations that I do pass
and this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committee
report on house bill two zero
seven all those of everything I
was and I.
Yes
it's try that again all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Yeah I just have a commitment
opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
tomb is been referred house bill
one zero six has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendations to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption for doctor Phil
Committee portent house bill one
zero six a list of everything I
just and I.
Was me the eyes of a committee
for adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too Mr referred house bill one
thirteen has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation of do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption reduction
of federal committee report on
house bill one one three all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
The US Senate committee report
Dr.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
one fifty five has had it under
consideration point in with
recognition of the deep pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're on adoption of a
federal committee report on
house bill one fifty five all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those may be I just have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too much been referred house
bill one fifty nine has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendations on a deep
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption for an
adoption or favorite committed
for the house bill one fifty
nine of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Was named the eyes have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
one forty five has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation wanted to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andr√©s
Romero chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
The doctor federal committee
report on house bill one forty
five all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
The as having committed
productive.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
two twenty six has had it under
consideration point saying with
recommendation that it to pass
and then street for to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andr√©s Romero chair Mr
speaker I move the adoption
reduction of federal committee
report on house bill two twenty
six all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Yes have a committee report on
that.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too it's been referred house
bill two fifty six has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendation that it to
pass an answer for to the
provision the finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andr√©s
Romero chair Mr speaker I move
the adoption reduction of
federal committed fourteen hours
will turn fifty six of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe we just have a
committee report up to.
Deleted really are present
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order business introduction
of legislation no objection it
is so ordered click to read.
House Bill three eighty eight
introduced by Representative
Sari√±ana and Senator Padilla and
act relating to cybersecurity
creating the cybersecurity fund
establishing purposes making an
appropriation House Bill three
eighty eight introduced by
Representative Sari√±ana and
Senator Padilla House Bill three
eighty eight House Bill three
eighty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections
Indian Affairs Committee thence
the house appropriations and
finance committee
Bill three eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Lara an act relating to
identification cards removing
the fee requirement for issuance
of an identification card to a
homeless individual House Bill
three eighty nine introduced by
Representative Lara.
House Bill three eighty nine
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer Public
Affairs Committee Vince the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House Bill three ninety
introduced by Representative
ease L. and Duncan and act
relating to our racing directing
fines collected to the race our
testing fund requiring an annual
audit of the resources testing
fund House Bill three ninety
introduced by representatives
he's L. and Duncan House Bill
three ninety amended twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Judiciary
Committee fence the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three ninety one
introduced by Representative
Matthews Armstrong hi to me and
Thompson and act relating to
inter governmental agreements
and acting the audiology and
speech language pathology
interstate compact House Bill
three ninety one introduced by
representatives Matthews
Armstrong how to meal and
Thompson House Bill three ninety
one have been read twice by
title is ordered printed
referred to the house Health
Human Services Committee then to
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three ninety two
introduced by representatives of
Matthews Armstrong how to me and
Thompson and act relating to
inter governmental agreements
and acting the occupational
therapy licensure interstate
compact House Bill three ninety
two introduced by
representatives Matthews
Armstrong how to meal and
Thompson House Bill three ninety
two have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three ninety three
introduced by Representative
Trujillo forterra's Care Act and
Madrid and at an act relating to
health creating an advisory
group to study the feasibility
of establishing a program that
would use of psilocybin derived
drugs to treat patients with
certain mental health conditions
in a clinical setting making an
appropriation House Bill three
ninety three introduced by
Representative Trujillo Cortez
Care Act and Madrid House Bill
three ninety three have been
read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee
House Bill three ninety four
introduced by representatives of
block Montoya and Duncan and act
relating to public education
prohibiting the teaching of
gender reassignment and hormone
blocking medication in public
schools and within instructional
materials used within the
classroom requiring the presence
of a parent when gender
reassignment and hormone
blocking medications are
discussed in a public school
House Bill three ninety four
introduced by Representative
Spock Montoya and Duncan.
House Bill three ninety four
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
then so house health and Human
Services Committee.
House Bill three ninety five
introduced by Representative
Kate and Thompson and act
relating to labor requiring the
department of health to collect
and report demographic in
compensation data on
developmental disabilities
direct support provider agency
employees amending a section of
the book developmental
disabilities act regarding the
determination of rate paid for
support and services hospital
three ninety five introduced by
Representative Kate's and
Thompson House Bill three ninety
five minutes was by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
things a house health and Human
Services Committee
House Bill three ninety six
introduced by representatives
are a Lotta ensure Hugo and act
relating to local school boards
increasing terms to six years
House Bill three ninety six
introduced by representatives
and and a lot of entry he House
Bill three ninety six amendment
twice by title is ordered
printed affected house Education
Committee then so House
government elections in the
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill three ninety eight
introduced by representatives
Baca Armstrong he's L. Allison
and Lara an act relating to
trade practices adding a
definition to the franchise
termination act requiring notice
of termination of franchises
clarifying applicability of the
franchise termination act House
Bill three ninety eight
introduced by representatives
Baca Armstrong Teasdale Allison
and Lara House Bill three ninety
eight hundred twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house agriculture us against
in water resources committee
then set House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill three ninety nine
introduced by Representative
that Anna and Senator how to
meal and act relating to
counties providing that the
board of county commissioners of
the county with a population
greater than thirty five
thousand as shown by the twenty
twenty the federal decennial
census show consistent I
qualified electors establishing
one time procedure to redistrict
and elect county commissioners
to the newlyestablished five
member board of county
commissions for a term beginning
January first twenty twenty five
hospital three ninety nine
introduced by representatives at
Anna excuse me introduced by
representative Cadena and
senator how to meal house with
three line and have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the house
government election in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House bill four hundred
introduced by Representative
Sapan ski Representative popular
Martinez Senator Hemphill and
senator how to me I'll and act
relating to health care and
acting a new section of the
public assistance act to allow
the secretary of Human Services
to amend the New Mexico state
Medicaid plan to create a state
administered health coverage
plan requiring study on the
feasibility of implementation
required reporting requiring
collaboration between the Human
Services department and the
office of superintendent of
insurance to enroll individuals
in the plan making an
appropriation house bill four
hundred introduced by
Representative it's a Penske
Representative hi there Martinez
Senator Correa Hemphill and
senator how to meal house bill
four hundred have been read
twice by title is ordered
printer referred to the house
health and Human Services
Committee thence the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
This bill for a one introduced
by Representative Baca and act
relating to public education for
moving the technology for
Education Act as the digital
equity in Education Act
providing definitions providing
public education department
duties providing rulemaking
authority for repealing the
education technology opportunity
program in other sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
house bill four oh one
introduced by Representative
Baca house bill four one I've
been read twice by title is our
printer for to the house
Education Committee then as the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee House
Bill forum to introduce by
Representative dealer Cruz
Representative Harry Garcia and
Representative Castellano and
act relating to public
assistance establishing
establishing in the veterans
service department a program to
provide disabled veterans with
transportation to and from
medical appointments making an
appropriation house bill four oh
two introduced by Representative
dealer Cruz Representative Harry
Garcia and Representative
Castellano house before to have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
it's the house appropriations
and finance committee.
To leave from the chasing have.
Mr speaker the chair recognizes
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that the
speaker point a committee to
invite the honorable lieutenant
governor how he what this and
the automotive reserve the
Senate joint session with the
house this chamber for the
purpose of being addressed by
Senator Martin Heinrich
Representative to have some
measure from under us and
representative gave Vasquez
there's additional general point
representatives and I'm.
On in our new and Armstrong to
invite the honorable to ten a
governor how we what I listen
the honorable members of the
Senate committee joint session
with the house for the purpose
of being addressed by our
distinguished guest.
Mr speaker the chair recognizes
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that the
house stand in recess subject to
the call of the chair and the
rules be suspended to allow the
City of gas in the chamber
during the joint session if
there's objection the house and
Senate recess subject to the
call of the chair.
I would love to.
It is.
Hello
the bubbly.
Help.
We have a.
To do with.
The.
I don't think.
Right here.
Right here.
