Move.
We'll go as close we have.
Folks before we began to make a
quick announcement we are going
to take up.
The items number nine.
Number three.
The members on third reading and
then we're gonna go to
announcements to pool Senate
bill three sixty four of the
speakers table make the next
order of business is this all in
agreement with the leadership
offices of the respective
caucuses we are hoping to leave
here in in short order given the
weather conditions and the need
for our staff to get home
safely.
so with that.
Gentle lady from.
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
has speaker I move I got about
order of Business third reading
of legislation to no objection
it is so ordered is a gentleman
from Chavis radian item number
nine.
Yes Mr speaker we get to that
point that the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill ninety on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Mr speaker house bill ninety is
an update of the uniform
commercial code to taking the
account the different
electronic in other.
Transactions that occur that
have.
Been utilize with technology
that have not that have outpaced
through the uniform commercial
code so we need to update the
inform commercial code the
materials in this very lengthy
have a bill do that I do have an
expertise Mr Jack Burton who is
behind me if there are any
questions with that.
I will stand for questions the
gentleman to close.
Mr speaker thank you I now move
that house bill ninety be.
Do pass.
Well final passage of house bill
ninety the vote is now open.
Was.
Vote of fifty eight in the
affirmative during the negative
house bill ninety is only passes
house.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
radian item number three.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Mr chair Mr speaker
We'll get to that point will we
get your expert in.
Okay.
Would you give it to that point.
The record reflect that election
is Sir for placing House Bill
forty four on final passage has
been taking it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker HB forty
four relates to the federal home
loan bank which lends money to
financial institutions such as
insurance companies and this
bill allows the federal home
loan bank to recover the amount
due to the bank without
unnecessary delays if an
insurance company goes into
receivership is to change
already approved in twenty three
states my expert is a car and we
stand for questions
This thank you Mr speaker I move
that H. B. forty four do now
pass we are final passage of
house bill forty for the vote is
now open.
Let's let's close.
Sixteen in the affirmative zero
negative house bill forty four
has duly passed this house thank
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
I move we go to that order
business announcements.
In addition it is so ordered the
gentleman from San Juan thank
you Mr speaker Mr speaker I now
move that Senate bill three
sixty four be removed from the
speakers table and made the next
order of business and ask for
unanimous consent and Mr speaker
there Lee I can explain the
basis for the motion.
You know junction.
Senate bill three six four will
be the next order of business.
Madam explained.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house that the
rules we suspended the record
show that all actions placing
Senate bill three sixty four on
final passage has been taken
that is now subject debate
amendment or substitution Mr
speaker so the body understands
what this bill does and this
this is generally impacts
Everyone of us in the chamber
and also all of our constituents
this is actually really
important to understand why
we're doing this.
So Mister speaker there's a
certain statute that applies to
all of us when it comes to
ethical violations.
One of those specific provisions
is whether we as legislators can
use our legislative leader had
and our emails in our our title
since because legislators in
order to support constituents
they're having issues with state
agencies now if you're doing
that for compensation absolutely
not and illustrious license
attorney in which case you
cannot Representative that
you're a legislator in less it's
in matters of scheduling so you
can't I as a lawyer I can't the
correspond on on my legislative
leader had if I'm representing
constituent for pay in front of
a state agency so there was a
recent decision by the state
ethics commission that said that
those of us that serve in the
legislature.
Even if it's unpaid not for
compensation if you try to help
a constituent by using your
letter head or provided email
that is a violation of that
statute in there for ethical
violation and Mr speaker I
submit that's part of why we
exist is to help our
constituents navigate the state
government system and hence the
need for this so what this law
will do this this bill will do
it will clarify that Mr speaker
that you and I as legislators
when we're talking about not for
compensation.
We can in fact use our letter
head our email to help our
constituents navigate the
different agencies our state
government has and with that Mr
speaker cheese of what happened
the board.
With that I would slowly
yielding for questions thank you
Mr speaker thank you madam I
believe you wanted to have
both the wanted and the rules
chair chime in as to this bill
and the importance of us all
you'll the floor to the
gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker the genesis
of this was at our ethics
training.
The executive director of the
ethics commission told us point
blank that we could not use our
letter had to contact state
agencies on behalf of
constituents the parliamentarian
and I went up afterwards and
discuss that with the executive
director of we told me was wrong
being no stir us the Senate was
also.
Exercise by by such a statement
they started the process back in
December that's why we have a
Senate bill in front of us the
parliamentarian I did have draft
legislation to addresses in my
house but based on the Senate's
request we did not started over
here in the house and this bill
has arrived and I would
encourage everyone to support
money certainly yield to the
parliamentarian thank you from
Santa Fe Senator at all thank
you Mr speaker of thank you for
yielding this is a bipartisan
effort again to clarify that our
jobs are to act on behalf of our
constituents and using our
titles as Representative as
Senators this is very clearly
what we do is advocates when we
talk to agencies and we do not
want any sort of conflict or
confusion about what our role is
in that and so kudos to our
bipartisan colleagues the with
who he and I were very alarmed
when we realize that this was
the conflict in our current
rules about how we could use our
titles this clarifies that thank
you Mr speaker I move that we
vote unanimously for this even
though I know it's going to a
vote this is all in our favor in
the favor of our constituencies
thank you Mr speaker thank you
see no further debate gentleman
close thank you Mr speaker I now
move that Senate bill three
sixty four do now pass.
As a man with the men's clothes
thank you.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill three sixty four as
amended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
The votes about to close.
Loser close level of sixty in
the affirmative zero in the
negative Senate bill three sixty
four as amended with an
emergency clause has duly passed
this house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that business
messages to no objection it is
so ordered click to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill forty seven
as amended Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty three as amended with
our emergency clause Senate bill
fifty six Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one thirty three as amended
Senate bill two hundred as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted shady
on Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move the go to that
order of business announcements.
And miscellaneous.
And miscellaneous.
Miscellaneous business as well
Mr speaker thank you lady in
addition it is so ordered John
from Santa Fe and Santa
Representative McQueen.
Mr speaker the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee committee
dinner is tonight.
It is still on.
Whether you attend or not the
please try again safely it is at
one thirty nine west to San
Francisco future discussion
thank you Mr speaker members
take note the other elements.
Our members we're gonna call it
a night have a safe drive home.
We will reconvene tomorrow at
ten thirty for another joint
session the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I will stand in
recess until ten thirty tomorrow
morning to no objection it is so
ordered.
