We hear H. B. forty five and
we're ready to go Mr chair
introduce yourself and.
In the bill please.
Thank you madam chair I am
Representative Matthew McQueen
house district fifty this is
house bill forty five
the natural heritage
conservation act amendments this
bill is proposing amendments to
an existing statute to to allow
for the acquisition of the land.
The existing natural heritage
conservation act talk about
restoration and talk about
agricultural and conservation
easement it is not currently
currently allow for the
acquisition in the acquisition
courses you know essentially
clear ownership of the property.
I I understand there's
opposition to this bill I think
The opposition
Is is misguided in terms of what
this bill actually.
It's a way to really like talk
about is what this bill really
does and I I hope you will
evaluate the bill on the bill's
merits.
this bill is about opening a
point not locking up plant and
it's very clear from the
existing natural heritage
conservation act that that's the
intent.
that and the structure of the
program.
So you might have heard of
enrollment let me go back so
naturally here just conservation
act was passed originally under
governor Richards.
It has never been funded.
So the bills on this on the
books is never been funded in
the first year it was passed
there was an appropriation made
the five million dollars
It in the opinion of the
appropriation language it's like
a paragraph right so there's a
paragraph.
The basically parallel the the
bills.
But because they were going to
the legislature at the same time
one didn't name the other so
there is a five million dollar
appropriation made to Energy
Meryl's Nash resources they so
that the committee it was not
the committee referenced in the
natural heritage conservation
that they set up a separate
committee some of the money was
used for restoration some of the
money was used to acquire a
conservation easement
agricultural easements.
And it was really a success
there is a good diversity of
projects large and small across
the state some good restoration
work was done and it's
unfortunate that there was never
any follow up there was never
any subsequent funding to
program because I think in that
first year even though it wasn't
technically.
The natural there's conservation
act I think they have a lot of
success.
You may have heard of a big
conservation funding proposal
right so that the governor
mentioned it in her state of the
state address it's been
introduced I think by centers
worth and and the bill in may
cause concert by Representative
small that bill currently calls
for seventy five million
dollars.
But we do we should look at like
how that money is gonna be.
So.
First off its seventy five
million and it's my experience
that the.
Suggested amounts tend to get
smaller as they work through
their way through the process
they rarely get bigger.
it's a it's a it's a two
different funds.
Additional money could be put in
the funds and subsequent years
but.
Those are subsequent years one
fund is sort of a permanent
trust fund.
You know and the idea is to
build that fund up so that kicks
off interest rate over time they
can fund these programs.
The other fund is expendable
fund which would be fifty
million dollars in I've been
told that the expectation is
that that final last for five
years.
So we're not talking seventy
five million or not talking
fifty million we're talking ten
million dollars.
In the ten million dollars is
spread over I think it's eager
nine different programs.
And the bill has percentages for
each program.
In of the ten million dollars in
a given year.
Twenty two and a half percent I
have no idea how they got to
these numbers twenty two and a
half percent because of the
internal energy minerals and
natural resources department.
Of that twenty two and a half
percent fifty percent.
Goes to the national heritage
conservation.
This is in the bill this is in
the other it's a central line
please.
So if you do the math what we're
talking about is about a million
dollars a year for the natural
heritage conservation act which
is great considering in past
it's been zero.
So that's progress.
But it's not a huge amount of
money.
In by comparison the the state
recently acquired the L. bar
ranch.
Which I believe is fifty four
thousand acres I've not been the
property I don't know anything
about the transaction I know the
state deposit with thirty four
million dollars.
So the funding in this program
that's thirty years of effort in
keep in mind the natural
heritage conservation act is
currently restoration and
easements.
It's not the acquisition.
So even if we had the
acquisition that million dollars
a year is to the fund the whole
purpose of the Act not simply
few acquisition.
When I explain this bill I like
to use that to my office I have
on this big State Land Office
service management maps.
So it's just like four by four.
And it's.
It just looks like someone
splattered color all over the
map.
There's orange there's yellow
there's green there's blue
there's Y. eight there's pink.
In.
It reflects the the service
management not Meryl St the
service management of New Mexico
and I personally think it's a
mess little dots all over the
place in each of those little
dots.
Mosalsal that's anyway section.
So square mile square miles
per area of land I think.
And I I think if you have a map
of like most of the school
section some of them might be
all federal are all private
that.
If you had a large map of one of
the sections you would see the
different ownership the
different lots that the break up
of that section you know whether
it's Porter Porter's or whether
it's been further subdivided.
That the point is our landscape
is fractured the ownership of
our landscape is fracture in we
have this really important to
have it in our landscape drawing
straight lines right I mean
think about that the four
corners area where the four
states come together rarely does
he streamline.
Reflect the reality on the
ground.
Right we have we have hills we
have goalies.
We have a rose we have rivers.
It would make more sense for.
Our our property boundaries to
fall the geographic boundaries.
Rarely do that.
So our land is broken up in what
with this bill provides is a
small Avenue.
To address some of that
fractured nature of our
landscape.
So for example.
If you had a state park where
there isn't any holding.
Maybe you could purchase that in
holding and consolidate that
state park.
Maybe you have an area public
land that is cut off from access
by privately.
Perhaps you can purchase
listening he's.
That would be allowed under this
bill.
It's not allowed under the
current program.
You could protect sensitive
resources you could protect an
archaeological site.
Maybe there's there's a a
wetlands that the private land
owner doesn't want
responsibility for.
And could be part.
You could also do recreational
licenses.
So a license in the sense it a
license is kind of like an
easement although it's typically
for term years rather than
perpetual so not like a fishing
license or a hunting license but
like a real property license
where a landowner would agree to
say for twenty years you can
cross property and I can
properties and hunt the property
condition property something
like that that that is an
interesting land that would be
covered by this bill.
The bill also effectively
expands the current program.
Beyond the current participants
so the national heritage
conservation act talks about it
being open to.
Local subdivisions.
Not a lot of political
subdivisions are in the
restoration Business and not a
lot of political subdivisions
are in the conservation easement
business.
Nor should they.
Right.
But a lot of political
subdivisions own land.
And maybe there's a you know
sliver of land next to one of
their partners or maybe they're
expanding their own trail
system.
These are this opens.
By allowing other interests in
land P. exposition and other
interests in land it opens the
project.
To more participants including.
I am grants.
Sake is.
Other political subdivisions in
the state could apply for this
money.
So this is.
This is a tool.
It's a pool of limited use
because there's limited funds.
It's not a tool to privatize
agricultural.
That's not the intent the
substructure if you look at the
language of the next year to
fund Survation Act it actually
talks about protecting working
lands.
And it's my opinion that working
lands need to be owned should be
owned by the people working.
The state's not going to go
you're going to feel.
And I know the example where
state by the year and that the
state Santa Fe County pot.
The property behind the Santa Fe
area that you much to mail.
Range of Senator Mario which is
a really important landmark in
that community.
Behind it there is is beautiful
meadow it was for sale.
And there is concern that he
would get divided and people
that mobile phones on so rather
than having this beautiful met
up on Santa Mario there'd be a
bunch of Google.
Santa Fe County.
What that.
In probably the middle died
because no interrogated.
So that would have been a good
example where you can be used in
agricultural conservation
easement left the property in
private hands left in
production.
Without buying.
So the so that's.
Just an example of why I think
we don't want the state buying
your gate farmland.
large tranches.
I I guess I can leave it there
leave it at that there some
technical issues in this in
terms of the nature of property
ownership I'm happy to go over
any of that
Like I said it's a tool.
We should have this tool in our
toolbox.
And it's not the two men
gloom we're gonna privatize
everything.
bill that some people I think
this thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr chair we're going
to go to public comment first on
if the if you support this bill
raise your hand.
There anybody on the zoom who
supports this bill would like to
speak in.
Or two more to lead a okay.
Mr to let the.
Who again my name started or to
let the for the record I'm with
the New Mexico land grant
council the council kind of
views this bill because it
allows for political
subdivisions to acquire land is
as a positive thing for Land
Grant communities
the simple that Representative
McQueen again about the L. bar
ranch and and that purchase
actually was all within the so
we have the land grant
and it didn't have an
opportunity to participate in
that process or or even be at
the table and I think that's
Definitely concerning for our
communities when they may have
traditional use areas that that
are are important and they also
have a stake in preservation of
these lands and for future
generations and so we do value
the fact that this bill allows
for land grants and a secular as
that that perhaps would need to
purchase either easements or
even properties of wetlands and
stuff to to maintain the second
infrastructure and health of
those of those systems and so we
see that as a positive.
Thank you thank you Mr to let
that now will go to opposition
you'll have a minute I want you
to come up here and use the Mike
Yeah.
And state your name for the
record.
I'm madam chairman and members
of the committee to more of our
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
first and foremost I want to say
thank you for Representative
McQueen for walking me through
the school and taking some time
to kind of explain it to me
unfortunately we do stand in
respectful opposition the
acquisition of land is of great
interest and concern to my
membership we've seen over time
that land management is most
successful when the land is
owned and actively managed by
private individuals state and
federal agencies simply do not
have the capacity or the
resources to actively manage
lands in a beneficial a multiple
use matter.
And many lands that are often
acquired are located in rural
communities which heavily rely
on the tax base to fund their
essential services as land is
acquired the tax base is reduced
and our communities suffer land
acquisition by the state and
federal government also
decreases the land available for
new and beginning farmers and
for these reasons we stand in
opposition thank you.
Chair lady Philip and get push
button.
Thank you ladies for the
committee members hi my name is
Bronson corn on here
representing the New Mexico
cattle growers and we stand in
opposition of this bill.
One thing that that the
representative touched on was it
it's.
Getting the funds from Senate
bill nine and out of that twenty
two and a half percent of the
twelve and a half million
dollars it comes out to million
four hundred six thousand two
hundred fifty but what's not
said is that if you get in and
get the federal grant the match
dollars that goes along with it
up to three times that amount
now you've got four million two
hundred eighteen thousand
dollars seven hundred fifty
seven hundred fifty dollars.
So now you're talking about
larger parcels of land and what
you get into with that is that
like was touched on a second ago
the tax base behind this and now
you're talking about larger
pieces of property you're not
talking about the small
metropolitan stuff surrounding
just a corn.
That's all the time I get.
On now if you if you're on the
zoom and you'd like to speak in
opposition raise your hand.
Okay.
Mr chair Mr chair would you like
to respond any comments I just I
want to make one more point
If that community tells you that
they're they're under threat
that land is is getting blocked.
Taken out of production.
They're right.
It is.
Hundreds of times a year maybe
thousands of times a year New
Mexico AG lands king purchased
for for trophy ranches for
subdivisions for New people just
need someplace to live.
It's happening.
Hundreds of times a year.
This bill.
Would be like to three
transactions a year if they're
lucky.
And again it's under the actual
here just conservation act which
has the stated purpose.
Of protecting in continuing the
productivity of working lands.
So we're not I I just not
talking about taking Atlanta
production.
So thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and take
questions from the committee now
and Representative Lujan is
first.
Excuse me thank you.
Chair.
So.
I want to thank.
Sponsor of this bill for
spending some time with me and
talking to me about some issues
I've also talked with.
Other others in opposition from
the something that concerns me
as I'm reading the fiscal
impact.
They are here.
and have we seen a member of the
house Appropriations and having.
Not too many of our
all of our internal meetings
over.
The this last interim and the
previous.
My big concern here and some of
the things that I just want to.
Preface this by saying that I
understand what you're trying to
do it's not that I mean up here
in opposition of this I just
have really concerns on the
budget aspect of this and having
talked with a secretary Kenny
and others and secretary EMNRD
that's you know the things that
are stand out here or.
HB forty five does not provide
funding which I understand you
went over all the other funding
possibilities for this however
it may create a fiscal and
administrative burden to EMNRD.
And possibly other state
agencies involved with land
management and also even for the
transfer of any land it acquires
to other departments such as the
department came fishes gamefish.
Aware of this or other my
question is then chair or other
agencies aware of these
concerns.
To chair representative on
First what's an existing
program.
So if that conservation funding
bill go through.
they will have all the same
amount of work.
They will just be more limited
in what they can I.
So still be administering the
funds will still be
administering restoration
projects will still be
potentially acquiring
conservation agricultural
easements.
It will just be limited that
they can't acquire property in
T. or other interests in land
like Trillanes.
so that's all coming this bill
doesn't change that.
In in terms of transferring
property to the Department game
and fish.
That you know this bill to
require anything that's that's
up to the agencies.
you know this could it could
transfer property to a local
post focal subdivision at once
and administrative.
Hello and in.
Owning land is when require
stewardship.
Owning land is an obligation and
a bird you know it's not just
you only and then you're done
with it because.
If you don't pay attention to
line you on bad things happen
to.
This is an imposing that duty on
the state if they don't want.
Okay madam chair I I hear what
you're saying
Representative I think that you
know just there's just so many
there's so many unanswered
questions for me here and I
think that even over the FIR I
think that there are there
implications here that they
haven't been in addressed
through to what I'm asking you I
think that when I'm talking to
these other agencies as we're
talking to into the budgetary
process that we're finding that
they don't need they don't have
the resources at hand to to
administrate.
The needs that this would.
At this with the that they would
incur from what this bill could
do so I'm concerned with that
and I don't think that you're
really answering my question
there like to the agencies that
happen in your I hear what
you're saying it's between them
once this gets done.
My question is.
We have a lot of needs already
missed limited resources within
those agencies as we all know
workforce you know and so forth
so I'm wondering if this creates
a bird you know what they're
saying here's this is this could
create a burden for them which
they already have incurred a lot
of that that burden so.
Mentre Representative Lujan
If the conservation funding bill
did not pass and this did.
There would be no change we've
had this this program on the
books for over ten years.
With no activity none.
No fiscal impact no
administrative per.
If we mended it that would not
change.
The change that's potentially
coming is from the conservation
funding bill.
Again that's separate from this
bill if that bill passes there
will be.
My mouth was about one point one
million Mr Korn's math was was
more that the tents on what the
pay out is.
You know it's still between one
and one half million dollars.
Not a lot of money when you're
talking about land.
That change is coming right I
can't say regardless that change
is coming separately.
Of its own accord  if that
passes this bill.
Does not affect the
administrative work that
agencies will have to do.
If that bill passes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you Representative bye I'm
hearing you but I'm reading
something different on the an
FIR so I'm that's a concern Sir
and I understand the two pieces
that we're talking about here
the funding and with this.
And I don't have I don't see
that we have anybody here
Representative from those
agencies that have put for the
F. I. R. madam chair so.
Again I'm not against what your
bill is doing at all I'm I'm I'm
really looking at the fiscal
impact and what is.
Brought forward from the from
the state agencies and the.
The issues that the thirty four
with us today so I take because
with this and it again I don't
not support what your bill is in
the intent of your bill so
Representative I just take
concern with this and as a
member again on HFC
this comes back to us in this is
going to be brought forward
again when we meet with them.
And.
I disagree because without.
So.
Madam chair I.
That's that's all the question I
have I do understand the intent
of the bill and I do understand
and thank you again for spending
time in explaining all that but
I I do take some house with this
Madam thank you thank you thank
you Representative
Representative Mason.
Yes ma'am.
There's the.
At the madam chair.
The representative.
Hey this ammendment changes that
are.
You know the region of.
The original bill you know was
not a land purchase bill.
And this changes it to a land
for.
In my in my view.
It but there is a few things you
main courses.
And culture but funding
acquisitions of lands what it
says and and but the real hard
burner for me is and other
interests in land what is other
interests and land.
It says that multiple times this
bill.
The committee sent Mason
Ownership the property can be
divided in any number of ways.
There's really a multiplicity of
of ways you can do things
I I own five acres New Mexico
state.
PNM owns part of my property.
The the utilities veterans my
house they own that part of my
property that's an interesting
line.
My property has a public trail
easement along the creek.
That's owned by conservation
organization that's an
interesting one.
So trail easements
licenses as I talked about for
undivided interests aren't
interested land when when I got
married.
I I own the house I got married.
I put my my wife on the.
She owns half the property.
I could have given
Ninety percent.
I could give under ten percent I
mean the you can you can divide
property up down and sideways
and that's what interest in land
means it's some of those other
arrangements in real property
that might be more advantageous
than just buying the whole
property baby don't need the
whole property to get access to
a landlocked public personal
maybe you only need access
easement that's an interesting.
Thank you representative madam
chair.
Of it's still awfully vague the
million you know your ease but
like like you're talking about
for the in the for whoever and
then they come to us as private
landowners to get these
easements.
You know I mean it's a lease but
I I give I have at my place to
an easement for Otero elector by
one like Christy I have to give
them the basement so mean
there's a trade off there given
it to the national heritage and
also there I see no.
Maybe you don't have to even go
through in a minute bill money
to purchase this land or there's
no mention of it in this.
So you have just.
You wanted to get it is that the
way this thing right
Madam chair representative Mason
the statute is quite explicit
that this there's are strictly
voluntary transactions and it
prohibits the use of an and it
to me.
So if you want it you got to pay
for it.
And you gotta find someone who
wants to sell it.
So strictly voluntary
transactions the thank you madam
chair Representative one other
thing
As the representative was saying
you know the the departments
that will manages land for
street again in phase lever.
If you talk to any of those
right now I think they do of so
they don't do a great job of
managing the lands I have now
you know with the forest fires
this last year with the course
that was federal most of it that
the some of the state land to
you know our track record of
managing lands by a public
entities are not good.
You know with the some of those
game and fish you know they
bought different properties in
this property is bought you know
they bought it they have no
money to do anything with it.
So it's just kind of set out
there you know it the.
With the I just believe that
land if if the state would be
better off seven land back to
the private and put it back in
the tax place and we would be
part more lambs Bill of we've
got a lot of the land already to
some of the state in the state
of New Mexico there there one
the land ill okay very large
land.
Owner in the state of New Mexico
when you take all the agencies
from this State Land Office
game and fish for the in the of
tremendous amount of land now
which is.
If it was is not in our tax base
which would make a big
difference but the.
But the.
Thank you much.
Thank you thank you Mr
Representative Mason
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair
politics Representative between
us has been to try to get back
to yesterday because I saw there
was concerns with my County and
I heard back please try to have
yourself of apologize for not
getting back to but they did get
back to me and they did read
this bill they still had
concerns
I guess the particularly
when it comes to a.
Acquisitions of land
I use the example Rio Arriba
there's a lot of the state and
federal and.
Tribal land and we're kind of
landlocked Sosa.
If we have a governments or
other entities by not this land
it's it's a streaking what's
available to the the people from
that area and I know you brought
up the example of behind the
side twenty oh you're going to
see mobile homes and I kind of
take exception without because
of fund you're from northern New
Mexico five seventy to eighty
percent of the people of the
mobile homes because that's what
they can afford and another
thing is to my all it's a
traditionally Hispanic community
that follows the same suit a lot
of people of the mobile homes my
concern with the this type of
legislation is if our
governments are going to be by
property that's going to drive
costs up on what the property
that's left over and it's it's
kind of going to force people to
Move away or something to it I
mean that's my concern with this
this legislation on.
You're you're driving up the
market one of the things I would
say is that insure a.
If the people that move to Santa
Fe from other states knew about
two mile then on the talking and
slide it up and what we're
seeing is that's happening in
our we talk about gentrification
building these big adobe houses
and
We're we're little by little
we're we're driving the the
locals out there having to move
to the Albuquerque live in
apartments are.
It's just a the cycle and it's.
I know what we're trying to do
but I wish there's a better way
for it would have turned our low
poverty Hispanics or people from
the area because
And I don't know if you
understand what I'm saying I see
this driving up costs on private
property.
as lance.
Purchase Madam chair
representative
On the two more project my
recollection is that was
proposed by the community.
so I I I recognize
You know mobile homes
manufactured housing is this in
fission to form of housing and
it's it's common in northern New
Mexico so I I don't have a
problem with that that was a
project that more question is
proposed proposed by the
community because of the
importance of the senatorial.
as in terms of shrinking land
available or driving the market.
this is you're talking about one
to one point five million a
year.
The real estate market in New
Mexico is fast.
This is not going to drive the
market and I will go back to my
previous example of you know
talking starting it you know the
the macroscale service
management in New Mexico and
then going down to
you know the the smaller you
know within a given section
within a given area
To resume since point the state
owned a lot of land.
At the it does especially the
food state trust lands but you
know it's here in the tier in
tears and that doesn't
necessarily fit together the way
it that should from land
management.
What this what this bill does is
it gives the opportunity for our
state agencies and our other
political subdivisions.
To buy land where to program.
And then.
There is concern about state
forestry not going to own land.
They don't have.
This bill doesn't require that.
It's within their discretion.
The the natural various
conservation act has currently
two main focuses.
Restoration acquisition of
conservation easements.
This would open the door to
another option doesn't require
that.
State the agency could spend all
the money on restoration if
there were no good proposals for
acquisition.
So nothing in here forces a
landowner nothing in here forces
HSD nothing in here forces local
governments.
It's just opening the door.
Where its program.
Madam chair I guess that's my
concern it's opening the door
that's going to come later when
there is real money available
in a lot of the the people for
my district in my area the
little by mobile homes because
they're efficiently by an
because that's what they can
afford
In some cases the health have
all elected electric heat types
during the coop and they would
have four hundred dollars
electric bills for heating their
homes because they to have
access to natural gas so they
they pay for one or another but
a.
I guess those are my concerns
and thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Sanchez
we have faster because the on
the next thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen real
quick on your technical issues
it reads the bill as proposed.
Does not define other interest
in land as Mister Mason asked
logo which presents challenges
for determining what
conservation activities would be
the end goal of such and that is
a a group.
Was conditions is that what is
that's where my constituents
have a concern what is the end
result of this.
What what is the intent if
somebody purchased a property
what is the end result you know
the Pecos wilderness you know
yeah the fires in Los dispenses
the stuff so my communities not
really in favor of this this
bill at this point.
Madam chair representative
Cassiano
This bill.
Amended existing statutes the
existing statute.
Has detailed provisions.
About what is for.
Conservation projects this I'm
reading from seventy five dash
tenders six.
shall be for.
Preserving and conserving water
quality and quantity.
Protecting agricultural
production on working farms
ranches and other agricultural
lands.
Protecting restoring forces
watershed watersheds conserving
wildlife habitat maintaining
natural areas providing outdoor
recreation opportunities
including fishing and hunting.
Preserving cultural and historic
sites with natural resource
heritage about.
That's the purpose of the bill.
Right
right now with.
In that my committee has been
through with the fires the
flooding property go for cheap
that means the state could but
at any of the dollar and that's
concerning because like
Representative sunset that's
making apple people moved to
Albuquerque or other cities
where they have to rent an
apartment stuff so that's just
that's concerning to me that the
state would want to purchased or
purchased more land when they
can barely take care what they
have so that's just a concern I
have at this point
Representative McQueen and madam
chair I have more questions.
Thank you Representative
Castellano.
Next up is yes Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
And I understand your interests
are in your in your in your.
thought of what you're trying to
do for state and I appreciate
that.
Couple questions at night the
kind of confuse me when you said
PNM owns part of your property
did you sell it off or do you
have an easement on there
chair representative trusses as
is Representative Mason looted I
gave them an easement and they
put the power on okay but that
that easement is is part of you
sometimes it's about property is
a bundle of sticks that's one
the sticks right you know that's
that's a right to my property
they own that I can't take that
back it's there.
And so I think Madam chair
representative I think easements
I think we get
And with all due respect and
these men is is the ability for
public utility to get power or
other utility from one of
property owner to the next and.
We got I got proper I got power
and utilities
by the property are next to me
allowing access through its
property not just to for his
self interest before the next
property owner and so forth and
so an easement is basically
Madam chair representative you
allowing them to come an axis
that property and use it for
that particular reason only they
don't have a property that'll
pay taxes on it they don't have
any other right to it it's
limited to just
restoring it
bring in an axis.
And and and you know making sure
that the the
that they have access to to
imagine if we had a property in
school all the strategic
alliance going through all these
properties that will power lines
down but then it's all locked
you're locked out of that
ability to for them to restore
power so you know I just want to
make sure that we understood
that the other thing madam chair
representative is I have been
worried about our lands in New
Mexico been very worried about
what's going on with our ability
of our children and our
grandchildren really affording
to live in New Mexico
I was just saying this the other
day and are we really we really
see I've seen the property
values increased tremendously.
In the last.
I don't know about twenty five
years
to people moving from other
states here which it's just
that's what's happening right
now they're coming to this
beautiful state Madam chair
representative but also
if I wanted to buy that ranch.
I don't think my checkbooks is
because of the the state of New
Mexico Madam chair
representative and so that a
come pick it can become a
competing element which worries
me
we're already struggling with
that already and for me we we
keep talking here the
legislature madam chair
representative about affordable
housing and affordable housing
is mobile homes for many many
people and I
I second it concerns me that
does concern me
you know that
The people are able to to live
in our state we're losing all of
our our kids and grandkids to
other states for various reasons
and I definitely want to see
what we can do to make me.
Like to try to Mr chair
representative madam chair
representative of what you're
trying to preserve our lands I'd
like to preserve the the the
rate for children to be able
able to afford to live here so
although I have I understand
what you're trying to do and I
appreciate and I think in some
of those cases you very valid
and what you're saying but I
also think Madam chair
representative of that
This this this languages could
could possibly be abused and
which was control thank you very
much chair.
Thank you Representative us us
I'll go to.
Thank you madam chair
Representative thank you for
your presentation I mostly have
a kind of just a more a lot of
the COVID so we're here I have
that great concern over the
under other interests it's kind
of like that clause in your
contract set up and other jobs
that that are by that your
supervisor and and stuff that's
not my job and you can just
shove stuff in there and all of
a sudden we stuck with it
because it says other interests
and I also I lived in a in a
small town in California for a
few years that the only two
percent of the land was
privately owned
and it was it was owned by a lot
of different government entities
they were able to attempt to buy
it up and that didn't happen
when I when I researched a lot
of that it didn't happen
overnight so what so while I'm I
don't take much comfort in the
fact that there's not a lot of
money now to acquire big pieces
of property with this ability I
know that there's capabilities
later of acquiring a lot more
money so you can acquire bigger
pieces of land and one of the
major reasons one I love New
Mexico you can find good people
and good food anywhere else
that's that was the major reason
for coming back second reason I
I I left that places I would
have never owned a home because
it was too expensive as a single
mom at that point in time I
would have never owned it so the
more landed that government owns
in the less land that private
people own the more expensive it
is for those who want to live
here so
that's that's all I had to say
madam chair sorry thank you
Representative even thirty
seconds or Representative isn't
that I just the one that could
get through in the last more
question.
It the he said that that is of a
project is the.
The declared a wreck.
Reclamation project that it
removes the volunteer part of
the selling.
The current.
Madam chair representative Mason
that might be true under and
other laws it's not true under
the natural heritage
conservation act which
explicitly prohibits the use of
eminent domain.
Thank you Representative Mason
I'm I have a a couple comments
and.
Mr chair
what we missing out on if we
don't pass this bill.
mentor I think that's a good
question and I think the you
know I hear the concerns from
the committee.
I I think the concern you're
expressing or big macro issues
this bill is a microbial this
bill is a small amount of money
dealing with individual
circumstances
we we talked about the nature of
an easement.
And use it could be an access
easement right and you so you
don't own the land you don't
can't do whatever you want but
maybe you can buy an access
easement to get people across
public land to stateLee and
where they can hunt and fish.
That's not currently covered in.
The natural heritage
conservation act that is an
interest in land.
So.
Interesting land there they're
very.
But they're also limit because
you're still just talking about
land there's third aren't like
sneaky things that we're talking
about we're talking about
property interests we're not
even talking about.
Like weird reverse mortgages or
any other like executory
contracts anything like that
talking about property in
different ways you can use
property.
It I think access which is
explicitly called out in the
national air just conservation
that is one of those things that
we should if we have the
opportunity to enhance access we
should take that.
Thank you Mr chair what other
states around us have this
ability for the state or
political subdivision to be able
to tap into state funds to
purchase.
To acquire Madam I've no idea.
I I focus on the Mexican this is
my home and here it is important
to know what you time Colorado
doing as well I I I just I have
some some comments now for the
last nearly ten years I've been
running a land trust.
We deal with conservation
easements.
Sometimes we deal with
acquisitions
We tend to not have the funding
to to do that and I want to just
give you an example of where
this could be really applicable
We're changing this law could
could really benefit the
community in my committee inTaos
there's a five acre triangle of
land that is adjacent to the for
service it is where the head
gate of the second month it off
of the Rio Fernando you know
comes is is located
our and if private lemon X. to
it the
the landowner is would really
like to to sell it the second
would like to buy it the for
service would also love to think
about putting a trail there but
nobody and my community has the
the money you know even if with
all the nonprofits put together
working with yes I can
association which is a political
subdivisions the state we can't
find the funds to protect this
vital piece of property that has
recreational benefits but mostly
more than anything has the
benefit of protecting the second
head gate that feeds and waters
hundreds of acres of private
land through the second system
and this you know I look at the
opportunity here what we can you
know how we can help our staff
is our land grants to see a
property that's up for sale
voluntarily and their ability to
tap into this the hopefully
potential funding source from
the state to to protect the
lands that are that are their
traditions that's that's what I
see is an opportunity here with
with this bill so I that that's
the end of my comment I I'd like
for the chair to to close.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
members of the committee you
know I I hear you I hear your
concerns I think I think they're
valid concerns me I see what
happens I see.
People leaving California
because they can't afford
Thanks it's a completely
different scale.
I think the chairman as simple
as an excellent example.
That's the kind of project that
I have in mind that's the kind
of project that fits under the
language of the existing law.
And that's the kind of project
that they're maybe I don't know
what you know I think when the
user pretty expensive everywhere
including yes.
Maybe there's enough money.
To do a project like that maybe.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you what's the pleasure of
committee chairmen from
committee.
Also I also.
But.
Representative Lujan.
No.
No to table.
Representative.
Yes I will.
Representative more available
yeah.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Terrazas.
Vice chair because they on yes.
And chair.
No to table by a vote of five to
to this bill's been tabled thank
you thank you thank you madam
chair thank you committee
members of the audience this is
the only bill that we're hearing
today so if you're here for one
sixty.
You don't have to go home but
you shouldn't fear
We are hearing eight we're
having a presentation on
Thursday which is also the
treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo day
world will get a presentation by
our to our to let that to
continue to give us a sense of
what you know what land grants
to we need a little bit more
education on that and that we
may be hearing some bills I
think I think we'll be hearing a
couple bills with that that
agenda will be on the website
