Here.
Representative I'm sorry with
vice chairs that are chairwoman.
Madam chair.
All right you have a quorum
madam chair.
You need to recognize
Representative black is here
coming okay Representative
black.
Your thank you.
Good morning everybody we have a
quorum will start the meeting
and we will we have the honor
this morning having a Senator
Leo had a meal with us to
present his bill Mr Hodder
Senator now will you please put
Senate bill one forty one on the
table absolutely thank you so
much madam chair and thank you
members the committee for
listening to this bill if I can
give you a brief background as
to what led to the creation of
this bill so that you can
understand why Representative at
I and I both happy to get in
December twenty twenty one there
was a major storm that swept
across northern Rio Arriba
county wind was at an all time
high of that trees were uprooted
temperatures were below freezing
and the major concern we had
we're a number of our
constituents in rural Rio Arriba
county only have five percent of
their propane tanks filled now
that only would last about a
night and maybe two days to keep
them warm the major issue is
their tanks are leased when the
tank is least it's part of that
a violation of the statute to
allow containers to be billed by
anyone other than the owner upon
the owner's authorization for
the company who owns those eight
tanks is the only company who
can go in and re fill tanks the
company at the time out of
southern Colorado was having
issues of their own on their end
they didn't have enough drivers
to come to northern New Mexico
to fill tanks but there was an
emergency and immediate need for
something to happen that's what
to agencies along with state
police Representative and I
myself how to go walking door to
door to see which residents were
being affected who was out of
propane or near to the end of
the propane tank because we had
a move quick no that's important
to note because the way it's
currently right and is of those
customers who are not on the
list that.
List can't be provided by the
propane company when you want to
try to get them filled by
another company it just can't
happen so this bill.
That we address addresses the
major health and safety issues
that we ran into that it allows
the state county municipality or
tribal governments to declare an
emergency Andrew LP gas provider
is unable or unwilling to
provide customers with LP gas
this bill also allows that
during the declaration of an
emergency the bureau to obtain
the LP gas providers customer
list and I'm authorized service
for LP gas tanks by the other LP
gas providers that means we
don't have to go door to door
anymore we know exactly who to
target to ensure that they're
safe and of this bill also
ensures that New Mexico citizens
have access to heating your
round about that might not sound
stupid friends what you think of
the spring but when you go to
rural New Mexico expressions by
the Colorado border the spring
is still very very cold so this
is especially important during
times of extreme cold that we
make sure that these life
threatening situations are
mitigated and out also this bill
interest customers are protected
from the LP gas provider
confiscating the LP gas tanks
with fuel left of them without
first compensating the customer
for the underuse LP gas provided
during the declared emergency
and madam chair just one last
note in regards to the bill it
is being endorsed by the New
Mexico propane association and
with that I'd like to hear if
there's any comments from the
committee or anybody I'm so.
Thank you senator Hotmail
We are right there together so I
and that's why I'm co sponsoring
this bill it's at it's a huge
issue if it happens in rural New
Mexico and believe me it will
happen Senator how to me I see
you have an expert witness clay
Bailey do you want him to
do you want to introduce him and
have him talk about this issue
yes please actually have two
expert witnesses with me today
from the office of the
superintendent I have the
superintendent herself Linda
Trujillo and I also have to clay
Bailey with me today the
director of construction
industries division liquid
approach and so with that if
they want to make any comments
but with the control in just for
this bill they can do so at this
time.
Thank you madam chair and and
and Senator appreciate that the
two of you are sponsored this
Senator did a great job of
explaining that so we're just
here for answers quest to answer
any questions.
Thank you thank you
superintendent get to see you
good to have you here
with that so we'll go to and to
the audience are there are there
are people in favor of this
bill.
Please tell me my mom lockdown
madam chair.
Well you see we have the honor
Scott Scanlon stat
would you like to make a comment
on this bill.
There we go good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee
I would my name is Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico propane association and I
would like to thank the senator
and you madam chair for for
sponsoring this bill
thank the department for
bringing it forward on behalf of
the New Mexico propane
association we endorse this bill
we support this bill we urge its
passage I guess the the.
Well the the gentleman from that
had the problem was not a member
it is not a member of our
association but we are proud to
say that once the emergency was
very clear that members of our
association did step up to the
plate
and fill those tanks I work with
the community they did take on
some liability and so
we're we're pleased about this
bill
and we are just support so
please vote for the bill thank
you madam chair.
Thank you thank you Scott now
recognized I say it could cause
us.
Good morning madam chair thank
you so much Senator how to DO
and and and Madam chairwoman for
bringing such a consequential
piece of legislation that
affects many of our native
American Community so out
northern New Mexico as chair of
native American democratic
office we stand in full support
of this bill we believe that the
emergency scenarios where our
communities rely on gas to not
only keep themselves warm but
also ensure that there are more
ways for them to feed their
families and and and have access
to this very very dire natural
resources is very very important
so thank you so much Senator for
bringing this forward as well as
you Madam chairwoman.
I think.
I don't see any more people
wanting to make comments so
So we will go back to the
committee.
Yes I just said I would just
like to add a few things that I
I kind of smiled when right when
we say we walked door to door it
was was freezing it was below
zero and we didn't have the map
so we had to check everybody and
walking door to door and and in
northern New Mexico Maine C.
walked from the money that the
homes are
either half miler milers five
miles apart so we were walking
we're driving from door to door
getting out you know getting
back in to get as close as we
could so it was and it was
really you know I just want to
tell you the small rural
communities are amazing
everybody turned out they were
is situated in the.
The community center on
everybody showed up to help each
other make sure not only that
their families for safe that
that that seniors you know
living alone in in in in their
homes that they know them and
they made sure that everybody in
the whole community state so it
was really it's just kind of the
New Mexico was and I just wanted
to add that because
So where we come from and people
from rural districts understand
that and with that I will come
on the Representative is up for
questions and
I'll start with vice chair Linda
Serrato.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you to you and the Senator
bringing this forward I had a
couple of quick questions I did
see that this would be if we get
enough votes on the floor of the
house that this would be
defective regency effective
immediately I'm curious Senator
if this receive those enough
votes in the Senate already for
for to be declared emergency
effective immediately thank you
for that question Representative
and madam chairwoman yes there
were only five who weren't in
favor with this bill but when
they pulled me aside to find out
more after the floor session
three of the five so that would
have supported the bill if they
would have had more information.
Thank you madam chair thank you
as senator for that recreation
as well and I I want to preface
this by saying not every bill
can do everything but I am just
curious in the particular
example that you provided you
mentioned that there was a bit
of a supply issue with the
propane providers
and I'm I just for my
understanding this bill would
not take care of that particular
element but it would allow
individuals to refill the
propane tanks is that correct
thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative you are correct
and I might have misspoken by
saying it was a supply issue the
issue was having a certified
driver who could help.
Deliver the propane to these
areas so the major issue that
the propane supplier was having
was having somebody certified to
deliver the propane.
With the current regulations I
know of no other company could
come into that lease tank if
they have the drivers come in
with what's currently in place.
Thank you madam thank you madam
chair thank you center so this
would allow this would actually
kind of help the overall
situation that in in what you
had already experience is that
correct Madam chairwoman
Representative you are correct
thank you senator thank you
Madam those are my questions
thank you.
Chair the chair like to
recognize.
Representative part of.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator I'm I think this is
the first time I've had I've had
yet but I want to committee so
it's nice to see you and I do
apologize I was running late
this morning I did not get to
hear your testimony I apologize
if you have I answer these
questions please excuse me I'm
so when I when I understand and
if this is incorrect what if I
am ready to take from a company.
ABC you know propane and they
are unable to deliver.
I'm then I can go to one two
three propane company and they
can deliver in that red to take
is that correct madam chair
Senator thank you for the
question Madam chairwoman
Representative only if the
emergency is declared by the
governor the county and
municipality or tribal
government can those takes the
build so no other time could
another company come in and fill
the tanks of the least company
tank unless there's a
declaration of an emergency.
I'm so what constitutes I'm Mr
at.
I'm.
Madam chair and senator and an
emergency
And and this is why I'm asking
because I know we have a
national health emergency going
on right now so this would apply
currently correct I'm at madam
chair Senator well Madam
chairman and Representative not
in this case so the example I
gave was when a wind storm
brought temperatures below
freezing in northern New Mexico
the emergency was that there was
a large number of our
constituents whose propane tanks
were only at five percent I
presented a propane tank means
that would keep them warm
overnight maybe the two days of
the night of keeping them warm
that constituted the emergency
to going to needing to get these
tanks filled okay I'm yeah I I
support about this kind of wrap
my head around it we have I have
a property that I've been
waiting for four weeks for them
to install the tank and it's
like oh will be out there next
week I want to get text messages
we're going to be out there
tomorrow oh wait my guy has
COVID we can't do it because I'm
you know I have two guys out
level by and so it's been so
frustrating so I I totally get
why you're doing this I would
argue that an employee shortage.
My current emergency I'm
especially when you have
somebody that you know it's you
know it we just we just went
through it's like you know ten
fifteen degrees last week was it
last week I the list time up
here
and so I would argue that so
maybe my other question is it's
my understanding I'm totally
naive to that I don't understand
propane but I'm companies is it.
Types of mixtures.
That company is propane one type
of mixture and can you mix
different propane for different
companies.
Madam chairwoman Representative
it's just one sort of Jack's
right propane just one sort of
gas with the same elements but
what makes it interesting is we
asked even gas companies right
people who deliver fuel if they
could come in and deliver
propane you can't do that
because you need to sort of
licenses in order to deliver
propane so it's not as easy as
just finding a driver it's
ensuring that these drivers have
the right licenses and
certificates to deliver propane
but the propane is all just the
same element.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair thank you senator I know
this on hands out I have more
questions but I'm pretty sure
they're gonna be answered by the
other members that are not I'll
come back I just don't want to
take everybody's time we're you
know all that stuff so I'm gonna
let that the members ask
questions thank you Senator
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative for
heart all now come on
Representative look on.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Thank you senator for bringing
this bill forward it means it's
very needed I know that.
Once they go ahead ten years ago
or so there was another
emergency similar to this where
we have to get within and and
and.
Things to our our communities in
northern New Mexico are
increasing cold winter time.
I just have a few questions
How long does it take to to get
a different declaration of an
emergency
Madam chair one Representative
it can be as quick as a day so
if you look at Rio Arriba County
the three commissioners got
together had an emergency
meeting they put up an agenda
twenty four hours before and
declared the emergency the next
day after that agenda when I and
it went immediately and place
the governor said the need for
it and immediately declared and
emergency so it's as quick as
the agenda can go up when it
comes to with disabilities and
counties so that it's right but
they're gonna be meeting but as
quick as within a minute when
the governor declares an
emergency thank you so much I
appreciate that answer and that
discussed the testament of how
fast and where we be really
round that we were out ourselves
up to to really help those in
most need I'm did you madam
chair find out how many users
there were for for the product.
So madam chairwoman
Representative that's what the
issue was right we couldn't get
a list of their role so we could
get a list of customers this
bill would ensure that we can
get that list so that we know
exactly how many people are
affected and how many of those
desperate times of need for us
to move quickly up.
Thank you for that answer just
maybe and at wondering why your
by your own account how many you
were able to address or a
counter measures that's okay you
have to.
And you know and I do have item
Chairman representative of I do
have a just a bit so in and
around the child might area so
those that needed propane to be
filled or those that were able
to get would deliver to them
because they have the ability to
burn wood in a wood stove to
stay warm there were at least
thirty customers those who
needed the propane that
immediately or those who needed
what sent to them immediately
and note these were mostly
elderly citizens who were not
able to go out and collect what
on their own in the springtime
so these are people who are the
most vulnerable in our
communities thank you in exactly
thank you for that answer thank
you madam chair and how many
providers are there madam chair.
Madam chair representative to
would northern New Mexico one is
actually in southern Colorado
and wind within Espanola so when
the declaration of emergency
happened we had a providers
coming in from Albuquerque to
assist our residents.
Thank thank you so much for that
answer it just goes to share
with and I'm advocating is to
share the needed and and the
vulnerability that we've we've
had in our northern rural
communities and mentioned today
Madam liquid petroleum is that
something that would be more
I wouldn't want to say
sustainable what would last
longer is that a product that
would last longer something that
are.
Consumers would look into using
madam chair Madam chairwoman
Representative that is propane
this is the credits in this
liquid form there's not
something different there's I
was yes thank you for the
clarity as a little confused
about that that was a new.
Alright I'm I think this is a
really good piece of legislation
is addressing what is what is
wrong
are we going to does this bill
address that those containers or
just in here and.
Or just the the the issue that
we can you can now under
emergency get information for
private industry madam chair
Madam chair representative of
with this with this legislation
addresses is eight tanks so they
have the tank already take the
really expensive to purchase the
number of rural New Mexicans
can't afford it so the least the
tank this would ensure that
they're least tank can get
filled by any provider to ensure
that they can stay warm.
Thank you madam chair so they
already are leasing.
The material which then they
okay there's a lot of problems I
mean in yourself and some of
them with this piece of
legislation which I really
appreciate but there's just some
other issues that I think that
we need to look down the road
and addressed later and another
thing being like sustainability
and energy and sustainability
and the usage of of.
This type of project project and
I hope that we can have those
conversations to really help our
rural and those most in need
when we're looking at
So we're installation and things
like that to to really address
The product usage in.
And the crypto and thank you so
much I appreciate the time
and I have the same concern with
you with our northern rural
communities in this state needs
and I really appreciate your
business for thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative black
had her hand I don't know if you
still would like to ask a
question Representative.
Thank you madam chair my
question was just answer okay
thank you then I'll call on
Representative Montoya.
Good morning madam chair and
senator it's so good to have you
in our in our zoom space always
first of all I stand in full
support of this bill.
The rather heroic effort that
you both made to get on the
ground what's beautiful by the
time I heard about this and make
calls to our county to see if I
could support in any way.
I was told that yes we had
emergency centers open but there
was no real need because our
fund media us came to the rescue
to help one another well that's
heart warming to know that in
level makes you go we have that
beautiful sense of family.
At this point emblematic we to
the bigger critical issue of
rural infrastructure needs
across America in New Mexico and
particularly in the north where
I live we re define the need I
think this points to the fact
that we have to transition.
To renewables sooner than later
while I applaud the idea of you
know getting these emergency
declarations and making sure
those tanks were filled and it's
it's great work.
But it's emergency work it's
after the fact when a crisis
hits we need to be prepared now
I know it's a big lift to bring
infrastructure in rural areas
where topography and geography
in this your frontier pass this
of our townships make this
really challenging but we have
to place it in the middle of our
work finally.
I can't say it enough I'm gonna
get off my soapbox in about
three seconds but rural needs
matter we must draw attention.
Just last week I got a call from
in M. in M. M. S. N. B. C. sorry
national news that work asking
about these issues in New Mexico
they're seen there's an article
today that I read in your re
Pennsylvania where the trillions
of dollars the budget
ministration has aerobically put
for is not reaching the
townships that need it so I will
stop their just again thank you
for bringing this forward and I
want to compliment our committee
members you were brilliant smart
all of the questions I had were
answered thank you thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
and now and I'll entertain a
motion the ideas of it my hands
up.
I'm sorry excuse me.
Thank you Representative
Castellano.
Thank you
my question is for a.
Comes to carry in a Trujillo on
the F. R. I. it says.
that the construction industry
division will absorb any expense
insured when responding to a
declared emergency and I am in
support of this bill because I
am from New Mexico but my
concern is doing we all know
what the cost would be if an
emergency really happen if it
went on for you know two weeks
three weeks does the department
have the money in a certain fund
for emergency declaration.
Madam chair would you like me to
respond yes please thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative it's good to see
you and I'm appreciative that
you're in support of this
legislation so the only impact
to the Department during that
declared emergency that happened
earlier this late this last year
early this year was in regards
to coordination and so the real
cost fill of helping those
individuals who didn't even have
the funds in some cases to buy
on the the resources that they
needed to LP gas was of a
program through aging a long
term services and so on we we
really just coordinated and I
say just I shouldn't say just
director Bailey and his staff
really work tirelessly.
All nearly twenty four hours a
day for many days on and but
that's what that was we're
willing to absorb that because
we think it's so valuable and
important for this to happen it
but agent in long term services
stepped up to the plate with
funding and so if they declared
that a particular customer could
get their of fuel paid through
their fund then they would
notify us so we were having
daily meetings with of homeland
security emergency response team
with the agent in long term
services and US senator and just
to do that coordination so
that's why we wrote that there
wouldn't be any cost to us it's
just a matter of re directing
resources.
Thank you madam chair thank you
secretary Jill and my hat's off
in in commend you guys for
agencies working together
because these are the most
vulnerable are seniors and we
need to protect them they've
been here for us all our lives
now it's our turn to protect
them and I think you of
chairwoman of Anna and Senator
had a meal for your response to
this matter my hat's off to you
guys too and I am full support
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Representative I think
we have the.
Kelly I mean Representative
Fajardo to have another
question.
Thank you madam chair if I may
I'm Senator and Representative I
know that that you mentioned
slightly that there is some
senators that had a problem with
the liability issues between
companies I was that resolved
and what conclusion came from
that conversation.
Madam chairwoman Representative
great question whether these
companies are going to go in and
help feel they they take on the
liability and they understand
that the liability far outweighs
the risks of what could happen
to seniors are New Mexicans of
their drive toward so they've
taken on the liability.
And that's what that's one of
the questions one of the
senators Aston said if you would
have known that he would have
changed his vote knowing that
they're taking on the liability
knowing that they're doing
something by keeping New Mexican
state of our.
Thank you senator.
Okay.
I guess I'm last on the list so
I I just want to explain the the
power of the governor's office
because I really never seen that
are working for what happened
when that huge hundred mile
winds came up and all these
trees right down and
our lines went down I mean it
was it was really dramatic and
it wasn't freezing cold
we also electricity went to us
so we pulled a back up generator
they had ordered a generator
because of the supply change
line you know J. line during the
comment that they haven't
received it yet the governor
sent back up generator to keep
water going on or that for the
town I mean and what we found
out and we're working on this is
an emergency you really needed
to know what seniors really or
people we're hooked up to oxygen
tanks I mean that's a huge state
too so we put them into the
emergency center people pull
them into their homes I mean it
was a full court press water was
brought up.
We had meals delivered we had we
were doing everything and it
really was the governor really
having our backs on everything
and then looking for long term
solutions and this legislation
is is one of them it's a it has
a message from the governor in
it short session and so
we're very grateful to get kind
it to pull this package together
and to pull this bill together
with the with the advice of the
governor's office and with the
superintendent thank you lined
up for your work on this thank
you play for your work yes so it
was not only a full court press
during the emergency it was a
full court press one may when
we're preparing for this
legislative session and I just
wanted to explain that to
everybody because you know as
one legislators you know sitting
in your home.
And and we're just all
frantically calling everybody
and trying to organize this and
then finally got my car
With that Leo the Senate with
the senator going up there to
really be on the ground with the
governor to just talk to people
and and find out how how this is
working and how we should
prepare for the future should it
happen again and with that I
will entertain a motion madam
chair I would make a motion.
Okay we have a first and a
second.
That I would have the secretary
call the roll yes madam chair.
Representative black.
Representative black yes.
Representative Castellano
definitely a test.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
You have seven thank you pass.
With that Senator had a meal you
have a deep pass on Senate bill
one forty one congratulations
you madam chairman thank you
members of the committee and I
also want to thank the
superintendent clay Bailey the
deputy superintendent at one
last comment I also want to
thank all those are ten years we
came together we had Jerry
infant Landis who is with the
house city council came over to
bring what it to people in
northern New Mexico and the land
grant communities really came
together to also assist along
with our two agencies homeland
security and aging and long term
services all for ever be
indebted to so thank you again.
Thank you and I would like to
echo my thanks I it was kind of
just this wonderful amazing.
Time and is in that deep winter
cold in the Deep Department so
thank you all of the events yes
thank you madam chair if if I
may yes I just go to show when
we want something we stand
together anything can happen and
that's just you're absolutely
right.
Good to see everybody else see
on the floor some people of mine
thank thank.
