Sanchez Representative Terrazas.
By your because they are no.
We won you yourself please
present.
Thank you
for to also present we have a
welcome welcome Senator pope
thank you for having me Madam.
We have one bill on the agenda
this morning's Senate bill two
ninety seven the gentleman to.
Explain the bill thank you madam
chair Senate bill two ninety
seven is appropriation bill for
the Martin Luther king junior
commission here in the state and
you know this is just an
important bill to brought up
another two hundred thousand
dollars to really make sure that
we're reaching all parts of the
state talking about the
nonviolent social action of Dr
Martin Luther king junior and
it's also going to help them
bring on an additional FTE to do
this work
what that madam chair old ready
for any public comment any
questions from the committee
thank you senator why don't we
open up the public comment.
Those in the room in favor of
gay in opposition.
Of the zoom if you're no no is
on this soon we're gonna go to
Canadian center PO thank you
madam chair I think everyone's
and conservation and all right
now so there's some big stuff
happening there right now.
Representative Mason go ahead
the
Senator is the.
Let go of that anybody's that.
Correct.
You know it's a result that what
the it's a good thing bill I
don't think anybody would argue
about the impact Mr Martin came.
At three at the.
You know he was through them but
that the.
At the at the advocate for is
called but you know the the news
is not violent is.
it I wish we could all learn
something from.
This was of going about the
process.
The fact is that your question
this morning but you know we he
was Senator all time it would.
A list of the.
Those is and we're really doing
is is it is this.
This is a dollar.
The just because she's the side
of it all was.
The.
Positive about everything.
All the word law all of this so
just decided that central's
will.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative need only a.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator I just want to know and
do you have any idea what kind
of
events or something like that
what we're what what actually
happens you have an idea of what
actually happens with some
dishonestly sorry to cut you off
don't know you're good Madam
chair representative so the big
thing that they do is they have
their annual conference with
actually bring a lot of students
to educate them and talk about
his message and an education I
think what's really important
with this commission is you know
our generation and folks we know
about him and we want to ensure
that the future generations know
about him right and so not only
do they do a conference every
year in Albuquerque but they
actually go to other communities
in the state so it's not just in
Albuquerque or Santa Fe centric
date you know go to Hobbes go to
Los crucis go to different parts
of the state and make sure that
they're reaching out to students
and and educating them there
also the key sponsor in the
Martin Luther king junior March
that we do every year on the
weekend of the holiday in
Albuquerque and once again that
the big conference that they
have with students so that's
really a lot of the work that
they do excellent thank you
madam speaker and Senator I I
really love that you mention
dealing with with young people
because I'm I'm a teacher and
I'm all about empowering use
because they are our future and
and they are hope so so there is
hope because if they get in and
and get his message down in them
then then maybe we'll have a
little more of love and a lot
less so.
Craziness later on but thank
you.
Thank you Representative I have
a few questions as well Senator
is the two hundred thousand
dollar preparation already in
the budget madam chair yes it is
my understanding just from
Senate finance that simply put
in yes.
That's all I have thank you for
unless Representative Lujan has
any questions.
Yes it is a common thank you for
bringing this forward and I'm
glad we got the money in there
and
to better and bigger things for
the commission we've had him for
a while and and I knew
I know a little bit about the
commission but I I'm just glad
that it's still intact so it's
still running and and
Like Representative more about
million said it's it's it's
going to prosper we need this in
our in our in our lives and our
state so thank you for bringing
it forward Senator thank you
thank you madam chair thank
representative would like to
make the most of the press.
Twenty two has much on the table
Representative Lujan yes
Representative Mason yes.
Yes yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Terrazas.
Vice chair testing no.
Yes.
And chair or yes yes the
Senators you have a do pass on
Senate bill two ninety seven got
here Justin sure did
congradulations.
Madam chair yes Mr vice chair
how can I help you.
Can you tell that Mr Senator
Ingle and he has to be a lot
earlier.
Who just had something that
would be vice chair members
because the on on our senators
are meeting starts at nine we're
not used to committee starting
on
I don't know how you do it over
there in the Senate but here in
the house thank you thank you
very much Representative.
Have a great day it rose thank
you are are a committee this
meeting is adjourned.
He is.
For.
The.
