That
that that I've been on there too
much in.
Right here.
Well we're gonna Linda.
The.
It's just.
The food.
Happening.
The joint session of the house
and the Senate will come to
order what is the pleasure of
the joint session.
For for you.
I.
This is the worst years.
Are
you got it.
Some.
Mr Chairman.
The chair recognizes
Representative Gail Chasey Mr
chairman I ask unanimous consent
that we resolve ourselves into a
committee of the whole house and
Senate for the purpose of
hearing speakers and
presentations in honor of
Hispanic culture day.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
The committee of the whole house
Senate will come in order for
the members and guests who are
in the gallery please rise for
today's indication to be given
today but don't Lujan no.
For.
The young.
We have.
Is.
medical.
What about that apartment with
building at
the end of December but after.
For.
After.
The end
of the.
In order.
The.
We are only able to will be no
yes it is.
I.
The idea of limiting my concern.
When I.
We did have.
Maybe seed.
Before we get started like to
have you help me welcome some of
our guests are here joining us
on the rostrum today we have for
the name Hispanic foundation.
Honorary chairman this Edward lu
Han.
We have an ACC board member
Andrew bird.
The HSD donation president CEO
John Martinez.
In ACC co interim director New
Orleans medium.
Share the notions and cultural
center foundation is robbed of
Google.
The nation's Medical Center
foundation board member Mr Steve
Garcia.
Grandson of the late senator Ben
alternate on all Daniel Manzano.
Nationals Medical Center
foundation.
Director of development strategy
Jennifer Maldonado Greenwood.
Lieutenant colonel New Mexico
Air National Guard Nathan green
one.
The state auditor Joseph
Maestas.
This is been a cultural center
foundation board member mark.
Representative Mrs old Steve
Thomas.
Former First Lady former
president and CEO.
The national CENIC center
foundation.
Clara Papadakis.
President and CEO The
Albuquerque's elected chamber of
commerce Mr early see the Baca.
Chief experience officer
Albuquerque's model chamber of
commerce ribbon we need.
Representative sacred wins John
but all.
Director broadband business
development secret wins John W..
Mentions that a cultural center
foundation operations
coordinator Ryan with a little
Regalado.
Measures reading center
foundation operations
coordinator Jacob Siva.
President wise choice foods
season Chavez.
The CFO is C. three
international mic John is.
Former vice chair of the
Democratic Party New Mexico
Kathy McDuffie.
President of amount of forms
Sydney China is.
Business development wise choice
foods Senator Elliott.
Student at hope Christian high
school Emma Elliott.
Interim secretary of public
education money and by the
Interim deputy secretary of
teaching learning and assessment
Jacqueline Gonzalez.
National Hispanic cultural
center education program manager
Dr was idea but.
Let's go guitarist is still on
but.
This is been a cultural center
education program coordinator
let us Baca.
National Hispanic volunteer
coordinator Annette lu Han.
Secretary of workforce solutions
anything more.
DHF member come other than lotus
went to Mona who came.
Cochair record though a Cesar
Chavez community committee RCC
the amount of gross with the
then that Garcia benefit is.
Village of assumptions trustee
bream all of the lotus Haridasa
Gilbert Benavidez.
The R. C. C. C. event
coordinator Lola Gonzalez.
Former New Mexico secretary of
state close friend of the lotus
Florida Clara by the Andrews.
Co chair of the R. C. C. C.
bream of the lord's word the
Valory Saint John.
Former state auditor Brian
Cologne.
State land commissioner
Stephanie Garcia Richard.
And so let me go Norma ang
songes.
Sister did you serve in the
Helen what is.
Committee of the use of the
internet though is.
Why did you submit them surely
survey that.
Thank you so that but piece of
evidence.
Great granddaughter piece of it
Layla jul.
Centipede you Senator Mark Henry
so that the.
Some of the use of it Randy
Senator.
National Hispanic cultural
center foundation director
marketing and programs Amy
Hopkins.
Minnesota federal center
foundation CEO Melissa are
middle.
Representative Exxon Mobil
Ashley Wagner.
National Hispanic foundation
board member Tania Robinson.
The national Hispanic cultural
center foundation board member
IDA and India the two of them.
National Hispanic.
Cultural center board member by
the job is.
National Hispanic cultural
center board member Annette
Garcia.
It's been a cultural center
board member flow through he'll.
General counsel New Mexico's
workforce compensation Michael
hold.
Assistant general counsel New
Mexico workers comp admin Center
garner.
Are indications that Reggie had
NO.
Oil.
Messer restored is to for the
regal B..
Also joining us today Zaxby's.
Bernalillo county chair of Mr
John Allen.
The company by the the Ellen.
Cater to a business development
manager Beverly Frazier.
General counsel department of
military affairs Sonya conozco
that he'll.
Also joining us today is money
and see if he'll.
Martin sprocket.
Believe me a project.
From Planned Parenthood Elaine
songes.
Planned Parenthood we have John
Salvi.
Representing PNM Laura sciences.
Also Representative PNM with
cardinals to settle.
Executive director of the market
Hermio academy charter school
morning a I do not.
Singleton.
Executive director Albuquerque
collegiate charter school jade
Rivera.
Future focused education
assistant director workforce
learning hi then turned on this.
Special guests today the one and
only misses the lotus what the.
LaserJet of the Legislature
please help me in welcoming
today's performers Dr Sandhya
but and is still on the gentle.
I heard that later when I was
here.
Today have any of you seen
Let's see if she's here.
As I travel from place to place
searching for my children the
state do you know where my
children are if you do please
bring them back to me.
But
when you.
You.
No board we ended so you also
see the Mancienne is here
As I travel long K. searching
for my children.
You too have heard my cries late
at night.
Please.
You.
Let us see Sen.
And
Gadi you'll see on.
Cool.
Do you.
It is
The two.
C..
I thank you thank you.
I must have gone really you're
probably wondering who I am.
Maybe you know we by the name
idea.
We saw.
Hello I think I know you you
know what name is known here in
New Mexico he called to let your
which also it's so nice to meet
you it's not every day you get
to talk to you later in our
State late or not seeing while
some of you who don't know about
me why quintal my story has been
told for generations here's
throughout the world but also
here in New Mexico it is part of
who we are
Many people under misunderstand
this is the story and many
people see my face look very
differently than it does today.
Well my stuff has been used as a
teaching tool for many
generations and I would like to
share one queen.
There was once.
These young girl she was about
thirteen years old.
And he'd like to do our homework
I'm sure everyone here loves to
do homework.
But she didn't like to do our
homework one night she stayed
out very late so late it was
dark outside well finally she
snuck into the kitchen door she
wanted to rule as she was
walking.
She thought she heard someone
behind her but there was no one
there so she continued on into
the kitchen.
And pass the contingent thought
she heard sounds of steps
following.
Finally she got to her bedroom
in her rural with a huge window.
And she looked at the window and
she thought she saw the face of
Clean rules.
What she got very scared she
went into her blood into her bed
and she governor blankets
over her head and she she was
trembling.
Well her none of economic.
What's.
She's going to come in.
With the grandmother said he'd
need.
There's no one there.
So they looked at the window.
They didn't see anyone there so
finally they carefully opened
the window and this is what they
heard.
Into the room.
Watching at the window the young
girl started laughing issues
that I got myself so scared the
grandmother said he.
I share the story of language to
teach lessons to be safe.
That is why he's quintals was
shared with and that is why I
shared the points with you so
that you can learn and take care
of yourself and look there's no
you do not.
This story has value and is not
just to scare children well the
next day she went to her friend
you said I know what I don't
know if you're not nice to me
I'm going to tell her to come
over to house and take you away.
Well.
It's not every day you get to
see and I would like to see one
more song for you but my face is
going to change so if you get a
little scared can cover your
eyes.
The state that I was a young
girl a young girl who loved all
of the traditions in New Mexico
like the tools like New York you
may come in on this your devoted
can just well I love to do all
of these wonderful things in
fact this one day I went to a
yes the dents in the movie
because we're playing one of my
favorite does.
I began to dance of the State.
And through the door came this
gentleman well the next day he
came to visit me the next the
next we fell in love.
Yes we did we had two beautiful
children.
Well.
Story changed because his father
did not approve of our marriage
and he was going to take our
children
away I tend not to take our
children away and so he.
One to share with my children
they say what the winds began to
blow the rain began to fall but
I had work to do and I took my
children with me over by the
federal you'll over the water my
children asked me to play with
them and I showed them please.
And all three bands to the
deepest part of the bigger.
As the wind began to blow the
rain began to fall I began to
cry.
The.
And the winds blew harder and
harder as the water was raging.
What I did not know.
My children have gone to the
deepest part of the river had
slipped and had fallen into the
water.
But I could not hear their cries
about my.
Well finally it was time for me
to find my children I went over
to the water where I thought
they were playing and they
weren't there.
So I looked in a nearby
community and I asked my
children.
They said.
Well the state
I continue to roll in the second
searching for my children crying
for them so long that my face
became recruiting holes like a
group.
Committee.
No meeting rule you.
And on the.
Leave a comment on the.
So.
Where you'll.
Rule rule you.
Then you.
He though bid on cheese.
Cool.
K. C. but we key.
Some of.
No we waited on you.
Diesel and you do.
Aw.
The
comment on the then you you
need to open the.
We.
The building.
There was a chuckle in a stable
budget.
Mr chair would like to
recognize.
New Mexico state out of the
state house of representatives
speaker how did Martinez to make
a few remarks followed by
Senator Michael by the introduce
our guest speaker of the day.
Speaker one thing is.
Thank you thank you us the
members and guests and and
members of the Senate and house
thank you John how did you for
the beautiful implication of
doctors unable to conceive a but
or performers another run across
the state is beautiful.
Unable unable to the governor
how we what is
all the reason to Martinez for
that beautiful procession good
to see you guys.
Yes thank you.
We're blessed to live in a place
that celebrates Hispanic culture
every day here in New Mexico
we're almost half of our
population identifies as
Hispanic.
Or we are moving into the fabric
of this very state think of the
food the art the architecture
the far Spanglish that we
sometimes speak on this floor of
the house.
It's important to recognize that
our history in this land goes
back for over five hundred years
it's around says here in Santa
Fe everywhere we look from the
palace of the governors to the
that house Spanish and Mexican
American governments here in New
Mexico to the architecture and
the buildings that we see every
time we walk out of this
building to this building
itself.
Now whether you are a multi
generational Hispanic American
or like me a first generation
immigrant Hispanic American we
are all proud to be part of New
Mexico's rich and diverse
heritage.
We side here today with our
performers we see it on the on
the walls of this capital
through the art that we see
every single day we walked these
halls the contributions to our
state.
Our big look at our workforce
look at local business owners
are veterans.
In our community leaders.
I'm especially proud of the fact
that this call is that this
chamber.
Representative that diversity is
reflected in our house and the
Senate it is reflected in the
fact that we are one of the most
diverse legislature's in the
entire country and that deserves
a round of applause quality.
No it's not lost on me that we
stand on the shoulders of giants
and leaders of come before us.
Many of whom are here today and
some of them were not and I'm
gonna ask you all to rise and
please give a big round of
applause all the way to heaven
to keep the service that I and
many of them we don't know.
Two Hispanic lawmakers were
giants for our communities.
Many of those in the famous mama
Lucy's gang a group of mostly
Hispanic lawmakers in the
seventies who fought for good
government good government
education for kids protections
for our environment and equal
opportunity for all of us.
Specifically thank you so
veteran who served this house
for thirty years was somebody
who was passionate about making
sure impacted communities could
give input on the policies and
politics that affect them all.
That is something that I strive
to emulate in my speakership in
in my leadership always keeping
my door open and bringing those
who traditionally have not been
in the front to come into the
front.
That's why we as a legislature
as specifically as a chamber.
Work hard to include working
families in the debates that we
have in those debates happen
here on this floor day after day
from both sides of the aisle.
All of us committed to working
on behalf of those working
families a key part of our
culture is taking care of each
other this means supporting
people across the state from
veterans to working people to
labour's to educators to
business owners who helped
create jobs and improve our
economy here in New Mexico.
Watering our culture also means
living up to the values and I
believe we all do that.
Both political parties in this
house and the Senate are
fighting for those values in our
own ways.
But at the end of the day.
Our culture is based on respect
for one another.
And that is something that'll
keep emulating through my
speakership and I hope and I
know that all of you will help
emulate in your own leadership.
Thank you all for being here it
is an honor to have you here in
the house of representatives I'm
proud to be part of today's
celebration let's make our
ancestors proud builder history
that our children can be proud
of thank you.
Madam speaker of the house
funded month in is.
It is my honor to introduce our
next speaker Senate majority
floor amendment quicker.
Mr Michael Senator Michael
Padilla to make an announcement
and introduce our guest speaker
today.
Thank you Mr president Mr
speaker and we have another hand
for our brand spanking new
speaker is doing a phenomenal
job.
All members of the house and
Senate and all guests in
attendance today.
Proud to be part of this
historic event in honor to help
pay tribute to to New Mexico
Hispanics who made history that
made meaningful change for all
of our people but first let's
not forget the individual who
transformed an idea into the day
that we're celebrating today.
Former senator Ben D. Altamirano
originally sponsored the
legislation that created
Hispanic culture day and there
were many others in this chamber
that came before us that help
bring that to fruition so thank
you from the bottom of our
hearts to continue highlighting
Hispanic culture in New Mexico.
The success of Hispanic culture
days a testament to Senator all
the meat on those hard work
beginning in two thousand one
until his death in two thousand
eight he worked with musicians
as we heard today artists
students and prominent of
individuals within New Mexico's
Hispanic community.
He gave them an opportunity to
be honored for their talents and
contributions to our state we
are fortunate that he was able
to enjoy the efforts of his
labor and although central to
meet on those no longer with us
his spirit and love for culture
continue today and we will
contamination you for many years
to come it is important to
remember that this state not
only benefits Hispanics but all
New Mexicans by highlighting
Hispanic culture we can generate
a greater awareness as to who we
are as a people which in turn
improves cross cultural
interactions and success in our
state.
Since the exploration and
settlement in the fifteen
hundreds New Mexico has had many
cultural influences we hear
about many of them in these
joint sessions.
And they've also helped to shape
the land of enchantment the
culture that we must cherish and
preserve for generations today
we honor parents grandparents
and all generations is through
them and they're to dedication
that we are able to celebrate a
strong and vibrant culture here
in New Mexico and as New
Mexicans is up to us to keep the
tradition and culture alive I'd
like to thank you spending
culture center foundation
president John Martinez and
chief executive officer Mullis
army ho and their staff for
their dedicated efforts in
coordinating today's programs
and activities.
We get to do all sorts of fun
things don't we here in the
legislature sometimes they're
really hard and sometimes
they're really right in the in
the heart and today I get to
recognize senator Nancy
Rodriguez.
Senator Nancy Rodriguez has
been.
Senator answer the biggest has
been consecutively elected
twenty eight years to the New
Mexico state Senate from Santa
Fe.
Don't tell our secretary of
state which he was elected when
she was ten years old so.
She is the first woman ever
elected state senator from her
district I don't know if you
knew that prior to this she was
elected Santa Fe County
commissioner for four terms she
was a department head in the
Santa Fe county manager prior to
being elected to public office
as a state senator she serves on
eight legislative committees and
she serves as chairwoman of two
of them.
She's also the vice chair of the
Senate finance committee as a
member of the health and Human
Services Committee senator the
biggest continues to champion
the most pressing issues of
behavioral health mental health
and comprehensive rehabilitation
services for people struggling
with substance abuse
Furthermore she continues to
champion issues of disability
concerns she works tirelessly on
providing affordable housing for
low to moderate income families
and those on a fixed on fixed
incomes and continues to work on
providing services for homeless
in our community.
As the chair of the Legislative
mortgage finance authority.
The legislative finance
authority she is the sponsor of
the New Mexico housing trust
fund providing much needed
affordable housing and rental
assistance she recently passed
the first legislative bill
providing recurring and
sustainable funding for housing
this historic legislation
provides forty million dollars
annually in recurring revenue
which can be leveraged twenty
nine to one with federal dollars
yes my friends because of her
efforts one point two billion
dollars here in New Mexico for
housing.
Senator the biggest as a kind
and loving New Mexican and
deserves our appreciation for
her many years of service in
areas that truly try to touch
people's lives please help me
recognize senator Nancy
Rodriguez to say just a few
remarks.
This is way too much truly by I
just want to say thank you I'm
at a loss for words here but I
want to say thanks to everyone
for just looking to me in
thanking that I deserve
something like this I so
appreciate it this is a great
honor for me because it's so
meaningful in that I was routed
and I still am continue to grow
every day in my Hispanic culture
I grew up in very rural
communities speaking Spanish and
truly appreciating the culture
this nice lady the storyteller
and performers that entertained
us today brought to my mind so
many things that I lived through
as I was growing up and so this
is so great for me today and I I
just want to say thank you and
invites you to our luncheon
today to help us celebrate and
to fees together as a family
because that's who we are we are
family together in our Hispanic
culture and I just want to see
you there hopefully very soon in
a few minutes but I know we've
got a great keynote speaker and
I'm looking so forward to
listening to her and and I'm so
proud to be able to stand here
next to her and to listen to her
and learn from her continuously
all the time that's where we are
we're in school every day aren't
we and so together we learned in
that we can go on thank you for
giving me the wings to fly for
nourishing my wings as I
continued to grow and for
holding me as you are today it
never stops you spoil me truly I
I don't do anything that others
don't do and I just work
together with all of you in
hopes to better New Mexico in
our Hispanic culture thank you
so much.
So as I mentioned a little while
ago we get to experience some
incredible things when serving
in the state legislature having
the honor of introducing our
keynote speaker is one of those
very special moments that I'm
always going to remember in my
life in my eleven years here in
the in in service this is one of
the experiences again that has
been really meaningful and and
and has touched my heart is been
said that people will quickly
forget the words that you say
but they'll never forget how
they made you feel I'm so
honored to introduce the lotus
and we call it the lotus because
she's you know she's a sister a
friend a confidante of all of us
and we matter probably fifty
times because she's always here
New Mexico helping us.
but I will tell you every
interaction I've had with her
she's maybe want to stand up and
do something for someone else
and so that that I think is
truly meaningful the lotus where
the is the president and founder
of the lotus what the foundation
and co founder of the United
farmworkers UFW the lotus was
born in Dawson New Mexico in
April of nineteen thirty for her
parents and grandparents were
also born her father one effort
on this served in the New Mexico
state legislature in nineteen
thirty eight I didn't know that
that was a new fact I didn't
know you she learned grassroots
community organizing in the
importance of civic engagement
in nineteen fifty five in
Stockton California where she
lived with her mother at least
yes Saint John Chavez in the
community service organization
or as the political director she
was instrumental in passing
significant legislation
including public assistance for
immigrants with legal status
which included aid to the aged
blind and needy children.
Which eventually became a
national law in the U. F. W. she
was instrumental in passing the
nineteen eighty six amnesty law
which gave legal status to
thousands of under undocumented
farm workers and urban residents
she's been an advocate for
social justice women's rights
and reproductive freedom LGBTQ
civil rights and continues
working to develop community
leaders to advocate for the
working poor or immigrants women
and you through the lotus where
the foundation she speaks at
universities and conferences
forums on issues of public
policy and social justice and
advocacy influencing thousands
of young people to serve their
communities all the way until
today.
This introduction simply served
us to scratches the surface of
who this person is and I was
putting my thoughts together on
what would be the most important
thing I could say too about the
lotus and someone in my office
actually gave me the best quote
she said the lotus where the is
a person of action help me to
welcome the lotus what the to
the New Mexico legislature.
Thank you very much thank you
very much for that beautiful
introduction and I want to think
of all of the members of the
house and the Senate here for
having me today this is the I
feel extremely honored and very
emotional which is a to be here
with all of you today.
I am the building The New
Mexican it'll even though I was
raised in California the.
But I remember my early is here
and came back many many times to
the my father here and in New
Mexico.
And one thing I'd like to say
when I travel across the country
people have to come to New
Mexico to get humanize.
It will live.
I would be the here during the
it's that occurred to the
celebration to talk about the
culture that we have here in New
Mexico.
You know New Mexico is one of
three states that has the
largest indigenous native
population.
But the wonderful thing about
New Mexico is that they have
incorporated the indigenous
culture into the state of New
Mexico the the I think that is
so wonderful about getting.
So we have the indigenous and we
have of course the Hispanic
culture the Mexican as a Spanish
and Mexican culture into what is
New Mexico and it has been
integrated and celebrated and
this is what makes New Mexico I
think so you do.
Also when we think of
governance.
That New Mexico is one of the
oldest settlements that comes
into the United States of
America one of the oldest
settlements people here long
long before.
I was very.
The with NBC the national
network decided to look into my
ancestry in New Mexico.
Ansel my great grandmother.
The name was this Baca.
And to her they found that my
family had been in New Mexico
for fourteen generations.
Right.
In that work the great
grandmother was the pueblo
Indians.
The
that made
a very happy.
We think of the governance of
the state of New Mexico in the
many stages of course in history
but we also know that the United
States constitution of the
United States was actually a
research kind of based on the
indigenous people the way that
they govern right.
The so that you are aware of
that history but I think it's
important also to note in.
And of course we could talk
about all of that history but
New Mexico is still making
history because you had the
first woman governor the state
of New Mexico Michelle Lujan.
The that in.
And the.
But that we know that we are
facing a lot of challenges you
the legislature here this in so
many challenges because of what
is going on in our country and I
am so happy to see that you're
devoted a lot of resources for
education because I really do
believe.
That the only way that we're
going to be able to meet these
challenges of it to make it sure
make sure that in our
curriculums for our children
here that we can the only way we
can erase the hate.
That is in our country the
hatred against immigrants.
This woman.
This is the need to community
you know a transgender community
it'll all of this is happening
right now increasing the
division it is set in a country
that is the challenge that all
of you have but we know that the
only way that we're going thank
you be able to save our
democracy through education I
want to thank you for thinking
of that.
Because we know all of that
hatred comes in it's right
people do not understand they do
not understand the history of
our country the United States of
America they do not understand
the contributions of the
different of people of color
that have contributed they do
not understand that racism.
Comes from slavery.
This.
Actually created the idea that
somehow people have to work
their entire lives to make other
people rich.
That that need of the allies and
this of course then translates
to working people at least to
the with the with the treated
intransigent the way the
children are treated as a lead
and I'll that we have the
situation but there are people
that want to they want a better
books they want to ban the books
of the talk about slavery and
talk about this history that
we've had this terrible history
that we have to some I'll amend
and change in our country and it
is the thing.
This is the going on in the
United States so I think that
everybody and I know that you
are do this here that we have
to make a very strong commitment
that we are going to save our
democracy and also stop the
violence that is happening in
our country and I know that you
in New Mexico have been
subjected to some of that
political violence that is
happening now so we know that we
have to do whatever we can to
changes and to stop it.
When the state is that in my
work as an organizer.
The one thing that I have found
is that if you engage with the
local community groups that you
have in your state.
Work with them directly that
they can be you're at the
console thank you for your help
is because god knows educated
all by yourselves like did you
have to do a lot more.
I just want to encourage you to
do that because I do think
because there's so much work to
do here in New Mexico.
I was in Las Vegas.
Weeks ago.
For my cousin but is it is
passed away.
And the.
That was going to the wonderful
time and I love it that's why we
live I went to California.
I could see how much work that
needs to be done.
You know because people come to
New Mexico I I do believe that
we know that a lot of people go
to California and then they come
back to retire what do they do
that.
Because what do you have in New
Mexico you have an incredible
quality of life a quality of
life in this is the people that
come here and they feel like I
do bliss is just to be here.
And to get that feeling that one
feels when they come to New
Mexico but we want to make that
quality of life throughout the
whole state of California let's
just to set up a committee but
in all the small towns here and
I do but I do believe also that
that would create an economic
opportunity upper we look for
things that we need here in New
Mexico.
In that working together with
local organizations and local to
make sure that every single town
in New Mexico is a place not
only of cultural heritage but
the place of a quality of life
that everybody but life okay so
I know I'm probably preaching to
the choir with liquid when I say
all of this but I know that we
could make it happen all of us
working together.
And so.
So many of the things that
you're doing here.
And I'm going to call the New
Mexico values that I think we
need throughout the whole United
States of America the concert
for children thank you.
The children of the state with
the courts of the future and I
think that working as hard as
you are working right now
thank you very much for doing
all of this and coming together
you know kind of forgetting our
differences remember that these
are the New Mexico values.
Whenever I do interviews and
people as we what do you get
your values from a I get the New
Mexico okay.
My mother was a double T. thank
France's exhibit.
The the who was also devoted as
we go to Saint Francis of Assisi
and the idea was I remember my
mother's mandates for the little
kids the one thing that you have
to do.
If people need help.
You have an obligation to help
them.
And with that you.
With the navigation that we
have.
And I remember that the other
thing she would say.
Don't take any compensation for
that help.
Don't take any money.
You don't have to as for thank
you this is your obligation
as an individual human being to
help people that are in need and
I know those are put we call The
New Mexico values okay The New
Mexico to help.
So we have so much work to do
ahead of us but I do know that
we have the power to make it
happen.
And remember this to
all the people in the
communities it's not just about
being and then for boulder it's
about learning how to advocate
it's about how to support a
representatives to be up there
helping them understand yes of
so what is going to make that
happen they do all over the
country again your leader.
Because it's also important it's
important that you provided all
calls partner with the people
please there in the body goes in
the in the communities because
that's with the late of the
month Marcus is on.
All of you to send the.
A minute.
And I want to ask you two
questions okay and I'm gonna ask
you all of us working together.
I'm gonna say what democracy
we're gonna spend the New Mexico
values throughout the country
and I'm gonna ask you two
questions
unless the government I would
definitely think.
Our not much in state we've got
the power okay it was a what
kind of power that legislate
people power are you ready.
Okay but this up really really
love so all the haters can use.
We got these people to New
Mexico values throughout the
whole United States of America
what we say sept twelve it
almost.
Is that what.
then organize let's go see.
In in some of the demand is that
the yes we can.
Thank you lasted.
This
is the.
It is now my honor to introduce.
Senator Linda Lopez and
representative for the
settlement of it all.
To make a presentation.
To our guest speaker Senator
Lopez Representative Roybal
Caballero.
The lotus directing them.
You are a hero a hero she Rowe
as we call more here in New
Mexico for all that you have
done and continue to do for the
rest of us there.
What I have here to present to
you on behalf of the governor
the state of New Mexico a
proclamation that for claims
today February fourteenth the
lotus where today in New Mexico.
So.
As many of you know.
This is the reason why I started
and civil rights I don't want to
tear up again.
Fifty six plus years ago.
I joined the use of the United
farm workers.
And
Learn.
The lotus what the.
Chavis.
In all of the leaders at that
time so this is an important
moment for us and I'm gonna read
the proclamation.
Whereas farm labors daughter the
lotus wet the witness the brutal
conditions under which her
family and friends were forced
to work and we're as the lotus
one of those own experience of
discrimination and her sense of
justice and desire to help
others led her to join forces
with legislation of this
actually she led the forces.
And where is yes we have to give
her the credit for leading those
forces or as through nonviolent
protest and a nationally and
internationally great stride the
lotus weapons as a child is
change the way people who were
striking we're treated.
And whereas the lotus would work
to improve social and economic
conditions for farmworkers and
to fight discrimination.
And whereas to further her
because the lotus one that
created the agricultural workers
association in nineteen sixty
and co founded the United farm
workers.
And whereas the lotus one of the
set up voter registration drives
lobby politicians to allow
noncitizen migrant workers to
receive public assistance
tensions and to provide Spanish
language voting ballots and
driver's test and we're as the
lotus went to a skilled
community organizer traveled
from poverty to political
victory.
And became the second Mexican
American woman she gonna in
history to be honored with the
presidential medal of freedom.
And whereas the the lotus one of
the foundation teachers
organizing and training skills
to low income communities by
engaging in and developing
natural leaders.
And whereas the lotus one thing
embodies the value of family.
Community and land.
Now therefore I.
Michelle Lujan Grisham.
Of the state of New Mexico do
hereby proclaim.
Worry fourteen twenty twenty
three as the lotus web that day.
Thank you signed and sealed by
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
just as I level but not on the
margins.
The lotus.
Even though not as.
Senator Lopez thank you thank
you.
And we also have a gift for the
lotus on behalf of the national
Hispanic cultural center
foundation we also have a gift.
For you.
And the the artist for the
beautiful crosses Linda Valencia
Martinez.
You.
Thank you.
The chair recognizes
Representative Gail Chasey.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I ask unanimous consent that the
whole house and Senate rise and
report progress the joint
session of the house and Senate
will come to order.
Mr Chairman chair recognizes
Representative Gail Chasey Mr
chairman I ask unanimous consent
that the joint session of the
house and Senate be now
dissolved seeing no objection
the joint session has now been
resolved.
