Because.
Please rise for today's
implication Representative good
on a.
Senior center the four separate
of no more than the sultan's
me's most of it is for speedy to
but as co chairman of the mass
consenus of the duty part of the
civil legal commandment
anesthetic in the industry title
did you an associate are you
looking for the most facility
finance minister Committee that.
You guys give us a willingness
to give the best of our sales an
openness to listen to others we
we have we some is certainly
what truly serves the needs of
our people with the people of
our state we we continue to
believe that we can make a
difference.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Harper please
lead us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Also from Santa Fe politically.
Representative Nibert the
question Mexico flag.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I will go to that
order of business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan
small chair.
Options with a doctor favor
going to put in Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Opposing the S. have a committee
report on the.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business see
no objection it is so ordered
good morning members we need a
quick run of show for today
but before we do that I'd like
for us to take a moment to honor
our theme to madam chief clerk
on her birthday.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe to
seeing.
Okay please join me.
Have beavers day to you.
She's been spending everybody
with us for the past twenty five
years
Thank you happy birthday madam
chief clerk.
Rep show we've got a memorial
this morning members we will be
doing hopefully third reading on
house bill one thirty one others
a substitute being prepared if
it makes it on time will take it
up if not we'll take it up this
evening we will be meeting this
evening to get through a few
bills but I've already talked to
the respective leadership office
about it so you all should have
a heads up.
with that.
Are there announcements.
The gentle lady from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker I I do have
an announcement today that I'd
like to make the body aware of
today on February fourteenth
along with our our clerks
birthday is uranium workers day
Mr speaker and members and we do
have a
Proclamation it's house memorial
thirty three and I'd like to ask
the of.
It be removed off the speakers
table and made the next order of
business to no objection it is
so ordered.
That the record reflect that all
actions necessary for placing.
Oil thirty three on final
passage has been taken and it is
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentlelady to
explain the memorial thank you
Mr speaker as I mentioned
earlier is declaring February
fourteenth twenty twenty three
uranium workers day I may and I
just of highlight what's in the
memorial between the directing
us to grants mineral belt
situated between ship rock in
the Pueblo of Laguna contains
one of the world's richest
uranium deposits.
during a thirty year period in
nineteen forty eight the grants
mineral belt produced more
uranium than any district in the
world.
The history of uranium mining
has has involves small mom and
pop surface and underground
mines as well as large scale
commercial surface and
underground mines the Navajo
Nation has identified over five
hundred abandoned uranium mines
on tribal lands of mining and
minerals division of the Energy
minerals and natural resources
department has identified nearly
six hundred mine mine and
exploration sites in McKinley
Siebel and Santa Fe counties a
recent inventory study
identified two hundred fifty
nine uranium mine sites in New
Mexico.
Whereas exposure to dust gases
exhausted fumes as well as the
lack of protective clothing and
safety measures such as miners
coming in contact with water
from the money ceilings and
eating their lunches while at
work can result in on malignant
and malignant respiratory
diseases somewhere as an
increased risk for kidney
disease and hypertension
autoimmune disease may have
occurred.
And negative effects of uranium
mining and milling have provided
major health impacts Mr speaker
and members I happen to be one
of those people in my college
years it actually works added
uranium mill all four years I
did that during the summer
my dad was uranium miner worked
at that time for Kerr McGee
nuclear corporation and and the
way that that worked in those
days is that if you happen to
work for one of those companies
your college kid got an
opportunity to work in the
summer and so with that Mr
speaker I would yield to some of
my co sponsors certainly gentle
lady the gentle lady gentleman
from several of the committee
representative about going.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for the look very old
and I am one of the only
Representative these in the
state of New Mexico to have
been an underground contract
miner.
The last time I went to the
minors dinner.
they asked me if I was a minor
and explain to them exactly what
I had done and everybody was
just shocked that I had to be
moved so the process for seventy
years of being a minor in the
today a legislator.
As I've traveled through
different parts of the day said
with the NCSL I have been other
people that have worked in
uranium mines but I still good
could you be the only contract
providers so we did in the
legislature so thank you ladies
for this and
It's a great day for us.
There's further debate gentle
lady from McKinley is on one
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker and thank you
Representative Lundstrom and the
co sponsors for bringing this
house memorial forward I'd like
to thank all of our uranium
workers and families for their
sacrifice I live near Kerr McGee
money in McKinley county and
abandoned mine I'd like to thank
all of my family members or
neighbors or community McKinley
and San Juan counties for their
work in the uranium mine
industry and of course their
sacrifice now dealing with
health related conditions and so
with that I'd
just would like to thank
everyone for honoring the state
thank you Mr speaker there is
for the debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
supporters and one of the eight
here Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally to yield.
Yes I yield.
Immunity than from bring this
memorial up if you will Moul I
live in requests in a one point
grants was the reigning capital
of the world.
and you know all.
A lot of minors Act provides for
The energy and that the United
States was using at that time
and you know we really need to
remember of all what happened to
them and what's happening to a
lot of surviving veterans I mean
I veterans a minor that are
suffering from lung disease and
all kinds of the problems that
happen you madam chair you madam
chair thank you for bringing
this up memorial up from one
hundred percent behind it thank
you Mr speaker.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair for the young
lady from San Juan McKinley
County you.
I yield.
Thank you going from the
accounting for bringing this
memorial for.
The mobile streak several of my
communities still suffer the
effects of uranium mining
seventy years later so I'm so
glad that may bring recognition
for the sacrifices that they
made and I think the of my
constituents for recognizing
this of Iranian workers stand
memorial thank you lady from
McKinley.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker I'd like to thank my
of co sponsors on the memorial
it is incredibly important for
our part of the state and I now
move that house memorial thirty
three do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent of the house
that the record show that the
role as been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative there's been a
motion to show all members of
the house present and voting in
the affirmative seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
Final passage of house memorial
thirty three the vote is now
open.
What is a close by one of
seventy eight in the affirmative
zero negative house memorial
thirty three has duly passed
this house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker we have
guests this morning down here on
the floor with us they have
heard from for ever saw the
light Nix affinity group at
Albuquerque academy and I would
like to introduce them Mr
speaker please go ahead and
leave.
We had to and then on the right
hand side of the web Erin eight
thousand eight hundred Delgado
Robert.
We see on a budget deal and
their sponsor the last Atencio
but Czecho please stand.
Welcome to the house of
representatives.
Mr speaker.
I have another announcement if I
may announcer provided.
Well sure.
Sierra nine income.
Yet that a.
Again a bodies us ability.
Going to a.
Sasha.
What C..
Long journal when of the S..
Good morning speaker and members
in a fraction of the languages
that students across New Mexico
speak and study please enjoy the
valentines they created for you
and support multi lingual ism
and the state of New Mexico
thank you Mr speaker.
Yes you read that.
Any other announcements.
Delivers on the favors Amazon.
Thank you Mr bigger I just want
to introduce my daughter by page
for today snow day here Santa Fe
public schools so she was able
to come and spend some time with
us so if we have some.
Any any minor business that we
need to help with she's here to
help us in this is our olive
green Lujan.
Thank you all to welcome her
today Mister speaker welcome to
the house.
Intentionally can help those in
need homes confusing can be
ready to get to the first order
of business yes it could.
Any other announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
I just wanted to say happy
Valentine's day to everyone and
happy birthday of course to our
chief clerk but I I sent all the
ladies a little.
Chocolate from cacao chocolate
house amendment somehow I
managed to send everybody a
cookie I don't know how that
happened but enjoy it and
Happy Valentine's day to you.
Thank you gentle lady.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
about it'll.
Thank you Mr speaker and I rise
to wish everybody in aspen on
Phillies the other elements that
yet them off.
In Latin American countries
around the world we celebrate
this day as our national day of
expression of friendship and
love towards one another so I
wish that upon everyone that is
yes.
Yes the lady.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
Some speaker
And and I says is the most
because interest most because a.
Couple days ago and icon.
passed away I think it was
mentioned by Representative
Chasey a yesterday the day
before but the J. Paul Taylor
was one of the giants with the
traditional native New Mexican
culture and community Stima
speaker and Mr speaker when I
came on board a.
there was to a.
Cultural pillars.
Hello native on New Mexican the
Hispanic community in this
chamber.
One one J. Paul Taylor
and he said there were
Representative I mean I was
seated.
And the other was a course at a
time.
From like an island
you Representative the district
that the percentages of Sanchez
currently holds but it was the
most because these are kind of
a.
Owners of this chamber.
And they commanded so much
wisdom that that you couldn't
help but seeking out their
device on any little thing
personal political
whatever instrument speaker.
I wanted to
The kind of a.
Share with the body the funeral
arrangements for a J. Paul
Taylor.
And does the most because of his
rosary is going to be a member
of the twenty third at six PM
they're at the Representative no
Catholic Church and Misia.
And then the masses the speaker
will be on February twenty
fourth eleven AM that some of
the email.
Catholic Church in the Missy
eventually estimates because a
J. Paul Taylor has and his
little above a class C. to a
just about thirty thirty five
United from the front door of
the.
The Catholic Church.
But he was such a giant this
must be good and I hope on.
Some of us can make it I'm gonna
try my darndest the to make it
is the most because I would
visit J. Paul whenever I was in
this causes for and committees
and was always a pleasure to
kind of.
Learn a little bit of this this
call Joan mention this happens
because it was kind of a museum
of of art and culture the that
he reserves throughout the ages
estimates because so again.
The rosary society for.
Representative Baldonado on
February twenty third at six PM
and on the seventh day at all on
February twenty fourth at eleven
AM that's on that being a
Catholic Church thank you so
much because.
Thank you gentlemen.
In there now Spence.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to Mr referred house
bill one eighty four has had it
under consideration point saying
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair of adoption
Mr speaker for the doctor to
federal community portal house
bill one eighty for all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe the as having
reported up to.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill one ninety eight has
had it under consideration point
in with recommendation but I do
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair good option
reduction of favorable committee
for the house bill one ninety
eight of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Jose the eyes have a committee
report up to.
Mr speaker government Alexion's
in Indian Affairs Committee to
miss been referred house bill
two thirty three has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that do pass
as amended and thence revert to
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair of
reduction of federal committee
report on house bill two thirty
three of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Propose maybe just have a
committee report on.
Mr speaker government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee
too is been referred house bill
two five zero has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pas
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
move adoption.
Two fifty reduction of favorite
committee report on house bill
two fifty all those in favor
signify by saying not.
Propose maybe the eyes have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee to
Mr referred house bill two fifty
one has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation added to pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair move
adoption reduction of a federal
committee report on house bill
two fifty one of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
The full name.
The eyes have it can record up
to.
It
speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill fifty one
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that it do not pass for that
house health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty one do pass in answer
for to the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair Mr
speaker move adoption granted
option of a federal committee
report on house rules fifty one
but a favorable committee report
on house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill fifty one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye opposed make the S. have a
committee report up.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too it's been
referred house bill one ninety
one has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation of do pass an
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption reduction of
a federal committee report on
house bill one ninety one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose make the as have a
committee report up.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two twenty
two has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendations to pass an
answer for the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair
reduction reduction of a
favorable committee report on
house bill two twenty two all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose make the as have a
committee report on that.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee term is been
referred house bill two thirty
one has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation of do pass and
then for the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
was of the Thomson chair move
reduction reduction of federal
committee for the house bill two
thirty one of those in favor
signify was and I.
Propose Nate the S. have a
committee report about that.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill two twenty
eight has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation but it did not
pass but that house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill to
twenty eight to pass an answer
for to the government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
Gallegos chair Mr speaker move
adoption option of no federal
committee report on house bill
two twenty eight but a favorable
committee report on house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill to twenty eight
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Couples made the as having
committed for adopted.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to miss
been referred house bill two
sixty nine has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
sentence refer to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Dayan Hochman Vigil
chair the speaker move adoption
credit option with federal
committed putting house bill two
sixty nine of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose Nate the eyes have a
committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to miss been referred
house bill two seventy has had
it under consideration point
same as recommendations to pass
and that's referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Dayan Hochman Vigil
chair speaker move adoption
reduction of a federal committee
report on house bill two seventy
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose day yes have a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to invest in referred
house bill two seventy one has
had it under consideration point
I was recommendation of do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
small Dayan Hochman Vigil chair
speaker move adoption reduction
of favorable committee report on
house bill two seventy one all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose may just have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
four has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption word
optional Federal committee for
the house bill for all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe we just have a
committee report up to two.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
Toomas for House joint
resolution resolution two as
amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation to do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption adoption
referral committee report on
house joint resolution two as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those make the eyes of a
committee report up.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house bill
three sixty five has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation of do pass
and it's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair Senator.
Adoption of federal committee
report on house bill three sixty
five all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Propose may be as of a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house
memorial thirty five has had it
under consideration point things
recommendation of do pass was
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair that's an adoption
of a federal committee report on
house memorial thirty five all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose may just have a
committee report opted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
subjects.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation no objection it is
so ordered.
House bill four oh three
introduced by representatives
Garrett and how to meal and act
relating to higher education and
acting the public service loan
forgiveness multiplier Act
providing a multiplier for
adjunct and contingent faculty
of public postsecondary
educational institutions
providing for the certification
of full time employment status
providing for notice and renewal
of a public service loan
forgiveness important providing
for the dissemination of public
service loan forgiveness
information house bill four oh
three introduced by
representatives Garrett and how
to meal.
House bill four oh three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee vents
the house Education Committee.
House Bill for for entities that
representatives on in our new
Chasey and how they're Martinez
an act relating to crime and
acting the violence intervention
program act creating the
violence intervention program
fund establishing application
and reporting requirements
making appropriation house bill
four zero four introduced by
representatives on in our new
Chasey and have you to Martinez
house bill four four have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee then
so house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill four zero five
introduced by Representative on
in our new fund act relating to
municipalities requiring
municipalities to preserve video
recordings for a minimum of one
hundred eighty days house bill
four zero five introduced by
Representative aren't in our
new.
House bill four zero I haven't
haven't been read twice by title
is over printed for to the house
government elections and ended
Affairs Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill four zero six
introduced by Representative on
in our new an act relating to
courts allowing certain cases to
be revived if dismissed for lack
of prosecution or delay in
service of process due to the
Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen pandemic house bill
four zero six introduced by
Representative on in our new.
House bill four zero six have
been read twice by title that
are printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill four zero seven
introduced by representatives on
in our new and Johnson and act
relating to the disposition of
dead bodies requiring counties
to give reasonable opportunity
for legal next of kin to take
possession of an unclaimed
decedent defined defining legal
next of kin allowing for
counties to authorize the
disposition of unclaimed dead
bodies and set the rate that is
paid for burial or cremation
changing the amount of time a
County shall retain cremated
remains requiring the estate of
an unclaimed decedents to
reimburse the county for burial
or cremation expenses making
technical changes house bill
four zero seven introduced by
representatives on in our new
and Johnson's house bill four
zero seven have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee events the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill four zero eight
introduced by senators to
phonics and Representative
Hochman Vigil and act relating
to roadways for querying a
protected bicycle lanes be
incorporated when making a
roadway improvement within the
limits of the municipality with
a population of at least ten
thousand providing exceptions of
making appropriation house bill
four zero eight introduced by
senators to phonics and
Representative Hochman Vigil
house bill four zero eight have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee thence the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill four zero nine
introduced by Representative
Pettigrew an act relating to
state rules providing for
legislative review of rules
adopted by state agencies boards
and commissions requiring an
economic impact study before a
rule is subject to a public
hearing authorizing the
amendment or repeal of rules
house bill four zero nine
introduced a Representative
Pettigrew.
House bill four zero nine have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee then
so House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for ten.
Introduced by Representative
Pettigrew Senator Ingle
representatives Lundstrom
Townsend and yourself an act
relating to counties increasing
the salary caps applicable to
elected county officials
providing for a consumer price
index escalator.
House Bill for ten introduced by
Representative Pettigrew
Senator Ingle Representative
Lundstrom Townsend and itself.
House Bill for ten I've been
read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
house government elections the
Indian Affairs Committee Vince
the house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for eleven introduced
by representatives Pettigrew and
small an act relating to
professional licensure amending
the engineering and surveying
practice act revising
requirements for certification
as an engineer intern revising
licensure requirements for
professional engineers and
professional surveyors providing
for applications and I'll
allowing for notification of
engineering and surveying
licensure and renewal fees by
email or other means revising
the exemptions for the
incidental practice of
engineering and surveying
extending the termination date
of the state board of licensure
for professional engineers and
professional surveyors raising
the annual funding amount for
the engineering and surveying
support program House Bill for
eleven introduced the
representatives Pettigrew and
small house bill four eleven
have been here twice by title is
a representative for to the
house Education Committee then
south government elections in in
the Affairs Committee.
House Bill for twelve introduced
by representatives grew up to
Penske Sariñana and on in our
new an act relating to electric
motor vehicles creating the
electric vehicle income tax
credit.
Creating the electric vehicle
charging unit income tax credit
requiring an additional
registration fee for electric
and plug in hybrid electric
vehicles providing that the
additional registration fees be
distributed to the state road
fund and the transportation
project fund House Bill for
twelve introduced by
representatives corolla the
Penske Sariñana and on and on
new house bill four twelve have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
Vince the house taxation and
revenue committee.
House Bill for thirteen entities
for representatives Trujillo
corolla for radio Herndon and
Figueroa an act relating to
public schools amending class
load sizes providing exceptions
requiring the public education
department to create and
maintain an online portal to
receive confidential reports of
class load size violations
providing class load size
waivers providing rulemaking
authority to the public
education department requiring
school districts to provide
notice of class load size
waivers house bill four thirteen
introduce the representatives
Trujillo corolla Borrego Herndon
and Figueroa.
House Bill for thirteen have
been read twice by title is a
printer for to the house
Education Committee then so
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill for fourteen
introduced by representatives
Chasey and Andrea Romero an act
relating to state government
creating the housing department
providing powers and duties
making the New Mexico housing
trust fund a state treasury fund
approving transfers of functions
person money appropriations and
property of housing programs
from other state agencies making
appropriations house bill four
fourteen entities by
Representative Chasey and Andrea
Romero house bill four fourteen
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill for fifteen
introduced Representative Rehm
an act relating to hospitals
reducing authorize property tax
rates for class AA county
hospital funding and for
transfers to the county
supported Medicaid fund
subjecting all counties to the
indigent hospital and county
health care act requiring
certain class eight counties to
report county funding provided
to certain county hospitals
House Bill for fifteen
introduced by Representative
Rehm.
House Bill for fifteen have been
read twice by title is a
representative for to the house
health and Human Services
Committee then so house
government election and the
Indian Affairs Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Thank you.
Mr speaker.
Right the chair recognizes
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that the
speaker point a committee to
invite the honorable lieutenant
governor how we run out as an
honorable members of the Senate
to meet in joint session with
the house in this chamber for
the purpose of being addressed
by speakers in honor of Hispanic
culture day.
There's no objections the chair
will appoint Representative
Miguel Garcia Representative
Wheatley Madrid and
Representative Joshua and on
this to invite the unable to the
governor how are Morales and the
honorable members of the Senate
to meet in joint session with
the house for the purpose of
being addressed by our
distinguished guests.
Mr speaker the chair recognizes
Representative Chasey I ask
unanimous consent that the house
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair the rules be
suspended to allow the City of
gas in the chamber during the
joint session if there's some
junction the house or Senate
recess subject to the call of
the chair.
