Your Representative Gallegos
air.
Representative Nibert
Representative Ortez.
Representative green here
Representative Zamora your.
Madam vice chair Johnson here.
Madam chair blue.
Sure.
Thank you so we have a quorum
and I think Representative Ortez
is having I. T. issue as I keep
saying her jump and and now so
we'll be on the look out to
promote her back to panelists
when she's able to join us
happy Monday everyone it's good
to see everyone again and start
a new week
we're going to start with house
bill sixty two and go through
the agenda as it's presented on
the website and
we're gonna go ahead and start
the whole function today so that
way people may have an
opportunity to you know raised
their hands as they would in
committee to say whether or not
they support or oppose the bill
and then we're also going to
limit public comment to three
minutes so that we're able to
move a little quicker than we
did last Friday so
With that we can start with
Representative Dixon and house
bill sixty two welcome.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee I'm here this morning
to present house bill sixty two
house bill sixty two follows up
on the efforts that we began
last session to set up a grants
administration within the
department of finance and
administration DFA has moved
forward internally with setting
that administration up but what
we need to do is continue the
efforts.
To leverage federal funds in the
state by creating a matching
grant fund and grant
opportunities council the reason
that we want to have a matching
grant Fund is so that our local
municipalities can access
matching funds for competitive
federal grants outside of the
capital outlay process and in
the event that it falls outside
of their budgeting periods.
I'm doing this will allow
municipalities to compete for
more requests as opposed to
simply not apply the second
portion of the bill sets up the
grant opportunities council and
the purpose of this is to be
able to provide annual
recommendations and feedback.
To DFA in the grants
administration so that we can
continue to make modifications
and improvements as necessary.
the make up of the council is
the same as last year and it's
designed to represent both urban
and rural municipalities small
medium and large communities as
well as grant experts and a
member of the federal
delegation.
So with that I think I would be
happy to stand for questions
unless I I don't see
Representative Representative
Herrerra is are there and so if
she would like to make a few
comments thank you madam chair.
Welcome Representative Herrera
we've just promoted you to
panelists so if you like to say
a few words please proceed.
You'll have to and then on your
end.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Dixon I stand
in strong support of this bill I
I you know I was corporate
director and Dacian islands I
was a I've been a grant writer
for forty years
What what I found out when I
came into the legislature is
that especially an up front here
in rural areas we really don't
have that capacity so requests
go out to and maybe people apply
maybe they don't.
but there's a real lack of
capacity in frontier areas and
our counties and our cities
really can't afford full time
grant writer so anything we can
do to enhance to describe grant
writing in the state I think
would be a welcome addition we
we desperately need this skill
we need this capacity and I
plugged up Representative Dixon
for bringing this issue to the
forefront I actually when I
first came here I actually did
that did a a grant writing
scheme for every single every
single state agency and I I
looked at the price tag and I
just said well forget that will
never be able to get that
through so I'd like to applaud
Meredith the Representative
Dixon for being just right on on
point on this and so that's what
I like to say I think this this
bill could bring hundreds of
millions of dollars into the
state thank you madam chair.
Chairman and members.
Thank you so now we are going to
go to the audience and put the
pull up for a quick minute and
if you would like to vote in
support or in opposition of
health bill sixty two please do
so now.
Okay we're gonna close the
whole.
Okay so we have eleven in
support and zero in opposition
and with that if you would like
to speak
in favor of the bill please
raise your hand and we can.
Your comment.
Okay.
AJ fourteen you are now and
muted.
Thank you madam chair aged forty
with the New Mexico municipal
league we strongly support of
this bill this is this is
critical for small communities
just like the sponsor alluded to
especially with the federal
funds about half of those
federal funds are all requests
so at the end of the what we're
going to do is higher if you
grant writers to help our small
communities so we look forward
to partnering with DFA in any
way we can and the council once
this gets us well thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
And next we will have steep wise
bird you are now and muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the community I live
in terrace and I am a member of
the three fifty New Mexico real
advocacy group and also of the a
member of the Democratic Party
rural caucus and I can't tell
you how many times I've been to
town halls in the last year and
a half where this issue has come
up small communities just don't
have the capacity question mark
to
at provide grants and then
they're so confused about the
how to fill out the application
so I was so happy to see this
bill when it came out so we
stand and stroke support thank
you so much.
Thank you next we have Dan state
you are now and it.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee had Dan fan on
tracking broadband related
issues with the Adelante
progressive caucus and what I've
seen with broadband as we're
leaving considerable money on
the table due to not having the
resources to properly apply for
grants so this bill would aid
considerably and helping us to
successfully apply and receive
this money thank you.
Thank you next we have ward
McCartney you are now and it.
Hi you madam chair committee
members
I am in full support of this
bill I was just became aware
that there's a risk of.
Program out there and that
enables our rural coops to apply
for a no interest loan of set
say up to five million dollars
in the coops can Mr chair that
low to the coop members for
upgrading their homes energy
efficiency wise so that lowers
the bill for the low income
people which is a huge portion
of their income because our
house is more efficient
and that's just sitting there
and when you talk to the USDA
Representative state level
they're not even aware of that
program so it's not really a
sort of a grant program but to
make those programs more
available to our communities is
really important so are full
stops for this bill thank you.
Thank you Delilah Otero you are
now and muted.
Okay sorry about that you are
now located I can hear you now
okay thank you.
Good morning thank you for
allowing me to speak today my
name is Lucy o'carroll and I am
the co founder of the New Mexico
crusaders for justice I
represent the families of
victims of homicide.
Support of house bill five.
All right you born was shot by
Senator with our pre trial if
this bill was placed upon would
still be alive State we have an
abundance of violent crimes that
are obviously keeping Mexicans
feeling unsafe.
I'm.
Talking about house bill sixty
two.
I apologize I.
And we're trying to figure out
how this is all working I
apologize no worries thank you.
Okay is there anyone that would
like to speak in opposition.
Okay seeing then we will move to
the committee members.
All.
Representative Ortez.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative expand
representative at our I am also
a co sponsor of this bill just
wanted to.
Let you all know how important
this is especially in rural
communities I am grateful that
Representative addiction brought
this back up madam chair it's
it's very challenging to find
grant writers and even in places
like PTA's where we have some
resources so what this will do
is help are muted our mutual
domestics our our state
government they are local
government the the organizations
that work with them and that
provide services on the ground
get the funding they need at
this really critical time we
have the funding out there I
just wanted to make that will
collector this incredible them
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
I don't know Representative
brings going to mention this or
not but maybe I'll do it up for
him and he can he can talk a
little bit more about it I see
is hands up
On page three.
That section he.
Madam chair representative talks
about the the grant
opportunities council sell it by
DFA
on certain things.
But.
Should should the council also
advise other governmental
agencies on grant writing and
opportunities that exist with
respect to their specific
agencies.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Nibert for that
question I'm the role of the
grant opportunities council is
more to assist the grant
administration and fulfilling
its expanded duties and and so.
The opportunities council would
make suggestions and
recommendations to DFA on how
they might interact with the
state agencies as well as any
modifications to the grant
matching grant fund.
So Madam chair representative
you you don't see that there
would be any benefit to having
the council.
discussing those things would
potentially with other with
other agencies.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I think I think
that there could be benefit
that might be something though
that DFA and state agencies
might want to discuss
I've gotten the sense that
sometimes it's better to go
through DFA to work with the
different state agencies as
they.
May operate slightly
differently.
Okay the Representative the.
With just one thing that I
thought our our and actually by
Representative Rehm has further
information on.
One thing.
You know what like we're forming
this may be it it should be a
lot broader than DFA but but our
our I understand the desire to
get this may be upset as of
expanded role down the road we
can deal with that later thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and to
follow up on what Representative
divert same and I I don't have
it in the exact place I think it
needs to be but.
What are you so are the you know
working with a governmental
agency whereas there was
training offered on grant
writing and I see this group.
As an opportunity to hold those
classes are at a a lower cost
than what is provided by the.
I it secretary.
And the what I wrote I just
quickly but it probably should
be under the part one of under
that section the but on page
three lines seventeen we insert
six educatee New Mexico
government agencies on grant
writing and opportunities and I
think that's where our big
problem on grants is.
It's the lack of knowledge
either to find or two of to
properly.
Right a grant in obtain those
matching funds but that's more
of a COVID I think that
perhaps as usual long somewhere
in here you need to
add that in there now with that
said it just increased across
but you know if you're gonna
hold a class around the state or
you know maybe it's assumed
class I don't know
that might be the way to do it
but
R. I. C. I think it's a good
idea
but what I really see the
problem.
In this subject matter is is an
educational problem
and that's what you're trying to
fix and I think I think you need
to get to the education to
everybody anyway that's my
comment I don't know if
Representative Dixon said she
has a she's bounced up and down
okay go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative right and
that is wonderful and to be at
this so that was actually the
genesis of the bill last session
and that portion has been
absorbed all ready by DFA so
they have started to set this up
and part of what their new
Division is doing is exactly
what you're talking about where
they're working with state
agencies they're going to
provide advice they're going to
track federal opportunities and
they will be able to support
with this compliance and and how
you monitor the progress I'm so
they are expanding and doing
that and so that cost is
actually already been absorbed
these are just the other two
components that we believe will
make it even
our state even more successful
in getting our federal grant
opportunities thank you madam
chair and representative.
Thank you madam chair that show
all my suggestion and perhaps
the just a sentence and they're
saying coordinate with them on
on training statewide by.
Help alleviate that question
coming up in the future thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Eli.
I'm sure I move to pass.
Great we have a motion for a do
passed by Representative Eli
thank you and a second by
Representative guy a goes.
Is there any opposition to the
past motion.
Okay seeing none Representative
you have a do pass on house bill
sixty two.
Thank you madam chair
and we see here it's the
Representative Dixon show this
morning so now we will hear and
that'll be a do pass on house
bill sixty two showing all
members present voting in the
affirmative for the record and
next we will go to hell spell
eighty six.
Thank you madam chair and I do
believe that one if not two of
the co sponsors for House Bill
eighty six are
in the attendees hoping to move
over including representatives
lane and Figueroa.
Okay we have Representative lane
on Representative Figueroa if
you're on please raise your hand
and will promote you to the
panelists but in the meantime go
ahead and proceed Representative
Dixon.
Right thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
here again this morning to
present house bill eighty six
which is the law enforcement
retention Fund as I mentioned in
addition to me Representative
Ryan lane is here and
representative Natalie Figueroa
I understand is actually in
house education at the moment.
we are introducing house bill
eighty six because we know that
investing in recruitment and
retention of high quality law
enforcement officers is an
important component of
protecting and improving public
safety house bill eighty six is
a straightforward bill it sets
up a fund that provides funds
for retention differentials for
lawn New Mexico law enforcement
officers retention differentials
are established as five percent
of base salary and are available
to members upon completion of
five ten fifteen and twenty
years of service.
In addition.
House bill eighty six requires
reporting and data tracking so
that we can evaluate and assess
the impact that this bill has on
retaining officers.
There's a five million dollar
special appropriation in the
general appropriations act for
the establishment of this funds
and before standing for
questions I would like to invite
my co sponsors to say a few
words thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative welcome
Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning to the committee and I I
support this bill for a couple
reasons.
one is we know we've got a
massive shortage of of police
officers and so this is this
provide the financial incentive
for our one of officers to stay
here in New Mexico but the other
reason to I think and it's
equally as important as I think
what the signals to law
enforcement.
Is that we as the citizens of
New Mexico value them and and
value them staying in our state
and so this is a way for us to
do that is this gonna solve all
that all of the police officer
shortages certainly not it's
it's not the silver bullet but I
think it it's one of of what
should be a number of arrows in
our quiver to try to address
this problem so I very much
support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
next we're going to the public
if you would like to vote in
favor or in opposition of health
bill eighty six we will open
that pull up.
And we'll keep it up for a
minute.
I'm and madam chair.
Yes Representative I'm just what
you know Representative Figueroa
is now in attendance okay great
thank you.
So we will close the poll.
And we have eighteen and support
and three and opposition.
And Representative Figueroa if
you would raise your hand we can
promote you to our panelists
thank you very much.
Great would you like to say a
few words before we go to the
public.
Thank you madam chair no I think
it's been well described thank
you great thank you so if you
would like to speak and it favor
of house bill eighty six.
Please raise your hand.
Okay we will go to Jessica
Salazar you are now and meet it.
Good morning.
Good Morning Star Cassells R. I
am insured with gold futures
formally known as young women
United.
And I am proposing bill.
We're we're taking a public
comment from those that are
supporting the bill are you
supporting the bill.
Okay we can go back to you once
we take the folks that are
speaking and support okay I
apologize thank you JD you are
now and made it.
You madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me just
and.
And tastic it's great to be here
this is JD Bullington the
registered lobbyists of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
We need several hundred
additional officers in
Albuquerque the and we have
known this fact for years but
we're not going to reach that
goal through recruitment efforts
alone we have to retain the
offices we have on local forces
and in our state police this
bill provides meaningful
financial awards to officers for
staying in this difficult
profession and for choosing to
continue policing the streets in
our state.
Heart of making New Mexico a
more difficult state in which to
be a criminal is ensuring there
are enough of the good guys
police in the streets and
holding criminals accountable
for their crimes the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
strongly urges your support for
this bill and we applaud the
sponsors for bringing it forward
thank you.
Thank you next we will go to
David cursed you are now
unmuted.
Good morning madam chair
committee members I appreciate
your time my name is David
coursed.
Thirteen years working a farm
completes Department and in
August retired as a chief of
police for the city of blue
build I'm also a professor in
criminal justice at the local
college I support this bill I'll
tell you why there's two reasons
for experience in cost.
Will know the job is very
dangerous for me to please just
had an officer shot we are
about two weeks ago the probably
won't be able to return back to
work yeah we're asking officers
who witnesses and stuff to be
able to come back to yesterday.
What department you're down at
least twenty five percent or
even more in other places the
cost to hire a new employee is
extreme and the the benefits we
get from her net new officer
arching for at least a year so
late time somebody applied to be
a police officer to the time
there are on their own on the
streets about a year with over a
hundred dollars a hundred
thousand dollar spent in salary
training and equipment.
The fact is that most people may
not know that most police
departments are staffed by such
new officers that up to eighty
percent of the patrol division
have two years or less of
experience.
You know I see such a value
programs like this and so did
the other chiefs and sheriffs
that I know that for me please
we actually initiated this
program with our own budgets to
try to.
Health services we knew the cost
of hiring a new officer rushes
retaining an officer with
significantly more so we're able
to keep the experience on the
street we're able to keep our
numbers up so much more
manageable level and we didn't
have such a law student and
budget issues.
So again I a court the support
this bill even though I'm no
longer in the profession I know
the value of and appreciation
thank you.
Thank you next we have David how
to meal.
You are now and made it.
Yes madam chair can you hear me
we can't Wells thank you madam
chair members of the committee
David how to be a registered
lobbyist for the City of
Albuquerque and I want to thank
the sponsors for bringing this
important bill before this
committee in this legislature
recruitment and retention of
course is a critical part of
ensuring the safety of our
community and so the City of
Albuquerque stands in in strong
support of this effort to a two
button that down I also stand in
strong support of this effort as
the brother in law three retired
APD officers I was able over
their years of service to see
the gentleman that they took as
public safety officers and our
dedication to the community and
the sacrifices that they all of
employed on it's a very
difficult job this is the right
message to the community that we
support these officers and want
to give them the resources they
need to stay on the job and.
And and do the important work
that they do for the community
thank you.
Thank you next we have need to
stave heavy you are now unmuted.
Good morning thank you for
allowing me to speak to you I
strongly support this bill on a
many of the things that David
Koresh was talking about is is
our experience up here I've been
with Farmington PD for eight
years one of our one of our
initiatives over the last few
years was to to re open
longevity program in an effort
to retain officers longer we
were reasonably successful at
that even at the amounts that we
could afford this bill will help
us with that but even with our
retention bonus we order folks
leaving
this year we had five or six
different retirements which is
quite a bit for us and as the
non chief Kerr said I think
you're seeing that across most
of New Mexico certainly
Albuquerque as struggle but
almost almost all the agencies
that belong to the chiefs
association are reporting that
their numbers are down I think
the sheriff's association
probably is reporting the same.
It is difficult to recruit but
it's difficult to retain
officers.
I do believe that this bill will
would be a good step in the
right direction towards helping
us achieve that and I strongly
support the bill and thank the
sponsors for bringing forward
thank you.
Thank you next we have the
Belinda garland you are now and
it.
Good morning everybody thank you
for the opportunity to speak on
this matter my name is Belinda
garland and I am the executive
director of the New Mexico
livestock board as the oldest
law enforcement agency in the
state of New Mexico we applaud
your efforts to support New
Mexico's law enforcement
officers with house bill eighty
six the law enforcement
retention Fund.
The New Mexico livestock board
and other small agencies are not
in the limelight every day but
all of those officers who are
fully commissioned are quietly
working in the background and
going beyond the parameters of
the loss they specifically
enforce on a daily basis this
bill would make a tremendous
difference in our officers and
our ability to retain them to
that end I am respectfully
asking that you include the New
Mexico livestock for officers
basically called livestock
inspectors in this bill along
with other small agencies across
the state those to include New
Mexico game and fish New Mexico
state parks and rec and the New
Mexico gaming control board
thank you very much.
Thank your next we have sure if
Shane Ferrari.
You are now unmuted.
Good morning ma'am can you hear
me OK.
Yes we can thank you okay Madam
chair legislators I again I want
to thank you for this
opportunity money machine for
our in the chair of the San Juan
County and I am in support of
house bill eighty six I do want
to just bring up the a couple
matters that the the some others
have in talking about retention
of law enforcement we have to
remember that the average a
career expectancy of a law
enforcement officer in the US is
six years six years so when we
look at having to replace that
officer it's a as chief cars
former chief Clarke talked about
it's it's roughly a hundred
thousand dollars a year and it
takes us one to one and a half
years to replace that officers
that is the hiring of that
officer going through a very
difficult background process the
academy of field training
programs so we automatically end
up in a deficit when we lose an
officer so how can we better
extend those those career.
timelines past six years what we
learned from the military
themselves are military members
are offer bonuses to continue
there are less than every year
they know what works I can tell
you from personal experience it
does work over my last three
years with the San Juan can't as
San Juan county sheriff I've
given three retention bonuses to
our officers utilizing salary
savings from vacancies I've had
from from positions I wasn't
able to fulfill and we have seen
our retention continue as stated
earlier recruitment is still
extremely difficult so how do we
retain the officers we have the
experience we have in New Mexico
I believe it's through doing
retention bonuses such as this I
also think it's a great way of
thanking our officers for for
their service this budget there
for family it lets them know
that that we respect them you
know the last couple years have
been very rough on law
enforcement when we talked about
law enforcement reform and to
have the support of our
legislators this bill shows the
support shows our commitment to
to those that protect us there's
a and and will possibly keep all
of the New Mexico law
enforcement here in not looking
over the fence and other bonus
programs at other states offer
so again I want to thank our
legislators for bringing this
bill forward I am in support and
and thank you for for looking
out for law enforcement.
Thank you so that concludes the
public comment for support now
we will go to the public comment
for opposition I believe we had.
At least one person that would
like to speak if you would
please raise your hand.
Campos you are now and it.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is listed
as follows I'm a policy manager
with gold futures formally known
as young women United.
We respectfully oppose H. B.
eighty six the state of New
Mexico as well as local
governments have tried a variety
of law enforcement incentives
including hiring and retention
programs over the past decade
and yet they can see still
persist across our state.
We must reimagine public safety
and reduce crime by reinvesting
the proposed funding and
alternative emergency response
programs ensuring police
officers never respond to the
certain times of to the certain
kinds of emergencies following.
Imagine having healthcare
providers and social workers
responding to emergencies like
drug overdose mental health
crisis please domestic violence
and really providing supporting
a resources for our growing New
Mexico homeless population law
enforcement retention programs
simply aren't working in New
Mexico across the state it's
time to invest in a more robust
emergency response
infrastructure.
That doesn't simply rely on law
enforcement I urge you to
consider real solutions for our
communities and to vote against
HB eighty six thank you.
Thank you Jerica Salazar you are
now and muted.
Jurica have to and then on your
end.
Sorry about that.
No problem.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Jessica
cells are and I am the leader
all futures four million women
United we respectfully oppose H.
B. eighty six.
In our communities we have had a
negative impact with the police
departments majority of our
vendors are taking on more and
more charges due to being
addicted to narcotics and all
instead of getting the help
needed they're getting arrested
and being placed in jail and
prison well Kerr street at their
expected Shange without the help
needed.
My.
You ever community members the
opportunity to work on issues
that place them in the situation
to begin with we urge you to try
putting other programs in place
of gel present time.
Giving more money to officers
not going to fix things or make
people stop bending the only way
to make a difference is to offer
programs that will help the root
of the problem we can't offer
bandage to fix the core problems
we urge you to vote against H.
Payne sex thank you.
Thank you Barron Jones you are
next and you are now and muted.
Morning madam chair members of
the community committee my name
is Barron Jones on this policy
strategist but we ACLU of New
Mexico at this time we have to
respect we propose legislation
because we would like to see the
the retention access to
retention.
I came hi to training eight
point twenty legislative on
twenty twenty one.
Yeah twenty twenty legislative
finance committee report show
that forty one percent of the
offices
law enforcement agencies in the
state of New Mexico did not
comply with
Where we see on this play a
large initially access non thank
you all consider times funding
to try thank you so much for
amount thank you.
Thank you and that concludes the
public comments we will now go
to the committee Representative
Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
As.
Sure sure is pointed out of.
It the more experienced officer
is more effective in policing.
And you know particularly if you
look at officers that are in
there near the end of their
career with rare exception they
are better officers and the
model officers that we need to
keep our you know we all think
about the experience but with
that experience comes how to
work with the public in a in a
better manner as well.
I have a couple of comments on
this madam chair and
Representative Dixon is the
funding from there is going to
be coming from the
Our police officer
Attraction Fund.
Thank you madam chair and
representative range no it's not
it is a separate special
appropriation to set up this
fund.
Perfect.
madam chair and Representative
Dixon.
I would like to work with you on
page six about your definition
of a law enforcement agency.
As we've heard there are a lot
of other agencies in this state.
Where we have certified law
enforcement officers.
So there's the two
considerations our first is an
agency hires an individual.
and and of course we're talking
about giving the money in five
years of service but they hire
an officer they're not they may
not be certified for the first
year and certification comes
from their completing a Law
Enforcement Academy.
I think that.
maybe a better way to word that
paragraph and I'll work with you
on that is that they are New
Mexico Law Enforcement certified
police officers and they will
capture every one that you're
talking about plus all the other
agencies in the state who we
unintentionally at the end
client anyway those are my
comments and in our
Representative Dixon if you have
something up please let me know
yes I'm thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Rehm for bringing that up we as
Sanchez actually are looking at
the ways to expand that and have
been consulting with legislative
finance committee to get
detailed information on
additional costs and whether or
not we need to use the term
certified or commission and so I
look forward to working with you
on that thank you.
To help one of the COVID we've
got to watch using the yeah and
we're not doing that using the
law enforcement protection fund
that is.
A fund set aside to buy
equipment and police training.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair
representative don't follow up
on Representative comments
all right and this is kind of in
a constant mantra with me is
that the criminal justice system
is a system and so we can focus
on just law enforcement officers
but there are other.
Highbridge I would say law
enforcement officers at least
under current case law
that I think as you're working
on that language you want to
consider and that would be our
corrections officers I know that
as a former county commissioner
that correction officers are
underpaid and this would include
both those people in the
facilities as well as probation
officers correctly
the the case lies actually split
on this the directors are law
enforcement officers of
detention facilities but the
actual officers are not and so
I'm wondering if and I recognize
you're gonna talk to the finance
committee and that makes sense
to me if you would consider also
including.
Language and I actually have it
if you ever wanted to included
but I think this is our money
decisions so it's really beyond
the scope of this committee but
on page six at line three.
The same section that
Representative ring was talking
about you might think of adding
publicly operated detention and
correction facilities that way
you're gonna give the local
entities more flexibility more
ability to retain our were
equally important appropriations
correction officers they're part
of the criminal justice system
now what that would cost that I
don't know but I thought I'd
least put a bug in your ear I
don't know that that's
legislative term but I put a bug
in your ear the state please
consider that if you go to the
appropriation committee because
it is a system and you want to
experience people throughout the
system thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative you
mentioned that this gives
incremental of.
Boost at the five year ten year
fifteen year and twenty year
marks.
We do have some officers that
serve twenty five thirty
thirty five and maybe maybe a a
rare occasion no longer than
that and I was wondering why you
cut it off for twenty years.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative my part
Expanding it to twenty five
thirty and thirty five years but
certainly be something that we
could look to in the future the
five ten fifteen and twenty year
marks were based on discussions
with law enforcement officers
but you know that's by no means
at the end of the road.
Madam chair representative of I
say that because it seems to me
that with the condition of our
retirement funds are being what
they are there may be some
incentive to keep those officers
working longer periods of time
and maybe not deciding to.
All their retirement benefits
center I'm and this might be a
way to.
Accomplish that are at least and
encouraging that
madam chair and representative
my second question
Really a balls around and and
I'd certainly support this
measure but I did not see you in
here any a requirement of the
officers to meet certain
performance goals or
Maybe on the other side of not
have something on their record
that would
maybe should prevent them from
receiving these
Differential disbursement
suppose our anniversary dates.
Was any thought given to.
Having some.
Requirement for performance
standards or something along
those lines.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Nibert that's a
great question and at this point
the intent was to allow the
local
agencies some discretion and
that but that's certainly
something that could be looked
into.
So Madam chair representative I.
Choose the local agency some
discretion but with respect to
the state police of the state
level
so there is discretion to the by
the
Payment of that money to the
officers as I reach those
anniversary dates.
On the.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
the the way that it's set up
right now the agencies will
provide data in it the year in
advance to
The law enforcement retention
Fund
Whether or not they actually
have to
request funds for every officer
I don't actually know the answer
to that if if that something
that we have specified
Some of those issues you know if
if there are concerns about a
law enforcement officers
performance
those I would have thought
should be addressed in.
Sort of their performance
reports and.
other mechanisms.
Madam chair representative I
would I would agree with you
that those things should be
addressed I would also submit
you that often times those
things don't get addressed and
people are.
you know just stick in the
system not just police officer
but I mean I think in many many
our vocations and professions
are.
All get moved up the maybe
despite.
some.
Minimal level of our acceptable
contractor acceptable work
performance what I have here and
so are you know I like
personally I like to see
performance measures based on on
merit and certainly.
We ought to encourage.
Officers to we up to continue
pursuing that but we are also
encouraging of the officers that
are doing things of properly and
are performing as as we would
expect them to and I think we
heard some of the comments from
some of the folks that are maybe
they perceive the that's not
happening across the board and
if we have some performance
measures your bills that
That that I think would benefit
the officers as well as the the
governmental entities that are
going to be subject to this and
it would you know a character
those that are are doing well in
fact I would even argue maybe we
ought to have.
Extra incentives for those that
are are really performing
performing well and
You know maybe not just have a
duration and time but also their
meeting certain performance our
milestone serve go ahead and
give them of those act extra of
bumps of the of compensation
long word but I don't see
anything in here all I see here
is that if you.
Survived five years and you know
get to and you want to continue
you're you're going to be
considered for that the.
Additional pay to sign up and I
would I would hope that it
ninety nine point nine percent
of the cases it's it's well
deserved that at.
Honored but the
I would hate to see the the
person that everybody knows is
not doing very well get the same
amount of money as adults during
an exemplary job and yes Sir the
only differences well there's
there's no difference that we're
both there for five years ten
years fifteen years once doing
it correctly the other one's not
so just something to think about
the you know I certainly support
this and and we definitely have
the need to keep our our
officers.
On the force.
As a former county commissioner
I know how difficult it is to
attract new officers and get
them up to speed when you have
some of those veterans retired
particularly if you have a whole
host retired the same time so
I'm supportive about yeah I just
we should add some performance
mechanisms of it as well.
That would be by my comments
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
I wanted to
I wanted to suggest and I don't
I honestly don't know if.
I understand the purpose of this
but I appreciate the discussion
regarding the performance
measures.
What I.
What are you remember so much
for more debate on the civil
rights bill and
To have a I think was one who
provided input and we had to
members of the commission one a
retired
police chief from the lunar blue
line is and then the sheriff of
Dona Ana County.
We talked about the need for
training for officers and also.
All the
The system.
We have that fails to.
For officer misconduct so that
one police department or
sheriff's office somewhere
higher so would who has a bad
report and we're not keeping
track of that and frankly with
this kind of an appropriation it
seems to me that ideally and I'm
I don't know what the time frame
would be here but ideally you
would want to try to address
some of the.
The issues we've heard I know.
The really good officers don't
want the ones who are
This.
Conducting themselves properly
and they want reliable methods
Sure that those people are not
we hired someone else.
Given.
Salary.
So right incentives when in fact
they should be part of the
system any longer so I just
wanted to make that comment I'm
I'm I don't have a suggestion
for changing this but I think
with perhaps the evaluation
idea.
Eight two the reporting of.
Misconduct.
And perhaps the reporting of
meritorious conduct as well and
perhaps greater of a greater
rewards for those individuals.
Should be part of it thank you.
Thank you madam representatives.
Do you what did you want to
respond Representative Dixon yes
please I just wanted to say
madam chair and Representative
Chasey and I Burt I think those
are great suggestions that we
will look into.
Thank you great thank you.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
The past I move it second okay
we have a two passed by
Representative guy a goes and a
second by Representative Rehm is
there any opposition to the
depressed motion.
Okay seeing none you have a due
pass or house bill eighty six
showing all members present
voting in the affirmative.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Great thank you so now we are
moving on to Hey how's your
right now we can't talk.
And
Representative Matthews and
others that are on the bill
would you please raise your hand
and will promote you over to
panelists.
Right.
And thank you to the experts for
also raising your hand.
Okay just a minute I'd like
folks to stop raising their hand
unless you're an expert witness
Representative Matthews.
Okay thank you for.
And Josh brown is a panelists of
yours Representative.
Senator Matthews.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair it is Josh
Braun an expert witness for you
at now okay great James Grayson
and
Angelica at Larry okay we have
both of those folks on okay
great and madam chair if it if
Meredith Dixon is still on yes
co sponsor and as I could be a
panelists for this too if you.
That's okay all yes she's still
on okay and proceed with that
house bill five okay
madam chair members of the
committee it is always a
pleasure to appear before this
committee I'm here to present HB
five a cell on maybe even a very
controversial bill that is
offered.
In response to what many
consider.
Sorry I didn't realize my video
is not.
it is offered in response to
what many may consider
unacceptable levels of violence
in Albuquerque increasing levels
of violence in other parts of
New Mexico.
This bill raises the question of
whether the device known as an
ankle bracelet is the most
effective way to protect public
safety from those who are
awaiting trial for allegedly
committing a serious violent
felony and list of which isn't
are enumerated in the bill for.
for brandishing for discharging
a gun in the commission of a
felony or for having inflicted
great bodily harm or even death
in the commission of a felony.
This bill reflects the belief
that the legislature has a role
in defining the crimes we
consider most dangerous to the
public safety and pass our
courts to carefully consider the
risk involved in releasing
individuals for page probable
cause exists to believe they
have committed those crimes.
This bill does this the creation
of a presumption rebuttable
presumption that when probable
cause to shown that the
defendant has committed certain
crimes resulting in death child
abuse in treatment trafficking
and sex offenders and the others
enumerated in the statute or I'm
sorry in the bill in excess
threaten or actually Harmening
kill New Mexicans at worst
that's we're asking our courts.
That the legislature is really
concerned about the pre trial
release release of those charged
with these most dangerous Act
and we expect them to be very
careful and thorough in making
decisions about their pre trial
release.
With me today to testify our
angel and Larry who knows to the
death of her son heavy price
that the present system imposes
and James Grayson deputy
district attorney in the second
judicial district looks fine how
to propose presumption system
would work and why it's needed.
And
And with that
I would like to go ahead and ask
Mr Leri eight two.
Proceed.
Chair sure that's fine.
Good morning madam chair and
committee.
My name is Angela Leri and I'm
here to support house bill I
because I believe if my son's
accused killer had been detained
until trial that my son would
still be alive.
Let me begin by telling you a
little bit about my son.
he was a handsome funny loving
charismatic and hard working
person with lots of goals by no
means was he perfect but he was
genuine and had core family
values he often visited his
grandparents and helped and
cared about his siblings nephew
and niece he had ambition and
ensure Pinero mindset as he
started his own shoe box
business in the fourth grade and
continue to work hard with many
side jobs and businesses along
the way.
He had future plans up until his
untimely death.
He was killed four weeks after
his twenty second birthday and
was in the middle of his first
house flip as well as almost
done with his pilot's license
one week after he passed he
received his passport in the
mail as he had plans to travel
as well.
The defendant accused of
murdering my son originally went
in on charges where he would
have fallen under the rebuttable
presumptions.
Unfortunately the Arnold school
dean tend to not be a threat and
suggested R. O. R..
The DA tried hard to keep him
incarcerated until trial but he
was released to supposedly the
strictest of conditions.
Conditions we now know didn't
involve monitoring after five
weekends or holidays.
There has been so much
resistance to changing pre trial
release and to the addition of
rebuttable presumptions with
some commenting that it will
help in that studies in evidence
show that the current system is
working well apparently it's not
working because my son is dead
and there's plenty of other
examples of the flight system.
Can anyone tell me look me in
the eye and say one life isn't
worth trying something new.
I can't tell you with a hundred
percent confidence that these
bills will work but enough talk
we need action and it's worth a
shot.
Some might tell you that this is
bill good legislation but I'm
standing before you to cynically
tell you that I don't feel good
and I never will again.
Until it hits home it's easy to
want to base decisions on
analysis but in real world
scenarios criminals are getting
the upper hand well we argue
about what is and isn't working.
I'd like to ask you now to
imagine that you in your closest
loved ones like your parents
your children or grandchildren
less live next door to someone
who is accused of murder
voluntary manslaughter
aggravated battery sexual
exploitation of a child
activated criminal sexual
penetration or robbery in the
first degree or human
trafficking of a child until
their trial.
Would you feel safe leaving your
door open your grandchildren
outside unattended your
valuables in plain sight.
The real world answer is no and
nobody wants to take that risk
when it comes to one's own
family yet we are continually
letting these offenders out.
Yes of course innocent until
proven guilty but it should be
required for them to prove that
they are innocent as someone is
so brazen to partake in such
violent offenses or surround
themselves with those that do
such by that commit such violent
offenses why should we be so
concerned with their robbing
them of their rights especially
if they don't want to abide by
the laws that give them those
rights.
Better safe than sorry in my
opinion we are asking to detain
petty criminals here we're
telling you that there is a
correlation to certain offenses
and future violence no amount of
bills or pre trial conditions
can protect us from that
violence my biggest concern is
the use of weapons while
committing a crime this should
be a blade in signifier that the
person would not hesitate to use
that weapon on someone.
My sandwiches chili dead
originally he went in with
possession of a controlled
substance a stolen firearm
aggravated battery and firing a
weapon out of his car.
Those bullets could have very
easily hit anyone of your family
members that date he acted with
no regard to human life but we
still released the actual pre
trial release system and GPS
monitoring is a whole different
story I won't go into but I'd
like to leave you with this.
In a forty eight hour time span
this individual committed
homicide.
Activated the soul and elderly
woman and committed armed
robbery.
The entire time he had an ankle
monitor and police were actively
looking for him yet he wasn't
even buy them using his GPS
location he was caught by police
after the armed robbery to add
insult to injury detectives had
to obtain a search warrant just
to get his GPS data.
In response to those who say the
system is working in these other
bills are unnecessary I
questioned the conflict of
interest interest I understand
the duties of those who must
protect effectiveness efficiency
cost and constitutional rights
but in my opinion my son's life
was worth more than that and
who's protecting his rights I'd
like to end by thanking all of
you for listening to me and to
also thank you in advance to
think beyond the black and white
aspects and realize we must make
changes that coincide with our
current times and situations we
are facing a pandemic of
violence and we must act
accordingly to those new times.
Thank you madam chair and
committee.
Thank you Mr Grayson.
So this Mr grace and your muted
it looks like on both ends so I
don't know if there's an issue.
Districts.
Now we can yes thank you I
apologize there must be some
issue with my microphone.
I'll try to talk loudly and not
with the the members of the
committee madam chair can hear
me.
thank you for letting me speak
to you this morning thank you
Representative Matthews I'd like
to give us a little bit of
background on pre trial
detention and then talk about
how this bill would work in
terms of my own background right
now I'm the chief deputy in the
second judicial district
attorney's office I've been a
public servant for about twenty
five years I've been in
prosecution in both appeals and
it's a trial level for for about
I see seventeen years I believe
so
That that's my current
background in terms of where
where I work I also participated
on the New Mexico Supreme Court
rules committee rules of
criminal procedure for the
District Court and I
participated in two of the ad
hoc committees for pretrial
detention rules.
So background for
the the
pre trial detention procedures
in New Mexico I'm New Mexico
decided to to adopt bail reform
in two thousand sixteen and in
doing so decided to rely on New
Jersey and the federal
government as a model.
our constitutional provision
article two section thirteen is
modeled on language that's and
the New Jersey provision and the
federal statute.
That language requires the state
filed a motion for pre trial
detention.
the state can do so for anyone
who is charged with a felony.
and then the state must
establish by clear and
convincing evidence that no
conditions of release for
reasonably protect the safety of
another person where the members
of the community.
Second judicial district we have
a rigorous screening method for
determining when to file a
motion for pre trial detention.
We filed a motion for pre trial
detention as I mentioned all
felony defendants are eligible
for pre trial detention the New
Mexico constitution.
The second judicial district
attorney's office files a motion
for detention in only twelve
percent of felony cases.
Of those twelve percent have for
granted and half for denied.
Tension motions are filed by our
district again that's twelve
percent of felony cases seventy
percent of those involved
violent crimes.
The problem we face one of the
problems we face in establishing
current convincing evidence that
conditions of release cannot
protect the community is that
the New Mexico Supreme Court has
interpreted that language in New
Mexico constitution to require
two different elements.
One is dangerous or a threat to
the community and the second is
the conditions of release
are not available to to protect
the community community with
reserves reasonable certainty.
The problem arises when an
individual for example has no
criminal history.
Because they do the most common
way to show that conditions of
release are not available to
protect the community is to show
a previous violation of can
conditions of release for an
unwillingness to follow
conditions of release.
We have many offenders who are
first time offenders who engage
in violent behavior.
And that method of proof is not
available it doesn't mean these
individuals are less violent it
also doesn't mean they've
necessarily committed fewer
crimes.
They may in fact be charged with
multiple crimes in the in the
case at hand for example there
could be a serial rapist who is
charged with multiple rapes all
of the same time.
That individual will not have a
criminal history that will allow
the state to show previous
violations of conditions of
release.
What happens in the second
judicial district as we have
many judges who deny motion for
pre trial detention.
And find the defendant is
dangerous.
Is a danger to the community and
a threat to public safety but
the conditions of release can
protect the community.
There are two problems with
that.
One is that pre trial
supervision.
Is not rigorous.
as testified to by Ms Leary
and as found by the New Mexico
Supreme Court in state versus
groves a GPS device does not
prevent crime.
GPS device can tell us where to
send it is at a particular court
particular time but it does not
prevent them from committing
further crimes.
And GPS tracking devices are
used for a very small percentage
of defendants who are on pre
trial release.
Most of those defendants are on
pre trial supervision requires
only that they call the court
once a month.
Federal supervision is not
sufficient to assure the
defendants do not commit new
crimes.
The other problem is that we
have a public safety assessment
instrument in Bernalillo county.
that.
Is designed to tell the court
whether someone presents a risk
of flight or a risk of
committing new criminal
activity.
The problem though is that that
tool is designed for other
jurisdictions and not for New
Mexico.
In New Mexico the constitution
only allows detention based on
dangerousness not based on a
risk of failing to appear for
court.
Itself takes into account a
number of different factors
there are seven eight factors
that go into each of the
different scores on the
instrument.
Violent crime is only one of
those factors.
And with violent crime with the
consideration of violent crime
there's no distinction between
an aggravated assault which is a
fourth degree felony that does
not result in harm or injury I
should say not does not result
in physical injury it of course
does cause harm.
but that's in that crime is not
distinguished from first degree
murder which is a much more
serious crime poses a much much
greater threat to the community.
So we have a public safety
instrument that is essentially
giving judges misinformation.
We often have the the PSA is
what we would call we often have
PSAs that have basically has a
school a scale of one to five in
terms of risk of failing to
appear more risk of committing
new offense while on release we
often have individuals charged
with very serious crimes
including murder who come in
with a PSA of one and one with a
recommendation of release on
recognizance.
And that's simply a matter of
how the instrument is designed
that's not a reflection of how
dangerous this individual is and
it gives a misimpression to
judges that this individual is
not dangers.
Of the fifty percent denial rate
with detention motions we have
seen reduced recidivism we have
seen violations of conditions of
release by picking up new crimes
from the population of
defendants who have
For whom we filed a motion for
pretrial detention but for whom
the promotion worst in our.
Our office has determined that
there are that eighteen percent
of those defendants released.
After a month after denying a
motion for pre trial detention
have committed a felony or
misdemeanor domestic violence.
Eighteen percent.
That's a that's a higher number
than in other states with bill
reform.
We're not doing as good of a job
and identifying dangerous
offenders as other
jurisdictions.
And the PSA and and the fact
that it's not designed for New
Mexico is one of the big reasons
for.
Rebuttable presumptions will
balance the misinformation that
was given in the PSA.
And the reason I say that.
So I go back to the fact that
New Mexico relied on New Jersey.
As a model for its
constitutional provision.
In New Jersey New Jersey also
uses that uses the same public
safety instrument it's called
the Arnold pool.
But the parent with what's
called and risk management
instruments.
What that is is that identifies
dangerous FINS it serves the
same purpose as rebuttal
presumptions.
The federal government
recognizes rebuttal rebuttable
presumptions by statute and
again we model our system on the
federal government.
So what presumptions to
sensually does at its heart is
given judges information.
That's all yes yes Christian
Intel's judges what crimes the
legislature has identified as
the most dangerous crimes and
which offenders are most likely
to commit new crimes while on
release.
In terms of how this bill would
work itself the bill contains
several different categories
that the rebuttable presumption
would apply to.
I include serious violent
offenses.
It includes human trafficking.
First degree child abuse.
First degree murder.
So it's the most very the most
serious crimes that that are
contained in the criminal code
in New Mexico and only the most
serious crimes.
It also applies to brandishing
or destruction of a firearm
during a felony.
And applies to people who are
currently on conditions of
release or probation when they
pick up a serious violent felony
or who have a serious violent
felony conviction within the
last five years.
So this is a limited group of
people.
To start with.
So how would appreciate the
rebuttal presumption work that's
certainly a question of concern
and will it will increase the
number of motions for pre trial
detention I.
also as Alan question.
The answer to the second
question is no it will not
increase significantly the
number of pre trial detention
motions are filed as I said
prosecutors can currently file
motions for detention.
For every defendant charged with
a felony.
We're very selective in who we
file pretrial detention motions
on.
And we have a like I said a very
rigorous process to determine
when we filed a motion for pre
trial detention.
and that does not include all
cases involving the Bible
presumptions the crimes are
included in the in this bill.
So that process that string
process will continue.
And the fact that there is a
there could be a rebuttable
presumption will not result in
filing of the motion.
In terms of how we work and
hearing.
What happens is that with a
rebuttable presumption is it's
it's like a permissive inference
essentially it allows a judge to
say that this is enough
information.
To know that this defendant is
dangerous and the conditions
were released will not protect
the community if there's
probable cause to believe the
defendant committed one of these
crimes.
That doesn't bind the judge to
rolling that the defendant
should be detained.
It's still a balancing process
as it is right now and the judge
considers the nature and
circumstances of the crime the
strength of the evidence the
defense history all of those
factors to determine whether to
detain in December.
Again what it does is it just
establishes enough evidence for
a judge to provide.
That the defendant is dangerous
and of conditions of release
while protecting community if
the judge believes the balancing
of factors goes in that
direction.
The defendant then has a chance
with the shifting of the burden
of production not the burden of
proof.
To inform the judge why that
presumption doesn't apply in the
particular case.
Even though.
We will with resumptions arise
and evidentiary contacts in pre
trial detention hearings
evidence is not required.
Please make a proffer to the
judge so essentially the only
burden on the defendant in terms
of rebounding this presumption
is to make an argument.
It doesn't have to be evidence
is introduced we have the
defendant the defendant
currently has the ability to
introduce evidence so it doesn't
change that aspect of the
hearing as well.
It's an argument and makes a
proper that the rebuttal
rebuttal presumption should not
apply to this defendant the new
jobs will still consider the
presumption.
in the balancing the factors and
consider the legislature's wait.
for these particular fences.
But again it doesn't bind the
judge at all the judge has
discretion to grant or deny the
motion for pre trial detention.
Sure thank you members of the
committee thank you again
Representative masks.
Thank you.
Representative we're good to go
to public comment.
I'm sure yes we are ready to go
to public comment thank you okay
great we're gonna have a pull up
for those I would like to vote
in favor or opposition to house
bill I.
We'll have it open for about
thirty seconds.
And while that's happening we're
also going to limit the public
comment to two minutes we have a
rules committee at eleven
o'clock and we still have a
couple more bills to get through
I don't know that that will
occur but we're gonna do our
best.
And we are going to close the
pull right now and we have a
seventeen
audience members in support and
twelve in opposition.
So I'm going to usually we are
not usually but sometimes they
jump around in terms of support
the opposition or opposition and
support but I think to make it
easier on everyone will just
always start with support first
that way folks can be clear with
more when they're speaking
during public comment so now we
will hear from those in support.
Crystal match you are now
unmuted.
Good morning madam chairman
thank you for letting me speak I
am a member of the New Mexico
crusaders for justice and I am
for this bill.
I come to you today as it was
taxiing president of New Mexico
let me start by saying I love
our state the weather the
culture the food the meeting
scenery there's nothing else
like it in the world I can't
think of a better place to live
however states direction in
crime is causing me to seriously
reconsider my options I feel
forced to sacrifice these
amenities because I am in
constant fear for my family.
And my safety.
We have come to feel as if
criminals are being allowed to
take over our state they have
been allowed free range to
commit crime without signature
significant consequences they're
not being held accountable for
their menacing behavior I come
to you today not to ask for
change but to demand it enough
is enough the citizens of New
Mexico demands to feel safe in
our community we demand that
criminals are held accountable
the current laws they're not
working and we need change now
yes I understand the cost it
takes to house the inmates but I
also understand all too well the
cost the community is paying by
not having these criminals
incarcerated I understand the
cost of losing someone that I
love to murder.
This is the cost that my family
should not have to pay.
This cost is not.
This is the cost to other
families should not have to pay
I understand the potential for
rehabilitation but when
criminals continue to commit
multiple violent offenses they
clearly have shown that they
will not be rehabilitated.
They can clearly have so that
they do disregard the law
they've only shown that they
have learned how to make this
broken criminal justice system
work in their favor our
community is tired of paying the
cost we refused to.
Thank you now we will hear from
just sat.
You are now unmuted.
Good morning and thank you Mr
after allowing me to speak today
my name is does that are Karen I
am with the New Mexico cristatus
for justice and I do live here
in Albuquerque I'm a mother who
lost her son Kyle Martinez to go
to violence on April twenty
second of twenty twenty I am
here today to speak with you in
the house bill's about reform
could enhancement three strikes
I want you to know that I
support all these bills these
bills are important to me
because my son was killed by a
repeat offender and this guy was
locked up.
My son would be here today he
was only fifteen.
Same time any offender being
released back into the public
with increases the chance that
someone else will be heard with
repeat offenders that risk is
even higher.
The repeat offenders why should
the rights of the offenders be
placed above the rights of the
law abiding citizens the answer
is that they should not also
this course increases the
workload on police who have.
Now we and and would be de
funded under the door by implant
well being asked to accomplish
more such as recapturing these
offenders again without a show
up for the court were to cut off
the wrinkle bracelets by keeping
these repeat offenders locked
up.
It would help me in other
families who have to experience
the same pain I'm a new life
that we are now living.
And I am opposing the second
bill that there are too many
juveniles going out and shooting
it not being held accountable
for their actions and then being
able to be released in turned
out into society at the age of
adult if there are not enough to
shoot somebody then they should
be held and prosecuted as an
adult I appreciate your time and
thank you for listening I am
close by.
Thank you next we will go to JD
you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee JD Bullington
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
for our business community this
bill is a top priority and we
all know the reality of
Bernalillo county twice each day
the Senate has been released
from jail free trial is arrested
for committing the crime every
other day a defendant who's been
released pre trial is arrested
for a violent crime and every
two months someone with the
justice system had in its
custody and chose to release is
arrested for committing a first
degree felony like murder and
rape our police officers are Rio
resting released criminals every
day.
The greater Albuquerque chamber
commerce regrets that this
change the laws necessary but it
is just I just are simply not
uniformly making the best
decisions on their own regarding
the right release of repeat
offenders and gun criminals the
district attorney of Bernalillo
county is very selective in
making pre trial detention
motions and yet is offices
detention motions are granted
only half the time by our
courts.
We believe it's obvious that
detaining our most serious
offenders will help prevent
crimes in Albuquerque the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce believes that is if
this bill does not get watered
down House Bill I will save
lives and make everyone safer in
the greater authority chamber of
commerce strongly urges your
support.
Thank you next we will go to to
lie low Otero.
You are now in muted.
Thank you madam chairman.
For a long me to speak today my
name is Lee seo term co founder
of the New Mexico crusaders for
justice.
I like to feel that I represent
most the families of victims of
homicide.
I am support of house bill I.
Devin Heyward was shot by an
offender who was on pre trial if
this bill was in place Devin
would still be alive today we
have an abundance of violent
crimes that are obviously
keeping New Mexicans filling in
state we need to start making
losses separate violent
criminals from the community
what has been in place is
obviously not working and I am
in support of house bill five
thank you.
Thank you Nicole Chavis.
You are now unmuted.
Okay.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for
listening to me today my name is
Nicole Chavis and I am the co
founder of rob New Mexico and
today I represent approximately
a hundred and sixty two
individuals that have been
victims of violent crime or
homicide I stand a
Representative this bill because
it is common sense that for the
legislature to take to make our
community safer this criteria
would help identify offenders
who really pose the greatest
risk using this dangerous
standards from other
jurisdictions and it would
provide guidance to the judges
that align with the community
expectations of detention are
violent offenders and so I do
stand in favor of this
unfortunately as you heard today
multiple lines have been taken
while a criminal has been left
out as well as multiple crimes
committed so thank you for
taking time to listen to me and
I am in favor of this bill.
Thank you Johnny to heal you are
now and muted.
Yes my name's Johnny Trujillo I
am of the retired chief of
police of Sapporo New Mexico I
am also the executive executive
director now they'll pointed as
to where we're full service
domestic violence agency and I
am in full support of this bill
and and needed to comment on an
ankle bracelets really briefly
we recently just had an
offender.
What Office ankle bracelet on
the doorstep to the courthouse
ankle braces are not effective
in our area they seem to ignore
all and there's there's doesn't
seem to be the person in place
to continually monitor The
Jungle bracelets the other thing
is we're seeing that the of DD
offenders are currently you know
they're educating themselves
they know they repeat
misdemeanor after misdemeanor
after misdemeanor knowing not to
go into the family pool and and
and that's just another issue
but
the protection that this will
offer to the victims are
survivors of domestic plants be
tremendous many times the
offender is out of jail before
we you know with before the the
the victim is even receive them
the most needed services so in
support of this bill I'm
encouraging that you know a do
pass because it is going to be
speak volumes for the protection
of survivors and their children
of the mystic violence thank
you.
Thank you Danielle surveyed you
are now and it.
Good morning.
My name is van gene Randall
Shorty and I you know I thank
you madam chairman and for
allowing me to speak to speak
this morning.
I am here because I support this
I'm in support of house bill
number five I am.
Zacharia Shorty's mom
Zachariah's Shorty went missing
July twenty fifth twenty twenty.
And he was found a few days
later I'm sorry he went missing
July twenty first he was found
days later July twenty fifth.
And he was found dead and.
He is a victim of gunshot wounds
I am from San Juan County.
When that went missing here only
he went missing in Farmington
New Mexico was found on the
Navajo reservation in the non
side.
Which is you know a borderline
you know.
The little borderline area you
know just right off the
reservation you know my problem
there is you know with the
jurisdictions as well
Again I in support of house bill
I I you know changes need to be
made.
Two thousand debate held
accountable for their actions.
You know Zach's case there has
been no arrests made and you
know these ankle monitors
they are not effective at all.
I am also part of the New Mexico
crusade for justice in the NM.
W. in M. D. C. R. you know here
in New Mexico.
I am Zachariah's voice.
And I thank you again for
listening to.
To to us you know our children
did not deserve what they went
through.
Thank you.
Thank you next we have a J. C.
Trujillo.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is JC
Trujillo I'm the executive
director possibilities family
support services are we work
primarily in Sapporo impacting
counties with families who are
at risk for experiencing our
child abuse or domestic violence
within their families.
We stand in strong support of
House Bill five too often were
having to get creative with our
CD of the victim and witnesses
of child abuse and or domestic
violence right now we're seeing
alleged perpetrators getting
arrested and released the same
day for alleged violent crimes
are it is absolutely imperative
that we support this bill for
the safety and well being of
victims witnesses and our
communities at large I would
also further ask that the
committee consider that first to
fourth degree felony child abuse
as well as first Fortythree
battery on a household member
and even consider misdemeanor
battery on on household members
at again too often we're having
to deal with the crisis is out
because the alleged perpetrator
odds are released to and they
are re victimizing the victims
out and we're having to deal
with safety issues.
We serve a very rural community
out within Sapporo and and
Patrick county law enforcement
is limited law enforcement
response times are forty five
minutes to sometimes two hours
to get to our rural areas and
these perpetrators are are
getting access to victims with
that being said I would
encourage the committee to
expand the bill to include these
violent crimes thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Thank you next we have Erica
Walker you are now unmuted.
Good morning madam chairman
thank you for allowing me to
speak my name is Erica Walker
and my son I am the voice for my
son's around so the low Romero
recently was a victim of gun
violence on October thirtieth
twenty twenty one.
I am in support of this bill.
Not because it'll bring my son
back but because I have younger
children who I want to have a
bright future I want them to be
able to go out into the public
and be safe I feel like these
are these criminals have more
rights than are law abiding
citizens and it's very
unfortunate and it's very scary
as one of the other speakers
mentioned Albuquerque is a
beautiful place and we have so
much out there that we can be
enjoying but.
Because we're afraid to be out
there and to go out because of
all these criminals and violent
crimes that are happening and
it's very saddening
for my family for all of the
families who have lost loved
ones tend not only victims of
gun violence but to domestic
violence and
other you know tragic situations
and something has to be done
we're at the point where lives
are just getting lost and all of
these repeat offenders have no I
feel like they have no values no
morals for human life or and
they're just continuing to make
bad choices and when does it end
when when.
Do the people who are law
abiding citizens get to come out
with their foot first as opposed
to these criminals and repeat
offenders that are continuing to
costs chaos in our community and
it's it's it's sad and something
needs to be done and like I said
it.
Next we have Diana loose.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I am
district attorney dina lease if
that and president of the New
Mexico district attorneys
association I am joined today
here in Santa Fe I do a Marcus
one twentieth from eight do a
pretender from eleven one and DA
onder read from the not we all
did not law again the district
attorneys as a group all
fourteen or in support of HB
five this is not just in
Albuquerque problem this is a
statewide problem you heard
today that the second judicial
district attorney's office filed
a very small percentage of pre
trial detention motions.
The other districts around the
state likely fall more
specifically that this district
I believe my district files the
most easy D. A. office in the
state we still have individuals
who are not detained.
Based on a GPS monitoring and go
out and commit other crimes.
In my district I have had
individuals that have committed
aggravated battery by
strangulation who committed the
same crime with the new victim
again.
I've had individuals on
probation for child abuse as a
lower level felony offense we
have been committed child abuse
resulting in death.
I've had multiple cases out of
all three of my counties in the
district where our primal sexual
contact of a minor.
Have those individuals had
simply been released on GPS
monitoring to have committed
additional see is see a minor.
We are letting out the wrong
individuals we're not asking to
detain everyone with HB five the
Representative audible
perceptions gives the court
another tool another layer to
use to determine who should be
held.
As you heard from James.
Carlos on thank you are now and
it.
Currently you're have to and
then on your end sorry thank you
madam chair members of the
committee Carlos Fund tag with
the New Mexico business
coalition we stand in strong
support of house bill five we
think that there were some
mistakes made in the past about
how we released criminals or if
They were retained and I think
this takes a big step forward in
correcting the problem that has
been created the crime rate in
New Mexico is really out of hand
I live and work in Albuquerque
where is the worst people live
in fear here.
And it's not the way that New
Mexicans should live we
represent hundreds of businesses
and thousands of New Mexicans
and by far crime in the state is
of the biggest concern we urge
your support of this bill thank
you.
Thank you now we will go to
opposition if you would like to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand regularly Chavis here
now and then unmuted excuse me.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is Rikki Lee
Chavez registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico colonel Defense
lawyers association we
appreciate the work of the
sponsor her advocates and we all
work to make New Mexico a better
and safer place however we
respectfully oppose house bill
five presumptions belong in a
place where people are presumed
innocent until found guilty of a
crime presumptions are not a
place at the pretrial release
and detention faced criminal
investigations and legal the
criminal legal system we
encourage you to pre is opposed
this measure we believe that
there are safeguards in place
are prosecuting bodies have
substantial latitude when it
comes to initiating criminal
investigations and criminal
legal processes the current
system works as a check on that
latitude we encourage you to
propose and we also remind this
body and members of this
committee that we are here to be
a resource to you if you have
questions or concerns about how
the creep criminal legal process
works thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we will go to Kim
Chavez Cook you are now and made
it.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and I do
stand in opposition to this bill
for many of the reasons that
Rikki Lee Chavez just stated I
want to first mentioned that I
did submit a lengthy analysis to
the committee staff as a handout
that I hope you were able to get
a hold of and if not hopefully
you'll get it eventually but
it's thirteen pages long there's
no way I can fit it into two
minutes I will hit a couple of
high notes here the first is
that the dramatic effect on the
county jails that this is going
to have an is potentially
catastrophic this is not a
dollar figure concern this is
about actual safety of inmates
because New Mexico does not have
any mandate that trial be held
within a certain amount of time
the jail stays that are involved
with pre trial detention are
often lengthy and our jails are
currently in crisis with
staffing shortages and pandemic
conditions and lack of medical
care so while family big
families of the victims are
suffering understandably and
they're calling to save just one
life with a better safe than
sorry approach which I
completely understand this bill
would actually prevent very few
crimes from happening because
pre trial release is a drop in
the bucket the LFC memo released
last week I think provides
suggestions for measures that
would have a much more
significant impact on our crime
rate and we cannot overlook the
endangerment that incarcerating
hundreds more people will will
have on the on the those inmates
these people are not just
presumed innocent many of them
actually are innocent I would
point committee members to an
article in the journal this
morning about a man who was
actually wrongfully incarcerated
and ended up suffering very
catastrophic medical affects
from his incarceration I also do
not agree Mr Grayson's
assessment of how this would
play out in court I disagree
with his description of what the
bill does it does indeed shift
the burden and I would conclude
by saying that subsection.
It's a and B..
Thank you and we did receive
your analysis says thirteen
pages long so if folks don't
have that it should be in the
share drive next we have Donelly
Wilson you are now in muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dolly
Wilson I'm an attorney at the
ACLU of New Mexico caring for
you in opposition to each B.
five there are other members of
our organization to talk about
the policy pieces of our and
concerns of this proposed
legislation but we thought it
would be helpful for the
committee to have a member of
our legal department talk about
specifically the constitutional
concerns of this bill if passed
timely and resource intensive
litigation over the
constitutionality of HB five is
guaranteed do a great CENIC
introduced the committee to our
state's constitutional
provisions regarding bail reform
and it's very important to that
conversation.
That those are constitutional
provisions this body is
considering legislation that
would could directly conflict
with our state constitution
which it sent we simply cannot
do.
Statute cannot conflict with the
constitution and our state
constitution explicitly imposes
the burden on the state to
demonstrate the need to detain
so a statute that relieves the
state of that constitutional
group burden and relies instead
on the facts of the charges
themselves would directly
contravene the purposes and
languages of our constitution if
passed are already burdened
state courts would be engaged
immediately and these
constitutional questions and I
cannot imagine a scenario in
which such a fundamental
conflict with our state
constitution would be held thank
you.
Thank you next we have Barron
Jones.
You are now and it.
You good morning madam chair
members of the committee on
Monday with parents on the and
with the ACLU of New Mexico and
the fear of all sizes the ACLU
the proud member of the New
Mexico state coalition while we
support the Sanchez effort in
the ten of the proposed
legislation we see maybe we
oppose this legislation many of
the reasons our state morning
has a speed I would have a
disastrous impact on the
communities really decades long
tough on crime policies keeping
people locked up for a couple
days level must wait for trial
could have a negative impact on
one's ability to provide for
themselves and their families it
is not uncommon for people help
reach out jobs and their
education move the move over and
even their children these
realities dollars an individual
families they must be is our by
the entire community according
to the I'm reading a report
compiled by the open sites the
signing bonuses yes Mr not to
mention County jail about the
data miss madam are severely
understaffed jails are.
Just continue to be a hot bed
for coronavirus apparatus and
attacking more people in jail
pre trial only lasted based
acting senator stream we have
lived in this and public health
concerns and daily safety issues
that already is to M. S. have
been burning County recent weeks
SS leaks understaffing thank you
for that comes.
Thank you Marshall Martinez your
now on me to.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee Marshall
Martinez executive director of
equality New Mexico the
statewide LGBTQ advocacy
organization according to the
Williams institute seven times
as many LGBTQ people have been
stopped or detained by police
that our heterosexual
counterparts we need to adults
and youth Representative a
disproportionately higher
percentage of people who have
been charged for the crime.
This change in pre trial release
process these would mean even
more clear entrance New Mexicans
will thank you but not convicted
of a crime would be at the mercy
of an underfunded overworked
public defenders system or
whatever attorney they may be
able to afford on their own and
let's be abundantly clear there
is no jail in America we're
queer and trans people are six.
Representative Ely stated
earlier we have a whole system
and there is a need to address
crime in our communities but the
solution is a values based
investment in our community at
the root of the problems this
legislation does not provide a
solution to the levels of crime
in New Mexico nor does that
inherently mean more New
Mexicans will be safer as LGBTQ
people are sick yes threatened
by a broken system and so called
Texas like this not by the
presumption of innocence until
proven guilty we would ask you
to oppose this legislation.
Thank you and Danielle.
Speaking N..
Opposition.
Daniel.
Hello.
Yes hi good morning madam
chairman my name is Daniel so
they dropped my son was Ryan to
major who was eighteen who was
shot and killed on April twenty
first twenty twenty one our
purpose is to be our voices for
our loved ones who were killed
by gun violence how many
families have to continue to go
through the pain of losing a
loved one to gun violence the
pain that we live with
throughout our whole entire life
what about our younger
generations that are stirring
that it could happen to them
even in school what are we going
to do about it to practice
protect us and our children I am
the voice for by instigator
junior.
Thank you.
Thank you so that concludes our
public comment Representative
Matthews I think you had a
couple more folks that wanted to
speak.
Yes madam chair Damon Martinez
and judge brown of with the City
of Albuquerque an Albuquerque
police department
had their hands up and.
Apparently it was some kind of a
glitch or something
and issue raised their hands
right now we can get them but we
really need to see them when
they're in public comment
because I don't want to open it
back up again short judge brown
you're admitted.
The gentleman is all from the W.
chief filters about Curtiss
Department Albuquerque police
department stands for this bill.
we we start recognize the the
you know their needs for the
marginalized needs for other
programs one of the things that
we do see is that you know if
you commit a violent crime with
a firearm or.
You know export someone to
degree water it's it's a problem
This is the standout so.
Parents and supporters Paul
thank you.
Sorry about that thank you and
Representative Matthews.
There are no other hands up
unless madam chair I don't I
think that Victoria gamble is
down Martinez okay sorry.
You are now and it.
Hello.
What I'm sorry and that was a
family not correct.
I'm trying to figure this out.
Representative let's go ahead
and go to the committee members
we have them in support on the
record Representative Eli.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative first I
guess I want to start by saying
we all recognize that there is a
violence problem in Albuquerque
and other communities around the
state and the question is is is
this addressing the problem and
I'll start with the COVID and
we'll get back to it but I'm
more interested in understanding
what it is I'm looking at terms
of bill I got to studies in
front of me both legislative
finance and the institute for
Social Research both of which
are concluding that the problem
is not the PSA the problem is is
that as crime is going up
arrests are either flat or
declining.
It's.
Are flat or declining this
you're not sure all either one
of those problems the second
thing is is that
it looks like at least from.
What the institute researchers
concluded is that there are.
We get the number right.
Twenty eight I'm sorry fifteen
thousand one hundred and thirty
four cases where they were
released while awaiting their
trials are thirteen thousand
four hundred sixty these are
failing which thirteen thousand
point sixty these cases you cues
was released this is where the
DA didn't filing most so the DA
because to be released those
accused of felony eighty six
point six percent of the time so
if it's felonies we're talking
about the real question is
number one wire or rest flat
reclining wire convictions down
and why is the do a final
motions on the the number that
was given it doesn't account for
the fact the D. eight isn't
filing motions of felonies in
eighty six plus percent of the
cases Google for we get to those
studies I fundamentally do not
understand this bill and I we
need to go through it because I
do think that and I you know I
appreciate the DA describing the
bill but it is not the bill
before us on he is described a
bill that talks about
The burden of production this is
not a burden of production
builds the burden pre-filled and
I want to go to and I'd like to
madam chair and representative
and the DA that talked let me
read you are section eight so
that we're clear about this it
says subject to a rebuttal by
the present any pre trial
detention hearing requested by
prosecuting authority evidence
or offers approved establishing
probable cause for any of the
following felony offenses for
which a defendant is charged
shall be deemed prime aphasia
prove that the defendant is a
danger to any other person or to
the community and that no
release conditions were
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person in the
community that is not a burden
of production that's a burden of
proof any of madam chair and
with all due respect
Representative and with the a
district at the assistant
district attorney if you've got
some case law that says shifting
the prime the prime aphasia
proof is simply a burden of
production I like to see it
because that's not what I'm
looking at I'm looking at and we
will go through this kind of
wanted to time but I'm looking
at section eight that is a
shifting of the burden of proof
and so I'd like to start with
that is not what we're talking
about because it's not I'm not
reading this correctly.
Yeah respond.
Thank you
Representative Eli.
Taking the bill one section at a
time not reading at as a whole I
think it's not a fair way to
read any statute including for
any bill including this one I
would noted digestive decision
which is Hey Steven and Justice
prior he was he was on the
federal court of appeals at the
time decisions specifically
talks about.
This not being that this being a
burden of production not a
burden of persuasion but I'm
gonna let
Mr Grayson of expand upon that
if that's okay with the chair
thank you.
Representative Eli.
Yes that is correct with
Representative Matthew said to
so under eighteen USC section
thirty one forty two he it
contains very similar language
to this bill it shifts the
burden of production not the
burden of proof and subsection
D. says that explicitly in the
bill bill that it does not shift
the burden of proof.
just as prior when he was a
circuit judge on the first
circuit explained in detail in
just of how that works and he
talked about
He talked about the shifting of
the burden of production and the
basically help
it in in a sense.
Basically it conveys to the
judge what the legislative
body's view is on the dangers
missed of the crime itself so
the judge will keep that in mind
even after evidence is it for
for profit is given by the
defendant so it's not the type
of bursting bubble bubble
shifting of per of production
that can exist but is instead
meant to instill in the judge a
legislative judgment about
potential dangers in this and
that's what we're really doing
here is we're talking about risk
and managing risk and that's
what pre trial detention is
about and if the Legislature
determines that these are the
most serious crimes these are
the most dangerous crimes that's
information that is important
for judges to have and that
doesn't shift the burden of
proof.
If the representative would like
you to answer other questions
I'm happy to do so I know
Representative Ely have raised
other questions madam chair all.
Wait for those to be posting it
yeah Madam chair representative
and
I'm sorry what was your last
name.
Yes ma'am sure Representative
Ely and James Grayson I am Mr
Gration I appreciate that
except that number one we're
talking about state and your
reference you federal and I do
not think looking at the state
court cases that they're going
to interpret it the way you are
but Representative Matthews
madam chair next point that I
should look at the statute as a
whole so let me do that I'll go
through it and then we'll go
back and look at it so section
Hey at least under New Mexico
law not the US records detailing
the l'application yes but under
state law this language whether
you intended or not is going to
shift the burden of proof to the
defendant which raises the first
question how are they going to
robot in that I needed there was
a judge mind you before any
discovery Mr art and
not that they're not dangerous
that's not the.
As I read this bill they have to
prove that they have been
charged with any crimes I don't
see how they'd I mean unless
there D. A. is incompetent and
you know we filed a motion which
is just false that would
certainly work but it but then
you get the section be because
our Madam chair representative
Matthews as I'm going to the
bill let's go through it we have
section B. so again it says
subject to rebuttal by the
defense is merely places the
burden on the defendant any pre
detention hearing requested by a
prosecutor already it shall be
presume that it is a danger to
any other person or the
community and that don't release
condition will reasonably
protect the safety of any other
person or the community if the
court finds that was probable
cause to believe that the
defendant committed to
neutrality that prompted the
tensioners again we're talking
about something that I think
would be taxed by the PSA but it
is not a burden of production it
is now shifting the burden of
proof by the your language of
what you put in the statute and
then you get to see which is
completely inconsistent with
what I've seen in a and B. it
says if the court rules that the
presumption in section eight
work via this section applies
the Bennett the court shall a
valuation whether the
prosecution Authority
has satisfied Act words to prove
by and then it shows clear and
convincing evidence would you
just section a and B. it's a
probable cause standard sure you
proving probable cost by clear
and convincing evidence that
just making sense and that no
release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community by evaluating any
factors that require rules
approved by the New Mexico
Supreme Court again what you're
doing is you're basically saying
please ignore what we shared it
in a day and.
B. because we're now going to
propose a new standard you are
going to confuse any this record
job looking at putting aside the
constitutionality issues which
we may or may not get this
committee the task bar promise
you will get to in Judiciary the
fact is this section in my mind
is a knowledge I don't think it
makes any sense when we heard a
and B. and frankly section the
which is the last looking and
searching it's just nothing in
this section and I'm assuming
that that's referring.
two sections eight B. and C. but
it says nothing the section I
it's not some grafting or shall
be deemed to share the burden of
proof to the defendant the
defendant is not a danger to any
other person or the community
and there are no release
conditions that will reasonably
protect the state your any other
person or the community the
burden of proof rests with the
prosecuting authority I have to
tell you I read that and I went
wait a minute are we just gonna
ignore A. B. and C. it makes
zero sense I'm telling you a
District Court judge looking at
this statute would have no idea
what to do on the one hand
your setting Gee if the district
attorney comes in in either
shows in someone's brandishing a
firearm or these various crimes
have been charged and they are
prime a facially others is
showing promise Patricio
satisfying the initial burden of
proof because that's what I'm a
patient means satisfying that
initial burdens now the rebuttal
is switched to the venue course
they community climb same thing
thank you have the standard
clear and convincing which comes
out of no where and then the
edges I please ignore all that
the burden still isn't
prosecutorial I'm really honest
I mean I I I I understand we may
disagree on the substance of
what is your time to do I think
you're trying to address the
long problem but.
Sorry this spans you
and I'm just gonna say your
mind.
Yes on mass it has it is
contradictory in its terms it
has different standards approved
and the last section we're
really says please ignore we
share in a B. and C. and I know
that I'm kind of giving you the
diatribe but I'm responding
Madam chair representative
matches your comment we need to
look at the whole bill I have
looked at the whole bill and
honest as I'm sitting here
looking at it I have no idea how
district judge we go through
interpretation and I have no
idea how the defendant would
have any idea what to do in
terms of a robotic it seems to
me that what you're really doing
is you're saying thanks once any
of this is been charmed we're
gonna lock that person out until
trial happens by the way is a
separate problem we're gonna
talk about a minute but I'd sure
like I and I'm happy just listen
to you for a while go to the
statute now but I'd like to know
what is this all about because
it strikes me as as my daughter
would say it strikes me as a hot
mess thank you madam chair
representative.
Chair representative Ely
I always appreciate that you
never hold back.
And let me try to respond with a
couple things first of all
federal judges have been doing
this for years they have no
problem going to this process
there is lots of case law that
supports this approach
And it seems to me that your
argument is really getting down
to the question of does in New
Mexico legislature do the people
have been elected by the people
to come and make policy do they
have a right to say to records
when you're making these
decisions about the pre pre
trial release.
Here is a list of crimes that we
think ours are.
Evidence dangerousness these are
serious violent felonies serious
acts and we would like you to
consider them in the process and
it's a two pronged process
Representative Eli madam chair
it is one the presumption is
raised and then the court will
determine whether or not to
presumption even applies if the
course is a presumption doesn't
apply then it's just a regular
pre trial detention hearing if
the court determines that the
presumption does apply then the
court is going to.
Take a further look at the
situation and the defendant can
make a decision as to whether or
not it is safe for that person
to be released and when you
madam chair Mr Representative
Ely at one other point talk
about proving a negative.
The state under the constitution
is forced to prove a negative
all the time by having to prove
that there is no reasonable
means by which to protect public
safety if this person is to be
released.
The focus of this bill is
primarily.
To just establish to the
legislature Representative tion
presumptions are allowed to be
established by legislature's all
of time to allow them to say we
have concern when we see these
acts committed or alleged or
charged and we would like you
judge to be very careful in
trying in deciding whether or
not this individual should be
released and whether there's
clear and convincing evidence to
allow that relates.
and again out.
Deferred Mr Grayson he has more
experience in this to see if he
has anything to add.
If you lie I would like to just
reinforced what Representative
Matthews said and Mr gray center
I'm sorry to interrupt but could
you speak a little bit louder
perhaps getting closer to your
device there we have some
members that still can't hear
you thank you I apologize thank
you madam chair thank you
representative Ely I would
respectfully disagrees this is a
mess this is been the law in New
Mexico for over a hundred years
if Representative Ely will turn
to article two section thirteen
of the New Mexico state tuition
the very first sentence says all
persons shall before conviction
be bailable by sufficient
sureties except for capital
offenses when the proof is
evident or the presumption
great.
That language has been
interpreted in New Mexico as
creating a presumption a
rebuttable presumption of
detention for first degree
murder.
That is no longer in effect
because the New Mexico Supreme
Court has interpreted capital
offenses to mean those offenses
that are short subject to the
death penalty in New Mexico has
abolished the death penalty as
of two thousand nine but from
statehood until two thousand
nine that provision applied and
allowed judges to have a
rebuttable presumption of
detention when the defendant was
charged with and the judge finds
probable cause of first degree
murder so this is the same
process that was in effect for
almost a hundred years
And it's it's a process that
starts with the idea that
detention is based on a
balancing the factors.
So when there is a presumption a
judge can say that there is
enough proof to show that the
individuals dangerous and the
conditions of release can't
protect munity but the judge
continues to balance the factors
the judge determines the
strength of the evidence the
judge looks at the defendant's
history.
if the defendant presents
evidence for a proffer to say
this presumption doesn't apply
to me because it applies to
these crimes but I have a
legitimate claim of self defense
and therefore the evidence is
not strong.
that can read but.
from the standpoint of the
burden of production that robots
due to presumption that the
legislature has deemed these
offenses to be the most
dangerous ones and this
defendant didn't commit one of
these most dangerous offense not
that there's not probable cause.
To support the charge but that
they did not commit the offence
in a manner that was the
dangerous manner that the
legislature was concerned with.
So this is a process that has
been in place of the New Mexico
Supreme Court found in state
versus very that's two thousand
eighteen NMSC zero zero four F.
E. R. R. Y. the court found in
state versus ferry that the
nature and circumstances of the
charged offense may be
sufficient despite other
evidence to sustain the burden
of showing that the defendant is
dangerous.
This does the exact same thing
what this says is that the
probable cause to support these
charges of serious violent
offenses.
Maybe sufficient despite other
evidence to support a finding of
dangerousness and the finding
that no conditions of release
can protect the community it's
the same process that's been in
place in New Mexico four hundred
years.
Thank you Mr grace and and as I
mentioned earlier we do have a
rules committee meeting at
eleven and many of us on this
committee are also members of
that rules committee so
Representative Matthews we're
going to roll House Bill five
and once we pick up again
Representative Eli you still
have the floor and can continue
with your questions and then we
can get on to other committee
members as well but ask for that
we're just going to adjourned
and I want to thank everyone for
joining us today especially
those members of the public and
I wish you happy Monday with
that we're adjourned thanks
everyone.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
