Business committee reports.
Interjections ordered to read.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too Mr referred Senate for
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill to have had it under
consideration for same as
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Direction of a favorable
committee report on Senate floor
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee sub two percent yield
to all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All this was named Canadian
point about that.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business planning on
legislation.
Interjections ordered.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan over on to summon
calendar number one.
The gentle lady from McKinley in
San Juan are you ready on.
Central to put the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing Center for
substitute for Senate Judiciary
substitute.
Representative bill two on final
passage has been taking the
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house.
Senate Bill to delineate Senate
district redistricting based on
the twenty twenty federal
census.
For the past four months the New
Mexico Senate Democrats have
participated and engaged and
this year C. citizens
redistricting committee and have
had various.
Community meetings and
presentations throughout the
states as have areas and and
including Republican members.
These included listening to
public comment and community
members deliberations reviewing
committee Matt concepts provided
in the process.
And analyzing the committee's
work evaluations the bill I have
the bill we have introduced are
introducing today contains much
of the work provided to us by
the committee it also reflects
the diversity of our state fully
recognizes the need of our
native American communities and
protects the many communities of
interest and New Mexico's
borders.
This bill adopts the consensus
now approved by the pueblos
tribal neighbors are hit Correa
and Mescalero Apache cousins of
the Navajo and the Navajo
Nation.
Number one.
If you look at the northeast
region of the map you'll see you
hiding and curry counties.
These counties are largely
agricultural in nature populated
with many ranchers and farmers
as well as the home to the can
canyon airforce base.
The status quo of these counties
maintains with little change.
Number two.
Copulation declines in district
eight if you will note has
proved to be challenging thing
in the district within a
deviation range required other
changes in districts to lose
population and resulted in the
district representing all of the
city of Las Vegas as well as
parts that were in district six.
Number three.
During the CENIC public hearings
it became abundantly clear from
the public's comments that
Senate district thirty nine was
largely representing the
northern areas of New Mexico and
that the seven most County was
largely not within the community
of interest.
Senate Bill to remote removes
Lincoln County from district
thirty nine removing it into
district thirty three.
Number four to accommodate this
loss of population please note
district thirty nine now take
some parts of Santa Fe and the
Eldorado community which are
from district twenty four and
twenty five these changes in the
north east and north Central
District is similar to the CRC
concept C. one man.
This maintains a create and
creates a better boundary for
communities of interest.
Number five.
In the northwest con con
quadrant as I previously stated
native American consensus map
has been adopted by this year C.
in each of their maps.
This is included in the four
substantive.
Native American districts have
in excess of sixty percent
native American population.
This is very important to remain
remain compliant with the
federal voter registration act
district three has the largest
aviation minus six point three
and contains the greater part of
the Navajo Nation lying with in
New Mexico.
Number six districts to the
south is part of the native
American consensus plan.
Number seven.
The seven the southeastern
quadrant not including Dona Ana
County has experienced a
population decline which is
addressed and Senate bill two
with population shifts that
results in Senate district
twenty eight and district forty
five.
Number eight in the Dona Ana
County area district thirty
seven.
Has seen a population increase
that please the district outside
the allowable deviation.
This has been addressed in the
changes in Senate bill two four
substitutes please note district
thirty eight previously divided
the community of Mesilla cilia.
As for this year's the adopted
maps the community has now been.
Entirely in one districts the
community has been placed
entirely in one district.
Nine two counties seen have seen
large population growth and that
put their areas above the ideal
population levels and those are
the Lea and Eddy counties this
has necessitated a population
movement into district thirty
one.
And has resulted in the town of
chaparral with the exception of
two precincts being placed into
district thirty one.
This relieving a large amount
population problem in Eddy and
Lea counties previously
chaparral was divided by the
Otero Donna county line
resulting in half the community
in the district and have been
the other.
And finally number ten moving
into the southeast quadrant of
the state Senate bill deviates
from the C. or C.
recommendations which price
incumbents into one district
district forty two district
forty one into one district
Senate bill two pairs these
incumbents.
In order to address population
loss in district twenty seven
some of the excess population
and Eddy and Lea is moved into
this district.
Mr speaker.
We stand for questions.
Thank you generated there's
debate the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln representative
Nibert.
Mr speaker on a point of order
Speaker of.
I'm new to this my first go to
the redistricting but I have
been told that there is either
some sort of agreement maybe
custom possibly just an
understanding maybe a handshake
between of the two bodies that.
The Senate will not mess with
our plan that we sent over in
life was for the house doesn't
to really mess with the Senate
plan and it sent over and I just
like some clarification on that
point before we engage in the
budget thank you gentlemen
Fund there's no rule for Indian
officials statute anything like
that but it has it's my
understanding that it is been a
tradition in the legislature
since the nineteen sixties when
reapportionment took on its
current form after the one
person one factor based versus
car in nineteen fifties that
that the Senate has not amended
or altered maps reinforcing the
house and that the house is not
altered or amended bills they
reapportioned the Senate so it's
not a rule is nine and
unofficial thing but it is
tradition or custom.
Mr speaker thank you for that
explanation would you call me on
four debate as well at this time
or if you'd like to.
I will like to take this
opportunity from Mr speaker and.
The gentle lady from McKinley
County you'll.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady following up on a
lot of questions of the I had
with respect to the helps
redistricting plans at least
doing.
Committee and also on the floor
with respect to the.
Of congressional map if what are
the compelling factors that went
into the creation of this map.
Thank you Mr speaker and
Mr gentleman.
The compound would you repeat
that again please.
yes Mr speaker and highlight any
of.
In previous testimony we heard
the the for for one map we have
one compelling issue that was
addressed I think it was trying
to do communities of interest
together.
On another map we have a
compelling interest of having
three
competitive districts are try to
create three competitive
districts and my my question is
what are the compelling factors
that went into the creation of
this map as of the same.
Efforts are what what were the
compelling factors for this map.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
From being compelling factors
and process I believe is that
the redistricting for our the
C. R. C. principles of
redistricting I visiting and
presenting to the communities in
the districts throughout the
state and receiving testimony
and reviewing their districts.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
I understand your testimony
correctly were compelling factor
is following with the C. R.
seated.
Is that how I would interpret
your language or.
With a reasonable interpretation
of what you just stated Mr
speaker and gentleman yes
following this year C..
Process and the principles.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
that one of the factors that
This body.
Has appeared to or is required
to adhere to under any statute
or court decision.
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
not a court decision however I
can it is it was following this
year C. process.
I believe the call for map so
we've now considered to have
their genesis certainly some
basically in that process with
respect to two other maps and
came before this body.
Of there was a concerted effort
by this body to make sure that
communities of interest were
protected we sat was a testimony
I could certainly argue against
that but that was a testimony.
With respect to the
Additional maps the.
Compelling.
Factor was to try to create
three competitive districts and
certainly communities of
interest is.
Is of interest and and maybe
even a factor in in re
districting although if I
understand law correctly maybe
further down the line.
creating competitive districts I
don't know that that.
Even rises to the level of
compelling but that's what was
stated so the there's really.
Other than trying to do with the
C. or C. do there's no other
compelling factors that went
into the creation of these maps
is as I understand your
testimony so funny else's
question Mr speaker
intelligence.
Was this map approved by the
citizens redistricting
committee.
Mr speaker and kind gentlemen
no.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is compelling reason for this
math.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
What is the.
The reason that this map the
point from the C. or C. diff.
Reason to have this map was from
the fall of the state or city.
Mr speaker and gentleman server
for you the answer with the
gentleman from linseed
Representative Baldonado the
house rules that infinite option
require folks on the floor to
where a.
Ask the covers your nose and
mouth would you please do so or
exit the for.
The generate.
would you please continue.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman what the Senate did
regarding Senate bill two less
follow the CENIC principles and
process for redistricting.
And.
Sixty eight percent of the CRC
maps are included in the Senate
floor substitutes at that point
they came back and incorporated
in their native American
consensus map.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm not familiar with the.
Northwest New Mexico for the Rio
Grande Valley I am familiar with
southeast New Mexico.
I can tell you that there are
lines changed on this map.
That did not come from the C. R.
C. process.
And some of those involved
Senator but districts in
southeast New Mexico so I'm
wondering.
How those came to be.
We're following the state or
city maps and even giving credit
for of the Indian nations tribes
or pueblos of million of
adjusted some of those lines is
certain explanation for the.
and kind gentleman so if you
look at you look at the map with
me and you look at southeast New
Mexico that area stayed almost
the same.
And the ships were based on the
northwest New Mexico area
because of the population
change.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
I would I would argue that I
would say that some of the lines
were changed to protect
incumbents and I didn't know if
that was a compelling reason or
not it certainly wasn't
something.
This body did the other night.
In fact we do the exact opposite
we refuse to protect an income
but.
Yeah I believe that this map is
drawn in part to protect income
and see if
let me get to the crux of of my
concern.
Only with respect to the Senate
map but it goes back to the
house map from and I ran out
before I have the opportunity to
to today but as I look at the
numbers so look at the deviation
numbers with respect to the
Senate map and as I look at the
deviation numbers with respect
to the house then.
The Asian numbers reflect the
entire quadrant of the state of
New Mexico.
Is.
Under the ideal population by a
significant amount.
In the house.
For the northwest corner of the
state and Sanders seventeen
thousand people from the ideal
population the northwest corner
is under over seventeen thousand
people from the ideal population
I run the numbers in the Senate
map.
But I know if you look at the
Senate districts one two three
four twenty two thirty which
largely comprise of northwest
corner of the state each of
those districts have significant
deviations to the negative side
of from the ideal population but
I suspect we're going to see if
I current cell numbers before
going to cities of similar.
issue rise and that is northwest
quadrant of the State.
Has less people than the ideal
would show which means in
layman's terms the northwest
corner of the state is over
represented in this body and if
we passes map the Senate as well
for them the other three
quarters of the of the state and
so each of the other districts
have to me make up that
deviation so on the on the
Senate side of we're trying.
For those negative deviation is
six point nine percent.
If I read the if I read the
Information correctly
On the house side it was six
point eight or six point nine
percent
that is the crux of what really
concerns me is that we for not
taking one distribution and and
deviating
to adjust for certain conditions
in meeting county lines maybe
some natural monuments or what
have you for taking an entire
quarter the state.
Can providing very significant
deviation to the court of the
state that allows it to be over
represented the rest of the
state would then be under
represented and regionally
that's a concern and I think
it's a concern the the without
all the
not only because of some of of
four dollars also
Concerned about that as well.
Because of the purpose of
redistricting is to try to do
our best recognizing that there
needs to be some deviation but
to try to do our best to have
one person one vote.
In need of the house map.
Nor the Senate map.
Truly reflects a good effort in
that regard and that is the crux
of of my concern has been the
crux of my concern throughout
the this redistricting process
and so everybody in the state of
New Mexico need some of that
these plans.
The house plan and the Senate
plan both.
Find for deviations that few of
populations in the northwest
corner so that they are over
represented in the other three
quarters of the state of their
by under represented because I
have to make up that deviations
from Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you for this opportunity
to ask you a few questions about
this map
and that's the conclusion of our
remarks Mr speaker may.
Make a comment.
Respond to his
can I go back to your concern
regarding the southeast corner
of the map I just want to
mention to you that this year
see maps had income pen
income been spared in that area
in the Four substitute now has
no more pairings in that area
and then also regarding the
northwest part of New Mexico
there was an undercount and we
had to be in compliance with the
voting rights act that was
contemplated by the CRC and as a
result had tribal consensys in
northwest quadrant which
required and SS attainted some
adjustments Mr speaker thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
glad you brought that up.
This body earlier last week.
Made a decision not to worry
about those things in fact my
district.
District fifty nine.
Moves from one can County
imported Chavis County in the
Travis county alone and it bears
me with the gentleman that sits
on this floor today.
We as a body did not.
Worry about some of those things
we.
We didn't even.
Address those issues.
Now all the sudden it's
important on the Senate map.
And you're using that as a
reason why of this map brought
the film for us and and so you
have a they parenting comments
and I would say they protected
income that's found that
something that this.
Body.
Absolutely refuse to do this I a
huge increase for for the most
senior member on certainly this
side of the aisle happens it
behind me the gentle lady from
from Santa Fe County.
And we refuse to do that.
As we refuse to to protect.
One member one senior member of
this house.
Because of an apparent
compelling reason.
To.
Communities of interest and tax.
That was a statement made on
the.
On the floor here last week.
Yet we have a situation.
Where we refuse to do the the
work knowledge and that phone
moves on the Senate side and so
I just point those things out
because.
I
things that seem to be important
in one instance are totally
unimportant in the next instance
and it's happened at least three
times in the past week and a
half.
Three times.
We're changing what's important
to this body when we've done
three separate redistricting
plans and that in and of itself
is a concern to me currently is
not a concern of this body but
it's a concern to me thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
for that opportunity Madam okay
there's a generous for the
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from McKinley County yield.
Mr speaker I you.
Mr speaker gentle lady actually
want to continue on the
discussion
about the pairing of candidates
that was brought up I believe
you brought it up initially and
and Senator Representative
Nibert to continue but
in the end of the Mr speaker and
gentle lady the counting of
candidates in the Senate did
that apply to all senators or is
there still pairing in the
Senate maps.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman there is one pairing
invalid Lynsey County.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady is at the pairing between
two Republican senators.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle here both of
those gentleman Hispanic
Republicans.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
have.
One thing that has been
consistent and it's the only
thing that's been consistent in
the debate on any of these maps.
Is the debate over concerns of
keeping together communities of
interest.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Are Hispanic.
Concerns are there is that I
know we have this today.
The house of one on one our
House maps with forward and also
in the congressional maps went
forward.
but Hispanic communities of
interest.
there are there was discussions
where.
Hispanic populations were used
in one way and then when
The the the maps that were
presented by the majority used
with Hispanic.
populations in a different way.
But in each case the discussion
of keeping Hispanic communities
of interest.
Full.
was a consistent theme that is
one thing that I I must say.
To some degree there was at
least a lip service paid to that
discussion.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
In the maps that then the map
that was created and has this
was substituted on the Senate
floor.
I would have to ask how many
Hispanic majority Senate
districts are in the map before
us today Mr speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the map before us has
fifteen Hispanic.
Districts.
Thank you Mr speaker and gently
I I would agree with that mass.
there weren't maps that were
presented by the citizen
redistricting committee that
were sent.
To the Senate for consideration.
Mr speaker and gentle lady some
of those maps have nineteen.
Hispanic.
major districts.
And then the discussion on the
Senate floor.
Senate Republicans.
What happened was one of those.
there was I believe no pairing
in those maps of senators.
Why.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
you say that.
For whatever reason the Hispanic
communities of interests.
At least in the Senate.
For whatever reason lost
importance
Why would you do you believe
that is the case and the speaker
gently.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The.
The Senate did not use all of
the C. Garcia
Processes so the inclusion of
the native American map includes
portions of west Valencia
County.
And for district twenty nine.
There is still majority Hispanic
at fifty four point eight
percent.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
I guess that maybe a little more
specific.
I would choose that.
More simply.
We did and we did not decide to
continue with with pursuing
nineteen.
Expanding Shorty districts.
What was the what was the
reasoning very specifically.
For diluting the Hispanic
communities of interest voting.
strength.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Currently there are sixteen.
And we are proposing fifteen.
And so it is still based on the.
Southeast.
Population.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
The CSE maps as I understood
that that the two that came out
of up both protected native
American voting interests and
kept and actually gained.
Representation.
For Hispanic communities of
interest I'm I'm just wondering
why.
The decision was made to to not
keep Hispanic communities of
interest as a priority.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The Hispanic communities where
considered.
Priority and in the original
Senate bill sixty two three
sixteen and and then met in the
Senate bill is now fifteen.
Based on the.
Changes in southeast New Mexico
population and the population
throughout New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
If anyone listen to the debate
on the Senate side.
Someone who's not a Republican
has been affected a former
Democrat.
Mon the fact.
That there chamber in an effort.
To pander to one gentleman I
want to just we we really don't
discussed the other chamber when
we debate here
that did not we did not receive
that courtesy last night from
the Senate but we should follow
that here and not refer to the
proceedings in the chamber refer
to the floor debate elsewhere
it's Gee it's been a long
tradition that that we refer
not to motives into things that
are
behind a vote or if the
statement and so I just want to.
Mind the members that we're
going to use the focus on the
legislation before us and not
characterize or or risk casting
aspersions on the motives of
other legislators why they may
or may not have cast voter made
a statement.
and I actually disagree with
what you're saying here for
years Mr speaker I stood on this
side of the aisle and have
heard.
My fellow Republicans and and
our motives be disparaged
particularly on race Mr speaker
I'm gonna take the same liberty
but to not disparage but to
quote all I was going to do is
quote in debate and Mr speaker
that does happen throughout this
body and that's all I was going
to do is quote Senator.
On the other side.
Senator
this is the first time it's been
before this this body this
particular map and the debate on
that side is important I don't
have to back off of that though
Mr speaker if if that's what
you're suggesting I can just
reiterate my own terms because I
agree with that Senator
basically said that we are going
to be.
You're choosing that we have
made a choice.
The choice is to silence more
Hispanic voices on purpose Mr
speaker I believe I made that
same.
Assertion on this floor.
Several days before the point of
order personal privilege.
That spandex in the state have
long been.
As adding to the culture.
And for whatever reason Mr
speaker.
Despite what the Civil Rights
Act efforts.
Fifties and sixties produced
which was to do away with
segregation to do away with.
Trying to throw away with
keeping of the lines of
demarcation between people's.
a priority because it used to be
the priority of a different
group of people to keep those
lines of demarcation in place.
Speaker one's.
During this session.
Has been.
Of.
As we heard maps can.
And then one was able to come in
and say we're going to make
changes Mr speaker I believe I
have a little bit of leeway to
speak on this because I.
Of support.
A a native counseled my wife and
children.
Our native.
My wife and children are Navajo.
I worked for years on the Navajo
reservation and the folks that I
fought for and previous
arguments on previous
legislation are my Navajo
coworkers and friends people
that I.
Are still my friends.
And I seen the process that took
place in the Senate.
I'm actually.
I'm actually in west of the work
that they did compared to what
actually we start to at least a
priority on the side one.
Which was we're not going to
mess with anything I didn't I
didn't care for we try to make
some changes Mr speaker
obviously.
But Mr speaker.
I am the one process that would
say the same in both chambers
was of.
Was able to come in.
And make changes.
Despite the concerns of every
other community of interest
that's a problem.
And that's the problem with this
and that.
Mr speaker.
And gentle lady.
The questions I was asking was
and I don't think you can get to
that even though I I do believe
you're expert witness is a
member of the other chamber.
I don't expect you to be able to
tell me what their reasoning was
behind at least a true.
Reasoning that everyone could
actually understand that would
make sense just logically
politically it makes perfect
sense logically it doesn't.
Considering the specifically
that.
On the other.
Side said that they were gonna
be no pairings of.
the sitting senators Mr speaker
point of order.
State your point.
and gentleman
pursuant to Mason's section one
twenty two one twenty four you
Mr speaker gentleman impugned
the motives or even gas at the
motives of other members in
particularly not of the other
house and what the what the
Senate did.
The other night.
Important particularly on the
other side of the aisle
impugning the motives of members
of this body offender staff is
what happens when you start to
cross that line construction
passion in the motives of our
colleagues and our staff that is
inappropriate and Mr speaker
objectivity should not be doing
it thank you Mr speaker thank
you chairman.
Speaker I would hope that the
leaders.
Committee in.
Hold that line during every
session.
And when this side of the aisle
is being impuned and battery Mr
speaker it has not been a rare
occasion for yes yes for the
other body to mention what
happened in the other chamber Mr
speaker asking a question just
let me point out you're free to
make your points I think your
points your opinions are we're
all happy and happy to hear your
views you can make your points
without.
Violating section one twenty two
one twenty four masons just
don't talk about the Senate it's
very simple make your points
about the maps make your points
that are here but we saw
something in a recess on the
side where Hey we with the.
I mean.
It's a very simple thing to say
to wrongs don't make a right
okay so if if something is
happening the past if if.
Neither others had made the
point you know decide to one
twenty two one twenty four
masons.
In a they had an opportunity to
they didn't do it I can't say
why or why they didn't but I can
see now several times I've asked
you just as a matter of decorum
and as a matter complies with me
since that we keep the debate on
the legislation before us that
would be my preference and.
Please generated here by just.
Try to in this special session
on a collegial no.
And we can do so by staying
focused on the bill and by
letting us know your views on it
and by asking questions of the
for Sanchez.
Thank you.
Mr speaker.
I would ask that this be if this
is going to be the decision
because it's not this has not
been the practice in the past.
But if this is going to be the
practice going forward I would
ask the committee to hold this
during we have an upcoming
thirty day session and I ask
that that.
Being continued in the body
perfectly fine the idea Mr
speaker is the the the the
changes post throughout the
session have have caused our
heads to spend a little bit on
the side so Mister speaker and
gentle lady I will continue with
exactly.
Where I'm going and that is my
opinion on the matter.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
With this bill.
Where we are today.
Senator populations across the
state do have to wonder.
What we do wrong.
Spending populations.
Have I believe.
This past tried to eliminate.
The.
Divide.
Between themselves and native
American populations everyone
knows the history our history is
our history.
But to to to to on one hand
every day.
Coming
to this chamber.
Recite a pledge.
To the the as we salute the flag
of New Mexico and then we have
the words in it.
Resistible.
A perfect friendship among
United cultures.
I don't know Mr speaker.
And gentle lady going forward
that we can actually recite that
flag.
Recite that salute.
Because it does appear.
That we've done.
In this legislature.
Is to further divide.
And that is not the work and Mr
speaker.
I I briefly mentioned in the
past.
My family's involvement in the
civil right movement for civil
rights movement.
Anybody who remembers the name
of HSD had enough.
Remembers what happened in the
courthouse at the end of money
on.
One of the people who are.
Tenants let's say of HSD had you
know was my uncle's of they'll
they'll does she was in jail
with crystal do have you know
when that took place thousand
Mexico civil rights movement.
What I see happening Mr speaker
is a in trading on that Mr
speaker we continue to go down
this road.
What I see happening is similar
to what happened.
In I believe that was in
nineteen sixty five.
When that happened at the Rio
Arriba courthouse.
So.
More than anything this is a.
Warning this is a warning to
this body.
That.
I don't believe the folks who
still have that memory.
Are going to be happy with the
work that this legislature's
done.
I don't think we should be
happy.
Has been very specific for
political purposes not for
governing our populace.
And.
As I stated earlier.
I think if you are Hispanic with
certain values.
You have a target on your back.
And I would say have Mister
speaker.
Something that there was a
phrase that my parents used all
the time.
And it was embarassing inside.
Sen but once a has several
different meanings the literal
translation is without shame Mr
speaker.
Senator once a.
My mom was watching I Love Lucy
and and and this is something
ridiculous Muhammad laugh and
Thor had vaccines at once a.
Servicing.
That term was used to us in our
in our family.
We have tried or challenge.
To.
The little better.
And it was C. in translated so
much and have any pride it could
be don't you have any shame it
could be shame on you.
It could be
You're bringing investment on
the family.
Mr speaker.
I believe.
The statement to this
legislature what we've done this
year is that once a.
Hold on to anything that was
important to our forefathers.
There anything that our parents
taught us that is worth keeping
hold of Mr speaker what I see is
virtually everything.
That my parents taught me is
under attack.
Self reliance pride.
For yourself.
Property ownership and gun
ownership freedom.
Family.
This is what I was taught.
Yeah.
And in reality Mr speaker and
when I when I joined the
Republican Party.
First one in my family was not
the last one.
What I told them was don't be
upset with me for being a
Republican these values you
taught me no longer valued.
In my in my parents party at
that time.
The African American community
in the state of New Mexico is
referred to as others.
I'm actually.
Disappointed.
We've seen is.
Minorities.
Thanks.
Native American African American
on this side.
Have been under assault they've
been challenged it's one thing
to have a voice if you're a
minority it's another thing to
have a voice as a minority that
doesn't reflect the leadership.
Of the Democrat party which is
progressive.
Whether you're a Democrat or
Republican your voice is not
valued.
As a matter of fact your voice
in many instances has to be
eliminated.
And that's what we've seen over
the last several years.
So Mister speaker.
I I just would like to.
Again conclude not necessarily
with a question just a
statement.
To this body.
And that is simply to words.
Seeing that once a.
There's further debate the
gentleman just on the point of
personal privilege for me.
On behalf of the house of your
listing on the point of personal
privilege for me I value your
voice.
And you're not being silenced
and we're glad the participate
in the debate gentleman from
Bernalillo Sandoval thank you
for the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan yield
Mister speaker I yield to my
good friend and colleague.
Thank you gentle lady let me see
if I can start with a little bit
of what we've done because
there's been a lot of I think
Miss information on the history
of the maps so let's start with
that and I wanted to see if I
can fluctuate from my own mind.
So I can remember having been up
some long nights what happened.
so we start with.
The house.
And gentle lady I I think you'll
recall.
That.
We.
Senate bill three oh four.
Which was sponsored by both
Republicans and Democrats.
That set up the citizens
redistricting committee.
The citizens redistricting
committee had a process whereby
they presented us three maps.
Senate and house.
Members and PC.
That they wouldn't look at
partisan data.
They would then be taken public
testimony.
They would go around the state
enough hearings as I recall
there were twenty three hearings
that were conducted over eight
hundred people testified.
Come back with maps.
They're they're not value waited
independently.
On the basis of whether those
partisan feelings about whether
they're favoring Republicans
for Democrats
Mr speaker gentle lady recall
that process.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
thank you so that with respect
to the House maps and by the way
all of these maps so we're clear
got eighties in terms of some
fairness.
So in terms of those maps when
it came to the house maps
according to the legislation
that we passed.
The C. R. C.'s work was done
once they completed their maps
and it presented them to the
export and then provided a
reports legislature under
legislation that we all agree to
what was most of us I think it
was unanimous all agreed.
That was going to end their
function do you recall that Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentleman yes that what happened
with respect to the house maps
with justice Chavez who we all
recall chaired the committee and
the commissioners said we have
these three maps for the house.
Level of math.
We have a Navajo man.
We have what was gently called
the people's maps all of which
the committee looked at reviewed
to testimony on an approved
center professor control for the
independent analysis and so
we're done except that justice
Chavez in the commission said
we've given the story maps.
Because the tribal interests
could not reach consensus so
even though our work is done
your work is not done to member
that Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman yes so now
it goes to our body so we are
now charged with according to
the committee.
To try and work out a tribal
consensus.
Only frankly with the leadership
of the speaker.
Out injecting his views but
simply being the mediator to get
these interests together.
The tribes in a historic first.
A consensus and I say it that
way because we used their
consensus rather than imposing
our own.
Do you remember that Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman
absolutely and so we decided all
right before going to get away
from the C. R. C. maps we have
to have a compelling reason and
the compelling reason in that
case with respect to the house
maps was provided to us by the
CRC because I specifically said
we can't do this to.
It that was a compelling reason
for the house do you recall that
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker gentleman yes and then
with respect to the
congressional maps this would be
my recollections right Senate
bill one so with respect to the
congressional maps again they
gave us three maps.
And they all received proportion
information and their work was
done in the presented those maps
to us.
Our job wasn't done because when
we look at the maps as a body
what we realized was they had
other problems they had created.
Very districts consolidated
graphics each any solid
Republican seat so the
compelling interest we announced
for us not to make them
competitive but to give voters a
real choice.
So that if you were a Democrat
and Republican district board
vice versa.
Thank you wouldn't think just
going into the ballot box and
throwing away your vote because
it was a solid Republican or
solid democratic district we're
going to have a real choice
because all three of the
districts are now going to be
more competitive and that we
announced as a compelling reason
to remember that Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman yes so now when we
finally after all of this kind
of my recollection is now being
refresh of the history lesson we
get to the Senate.
And the same thing of course
that tribal interests had not
reached a consensus and wall I
am not an expert on the Senate
maps as I understand Mr speaker
gentle lady from your testimony
that for your presentation to
the compelling reason in this
case was really once again to
incorporate tribal consensus on
to these maps and one
understanding that all Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes so
in effect what we've done is
we've done very historic things
great things for the state.
One of the very first time.
We have handed off what is
traditionally been a legislative
function and through the
leadership of both parties.
We have said we trust our
citizens.
To call out.
In the form consensus on what
they think the maps look like in
totally open hearings with
everybody allowed to come.
With with the open discussion at
the end of valuation for
partisan fairness so that we're
not gerrymandering the
districts.
And what we need to.
Was it temps gerrymandered
districts both on the Senate and
house side the we rejected those
attempts.
Wondering what everybody that we
created by said that correctly
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman yes and so
the other thing we've done.
It is totally destroyed.
Our power and saying in effect
we want people to look at this
we're not gonna give away which
is why.
I still want to be able to have
the ability to for example
consider things of the committee
couldn't consider giving people
a real choice that seems fair
but we also have said for the
very first time.
We really on the.
For tribal citizens.
That's not just words anymore.
It inception.
We actually said we're not going
to just talk.
Those days are over.
We're going to do something
substantive we're gonna really
resonating with that we're going
to do with we're going to put it
on of these maps and isn't that
what we did with respect to the
Senate maps Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman
yes so Mister speaker gentle
lady I just want to confirm
about telling you and I seen the
Senators sitting there
I am of this body and frankly
the both chambers.
For having done something two
things that are just
extraordinary and I stand in
full support of Senate bill two
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much thank you gentlemen is
further debate the gentleman
from affects more Rio Arriba and
San Miguel Representative Roger
Montoya.
Mr speaker thank you with the
gentle lady from some from
McKinley County as you.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague.
Thank you.
A rising in pride in full
support is Senate bill two.
At an inflection point in the
state.
Of making history.
To give.
The gratitude that
Representative Figueroa and
Representative Dow.
For inspiring us to create this
construct the citizens
redistricting committee.
The trouble consensus maps in
story.
As the last three weeks with our
native American brothers and
sisters with my complete hard to
open.
As a he's elected is the sole.
And all of these identities
identities are important.
But what's most important vote
as brief as possible.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
What's most important as we get
to the work of the people.
Our state is so challenge some
challenge and in need of a
United work.
Urges all to move forward.
It was of
Republican or Democrat or to
whatever.
Mr Chairman is.
The server which is a wonderful
state.
Prosperous if we bring a hard.
Back to the center.
The nation is watching.
And I rise again in.
Insincere pride at this body.
Thank you for having.
The humble experience of
participating at this critical
juncture in our history to some
of us has a problems and thank
you.
The gentleman there's further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
Mr calling from McKinley yield.
Mr speaker I yield to my good
colleague thank you Mr leader
from McKinley.
Rise and to speak about these
maps first however we looked at
and we'll kind of look in our
neck of the woods this I think
the the sponsored her tremendous
leadership on these issues and
managing forty one colleagues.
As well as all the neighborhoods
on the tribal members and just
want to commend her for all of.
Some questions specifically.
In Albuquerque's westside north
valley because it's a very
unorthodox things Mr speaker
gently from McKinley.
Years ago the US population
demanded a new website
sentencing.
It meant that we made it to the
judge on the house side was that
through the river.
Is buttressed by an eight
hundred foot.
A beautiful mess
Devise a north valley on the
west side from Alameda to
central and so.
It was first traded on the house
side to use that as a boundary
thus forcing the website to
obtain two new house seats.
Judge was not compelled to do it
on the Senate side for whatever
reason and so.
Instead of an entire website see
coming over from this.
Well it was like ninety ten
ninety percent was a ten percent
north valley.
From the public school board
uses the river as a boundary
which of us gave us a brand new.
The school board seat we would
not have gotten on the west side
the city council also uses the
river as a boundary.
Which because of the population
growth on the west side forced a
new policy on the website so
these were done ten years ago.
And here last week on the county
commission on the Senate those
ten years ago and essentially.
And.
Rates that that injustice for
for another decade.
But having said that the the
sentencing.
Added a brand new website
hosting and I and I would come
in some matters because that it
was elected.
I was elected you know we.
Previous districts matter.
Incumbency matters.
and so I respect that but my
question is on on.
I'm looking on the page
Albuquerque metro and then you
flip it over and says I have a
projection Weston does have a
page number Mr speaker doing
but.
The reasoning in the north
valley.
Historically has used north
south boundaries central for you
a on the value of the rules.
Fund Tanya Paseo what the
Senate.
Choose to divide the north east
west instead of north south.
from committee and district ten.
Which is west.
And then district thirteen.
Which is east to the north
valley districts.
Mr speaker and gentlemen so it
started in the west side.
And the website has a new
district which is Senate
district twelve.
So Senate district twelve was
removed from the downtown
Albuquerque area to the west
side to accommodate the
population grows in Rio Rancho.
Only from the committee question
about and that's the reason
district and moved east instead
of west but it doesn't answer
the question as to why district
ten isn't north and fifteen
south.
I was just curious about that
and apparently there there was
no answer
I just curious about that
because historically house
districts.
Another city council districts
that isn't always north south
and now it's counties where
some.
So it it might be good because
then you do single town homes
and you can incorporate this
into one single neighborhood.
And.
And and I I want to commend the
regional from on the committee
that twenty five north of the
from away from the fruit of the
county line is now and that's
very important we learned on the
house side how difficult it was
for.
I see two police tonight twenty
five so that's great that you
guys were able to make five
twenty five of them very.
And.
Look at the intersection if you
look at
The west which is kind of a.
Look at would.
Ten and twenty from need to Mr
speaker.
All it is a.
This is a major Sandoval county
Bernalillo county some.
Nine is is a great is a great
district because it but this is
one of several County from the
river all the way to the
mountains that.
It's it's much more compact and
much more manageable was.
And then ten.
Goes west of the intersection of
arms of the north west seven
north northwest.
That intersection and and what's
needed to look at all the little
lines all.
Houses stores and economy
commerce and then you see
section said that have no lines
wishes during.
Mr.
Intersection of ensemble of
northwest so in order to
provide.
It should be completed within
ten fifteen years ago.
They're such a mystery from
McKinley than.
Every.
People section and one day one
day and live.
Every single town in the state
with the exception of.
So that intersection it has not
been completed this is not been
prioritized.
On.
When it is completed hopefully
with the money and the.
The money we have in our coffers
that intersection will be fully
completed because they all that
land around it.
Winds around it which will
indicate Commerce.
Kani's new businesses new
stores.
And businesses small businesses.
And.
I would
My point is is that section.
Doesn't have is not part of the
district is not part of a
district is the is the boundary
of three districts are one of
two things can happen because it
and and all and all of those in
a moment of joy from committee
is this ten years China has done
to raise.
Packing.
Our staff.
And cracking that's how you do
it.
Everybody in the same district.
The power given only one
district.
And that's called packing.
Is Your divided Committee or you
divide a constituent group of
the divide.
you know members of a similar
communities that's what's
happening throughout the south.
Is that you
you can crack democratic
strongholds or American
strongholds this was this was a
intentions because.
But it may have the same result.
There's no will whatsoever but.
That intersection and that part
of town three times the most of.
No.
No there's nobody to grab.
That.
Fastest growing region in the
state that region doesn't the
state will not go.
The.
The.
And that on those district
management of joy from committee
these districts do not come into
effect January first twenty
twenty five.
Totals on the Representative
areas Representative the twenty
twenty census continue to be
underrepresented five years into
the decade.
So that are.
Colleagues and I have the
current district the district
that they were elected to
represent.
You know in in the in the spring
and summer of twenty four than
the shift gears.
To the to the future district
From Canada from.
It's made last night
that the Senate did
incorporating.
The recommendations of the CDC
those arguments.
On its.
As it relates to the west side
of Albuquerque in which the
Senate just rejected
categorically rejected.
the CDC recommendations and the
neighborhood recommendations
that the the CDC heard it just
means a high school.
When we come to the website to
listen to the neighborhood so.
We cannot continue to Senator
Woods.
And here with the state because
they.
Constituents.
And and we need to respond to
our friends our supporters.
to represent our constituents
and
But we just continue to get
better at doing that thank you
Mr speaker gentle lady from
McKinley.
Thank you generous further
debate the gentleman from Chavis
any other terror Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady of.
Mr speaker I yield.
Committee a lot said today.
Been lost said for the last
three four days.
And the frustration I think this
issue.
We all feel.
Is
Coming to a tipping point.
Of the lady do you believe that
every vote.
In the Mexico is equal.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
The gentle lady.
One of the big deviation.
The deviations.
Quite frankly the the more
strings and those that are under
represented.
And.
Less than those with higher
populations can you.
Make me feel.
Thank you believe that every
vote is equal when you're Bill
proposes.
quite the opposite.
In my opinion.
Mr speaker kind gentlemen Senate
bill two is the people's map and
it reflects the demographic
realities of our state now.
And this is the need to ensure
that New Mexico's diverse
communities including are
Hispanic and native Americans
all have a seat at the table.
One of the vote.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's an interesting comment.
The parliamentarian a few
minutes ago.
Said these maps came from the
citizens redistricting committee
back to the legislature.
And the
He said the speaker
I'm not sure who did a lot
of he said that there were two
meetings with the tribal
communities.
And that they were found by us
and they were just to try to get
a consensus is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
the.
Pueblos the patches and the
Navajos.
Had input and then redistricting
maps.
We'll
make Intel lady.
None of us.
That I'm aware of.
Were allowed to participate in
those meetings how do you know
they were not done so and
lastly.
Mr speaker gentlemen this year
CRC held committee meetings
redistricting map committee
sessions throughout the state.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we're
talking about meetings that
happened outside of those
meetings.
We're talking about meetings
that happened after the citizens
redistricting committee.
How do I help my supposed to
know.
For the.
Those were held in an unbiased
fashion.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Pueblos and tribes have inherent
powers of self government.
And these were tribal government
to government meetings regarding
the redistricting maps.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
have county commissions city
councils we have state Rep we
have state senators we have
mayors we have you know the list
goes on and on but none of those
were included in those where
they.
Mr speaker kind gentleman an
example in McKinley county house
district I our county
commissioners met with the
Navajo Nation inner city council
met with the Navajo Nation to
align the county boundaries with
the precinct boundaries.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
said at the beginning of this of
that we believe that every of
was all.
And that every of whether they
were.
of one community of interest or
another for the they were of one
race or another or where they
were one political party or
another.
And but that's not what
happened.
And so Mr speaker and gentle
lady I'm trying I mean I just
think.
I think we dismiss the bill of
sale I mean we have changed the
rules on almost every match.
We talked about.
How important it is that we.
A poll this process.
We have talked about how
important it is that we
protection from communities of
interest.
We have talked about how
important it is that the native
population.
Is Representative.
We have discounted.
The.
Has been in populations by our
own admittance something
everybody can see the the
numbers.
And so it it has caused me.
The problem with this question
of gentle lady do you believe
that these this body.
Has reviews each of these maps.
And and equitable fashion.
Mr speaker kind gentlemen.
I will have to say again that
the CRC held redistricting
committee meetings.
And the public was invited they
were healthy as soon as far away
as.
In rural communities such as
Crown Point New Mexico.
People had an opportunity to
attend in view and participate
in it in as many meetings that
they could.
And the only the appreciate that
but the fact is the
congressional maps or not a.
Citizens redistricting committee
met.
Principal.
I.
Also it is fact.
That this body these seventy
members or however many here on
Monday.
We look at these maps.
Through a different lens almost
every day.
One day.
We were all about citizens
redistricting.
The next day we change bill
posted we say it's about
communities of interest the next
day it just goes on and on.
So I do not believe that we
have.
Sarah Lee looked at these maps
under the same millions of.
And I believe that we should.
We should all take.
Some.
Reservations about than that.
Gentle lady.
With the maps is a hard and been
wrong.
Can you believe that the maps
that you are proposing today
find every voter in the state
equal representation.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
The lady.
We talk we have divided.
Communities of interest I mean.
It has gone on and on I mean
My friend from Bernalillo talked
about cracking.
The process of gerrymandering
and cracking and that is exactly
what happened in southeast New
Mexico.
We went in.
And split communities of
interest.
Right down main street.
And we said no but that we need
to do that.
Carella.
We use the different plans we
said all we can do that up
there.
In the in the northwest.
We.
Allowed the districts to be so
big.
To encompass.
Certain communities of interest.
Those communities.
Those smaller in population.
Had.
A Representative representing a
smaller body giving them.
A much more powerful.
I think we missed the bill post
there.
I.
The lady that.
This is a difficult process.
I saw when we started this
citizens.
Redistricting idea.
That we would have a third
party.
Look at this statistically try
to square things make.
Bank of.
Communities of interest hold on
hold we didn't do that.
I thought that there would be
less I always know there's going
to be gerrymandering I think we
all the.
But I thought that would be
less.
I don't think we did that.
I'm still.
Really concerned what we have
done to.
Members of this body who is
served for years and years
and we just kind of turned a
cold shoulder to we're not even
going to care about it.
Some young lady and I.
In the process.
Could have been much better.
I think we could re we could
have.
Because many of the questions
that I have another members on
both sides of the aisle have of
these meetings with the tribal
community and others.
Had they been more open and
inclusive.
Where there they could of the on
the record.
For they could have been put on
the web yes even if we didn't
get a chance to say our two
cents the people have the
ability to go back and look at
him and say okay.
I see it that's the way it was
done but gentle lady on this
matter.
that is being proposed in the
Senate and I know you're just
hearing it for the Senate and I
appreciate that.
But I don't think it serves
Building sound policy.
And a better New Mexico my.
A
friend volunteer said we are at
a tipping point.
And I would remind the body
that.
In many instances.
We're already at the bottom of
the barrel.
I was hoping for the opportunity
to climb out of it and I don't
believe these masks or the
mouse.
Presented in the house certainly
not the maps.
Of the.
Draw congressional districts
it's just pure political
gerrymandering and it's
It is in my opinion doesn't
serve this body or the state
will.
Speaker gentle lady thank you.
Thank you chairman this further
debate the gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew and
there's been a request for folks
to move their jackets that is
just fine.
Thank you Mr speaker the
scintillating from McKinley and
San Juan county.
Mr speaker I yield.
Mr speaker I debated.
All night long and whether or
not I wanted to talk today.
And
On the on the edge of.
What I should say here because
I'm confused and.
I look.
Back to the time that I decided
to run for this office and.
The amount of excitement Mr
speaker and gentle lady that I
had.
Who is the prospect Mr speaker
of being able to.
Support and defend and I for.
Finally getting constituents.
Sen only counting way of life.
Mr speaker and gentle lady since
I've been here.
I had the displeasure of of.
Witnessing and continual
onslaught of the tax.
On the.
The the the I represent an
industry.
It makes.
Our state our country in this
world go round.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
As we came into this week I
have.
I.
There would be an open debate
and discussion with respect to.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
maps.
And how each of our communities
are truly representative and
that we would be able to have an
open discussion.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
I'm saying with the exception of
what I watched last night.
Sen the complete office.
President of open discussion
there's no.
Opportunity to give proper
defense.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
our communities.
And I say that Mr speaker and
say that gentle lady because of
the very specifically because.
If the man have come in from the
C. R. C. and those maps for the
been debated.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Members of this house.
Those map for the maps that we
debated.
I would say that everybody in
the state Mr speaker and gentle
lady had the opportunity to
speak if they chose not to then
they didn't.
What happened Mr speaker and
this all happened gentle lady.
This game is the maps.
In this amount for changed.
The staff for change but people
outside of this organization.
Outside of this body outside of
the of the body.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
communities were for by that.
We separated communities of
interest even though we debated
last week with respect to house
bill eight it was specific for
communities of interest.
Really
accurate.
Mr speaker gentle lady members
of this house we.
In.
Bring in a congressional map.
Think it's changed.
Because.
It's not competitive enough.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
members in this house then we
bring in this bill today.
With a whole different concept
of provided are incumbents.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
just totally confused and those
are the as I go through this.
Hi.
I have tried to been asked by
members of my community Mr
speaker gentle lady.
To defend but the south is doing
and I.
I'm very honest with the I
can't.
Figure one argument.
For one map the different
argument for another map for the
debate the first argument and
the same thing for the third.
I can't defend that.
Yes the term and and somebody.
A member of my caucus the other
day I've seen the term the term.
Four people can stop out of both
sides of their mouths.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
feel like we're talking on three
sides of our mouths.
Right now.
And it's concerning to me.
I have no way to defend this.
The only option I have is I
continue to speak to people is
please get out and vote.
Let your voice be heard because
it is crystal clear Mr speaker
gentle lady members of this
house.
The members of the communities
voice was not heard on these
maps thank you Mr speaker thank
you generally thank you
gentleman this further debate
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
The gentleman from.
From from the.
Mr speaker I yield.
The.
Mr speaker the is distracting
the.
Thanks to all of us.
And a.
I for that matter.
And
And for some reason
There Mr speaker.
And
I have.
Sanchez.
Senator is a strong.
And the number you're in.
The school community managers
and community.
And
And then as respect.
And our.
Justin Mr speaker that.
Senate Bill team just like our
house.
suspended going straight.
And I make reference to a couple
of things.
Even though I've been.
Going to detail on the that are.
I was.
evidence which was evident in a
redistricting.
Legislation is that.
We're from king.
Senator Diamond Germany since
the last redistricting.
In the twenty eleven.
And has seventeen.
Hispanic about majorities.
To.
Major since.
And that was one house bill.
Thank.
No there's been no major scenes
from twenty nine in the twenty
eleven.
Redistricting to.
One seven.
House Bill.
I just like our.
Diminished.
This Bennett and seeds.
And
We can look at our.
Senate district twelve.
In twenty eleven Senate district
Paul was fifty six point five
percent.
It's been a good dollar major.
In the course.
Trying to.
Thirty nine point seven percent.
Fraternity.
We did that and has been.
Mexico districts.
Senator.
Redistricting.
The service.
In extended.
Seven come in and drop down into
the on again.
For the.
Nine
six percent Hispanic adults and.
House members from.
Twenty two percent.
And all.
Mr speaker of.
Talked about.
Splitting.
Conditions banning communities.
And
Which one did in.
In our house bill.
No.
To do so it's been a community
where I live.
Which is enormous Madam come
Madam some.
Spanning Mexico.
In the.
Starting.
Going around to the dollar.
The line.
One of the founding members of
things going on right.
Sixteen ninety two.
Mr speaker was.
Read about.
The criminals Management grant
concept.
The sisters.
For the creation of that land
tenure structure.
So.
In the Senate bill.
What is this about.
And as a neighbor.
To identifies as prince value
which is not just cross the
river.
This story is.
Representative dealt with so.
With the house districts.
Senator Stewart has district
fourteen.
Mr.
Senator revenue.
Transition for.
This spans.
And as.
Ten.
Senator fourteen.
Is an additional.
Of course.
Compared.
The Senate since.
As for the.
At.
The Senate bill also.
Spreads.
Conditions management
communities.
It was intentional.
But that's the reality.
As.
You know ladies and gentlemen of
the chamber.
What kind of concerning about.
What we're doing with this
redistricting.
The games.
Especially in the southeastern
part of the state.
As a further polarization.
Of the democratic family and.
In the Republican family.
Case in point.
Is an elected neither neither.
From that was.
Stated.
One moment.
But it was like something.
The Democrat and.
Isn't that Democrats.
Mr speaker.
I hope that what we do here is
chamber.
Those in the community.
And.
And hence.
That type of mentality.
Because I would like to.
The sense.
That a Democrat can can say.
Republicans in the southeastern
part.
And.
Combines state.
There's good Democrats.
So these are part of our state.
An example.
Of the extent.
Of that politicization.
For that mentality.
That there's no Democrat.
There's no government public.
Senator.
There's an.
Senator Anderson can be as on.
In Travis county for the longest
time.
And for the longest time and.
As well and others can.
Never wrote.
For.
Senator Hemphill or some.
Someone election.
Rosalyn terms.
Sierra folks.
You know.
Senator all these years.
I've been hands the phone to
Walter for space.
I find all of these
improvements.
To the county seems.
Most of the oil from.
In the Russell.
I don't.
China's County.
After the election.
When times can.
I'm one of.
Cease funding.
To order force please.
Chose.
And those things funding.
for space.
Was the chairman.
these subcommittee.
So we have that power.
Mr chair and.
This is.
Is that what we're doing in the
district in.
Does not create.
That that the polarization.
Discussions of these and part of
the state.
The best.
And I've seen the worst.
What's New Mexico has to offer.
Is that eastern.
On campus organized a boycott.
At nine.
At a grocery store and just.
No
federal system is.
Kids.
It's going to the store.
Is available on line.
Which is not the case.
We tried.
Is
that.
Goods at the store.
Representative.
And that percent.
Just because it means in the
process to purchase product.
One day
line.
No John Boettcher.
Around St.
Shotgun sticking out the window.
By the.
Industry in my eyes.
And so is.
In that way back.
Go back to Mexico.
Thanks using those guns.
The missing I and I just.
In a redistricting efforts.
Does not.
That.
Please.
Interwetten and sisters concerns
part of the state.
The best.
Estamos speaker.
My landlord Mr Turner.
Was in his eighties.
When I was reading the apartment
is that eastern.
If you.
About thirty years old.
And I madam.
In New Orleans eighties.
Homes that are.
Right.
Terms of I the.
Writing from you know why.
You know he was in a fraternity
of
redneck.
You know.
Coming out of his neck you know
he's been with his Texas twang
that you know that scared.
Senator.
In the red.
All.
Townsend I don't.
So that they do and.
The steps.
And we're just not
being the best in the.
Something that is going
both sides.
Is about.
Red lead.
College.
Mind and.
About the struggle.
CENIC's.
No Ryzen Water Rights so.
We got to talking
to the right.
Says.
For more more than.
I want to introduce.
Since our time is.
John can.
His eyes.
The.
Tell you the story.
About.
Share them for many years became
federal marshal.
Sections the numbers at.
Around the valley from some
going down south to the
southeast.
That was a section on March.
Mr Turner.
A little bit about eight years
old.
In eighteen hundreds.
About us.
With the writer.
Into a lot of challenges.
The reddit comes into the ranch.
That.
Senior stranger.
haven't.
And
easy one.
Reach out to them.
Legislative.
Gentleman what he wanted.
Water resources.
Turner said I'm.
My mom my dad.
I think in the introduce
themselves.
S. and the writer.
Was.
The little Turner.
Someone murders.
Thank you all as Bennett.
And I'm.
Interested access.
Another time.
Earns.
A week later.
Eleven dot.
Right guys.
Tried to settle.
The state in the support of
questioning the.
Mr speaker.
He says.
That.
Was one New Mexican.
Us gringos respect that.
Mr speaker.
And anything
taken as soon district.
For Mr Turner's in southeast New
Mexico.
And this.
Mentors.
Thank you.
Program point.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The general there's further
debate the gentleman from Rio
Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley County
please yield Mister speaker I
yield to my poor little brother.
Thank you thank you gentle lady
thank you Mr speaker.
This morning or now this
afternoon.
I contemplated whether or not I
wanted to stand.
Up to speak.
In regards to this bill that is
not ours within this chamber.
With all the race baiting that I
witnessed for the past several
days I feel compelled to the
state something.
Say something on behalf of.
The individuals that.
Many of them that
Representative.
Within my own house district of
those indigenous tribes that had
come together.
On behalf of their people on
behalf of the place that they
live and have lived since time
immemorial.
I want to first say I appreciate
the work of our Senate sponsor.
For your courage for your
determination.
For your values to which you
brought this bill forward and we
stuck with.
I appreciate the work of the C.
R. C. and I appreciate the work
once again of those.
Sovereign tribal nations the
problems the tribes in the agree
pagination that come to that
came together in a very
monumental way to come together
with the one United voice as to
this is how we want to be
incorporated when it comes to
the political process within the
state of New Mexico.
Unfortunately to get to this end
result for all the maps our
house map the congressional map
the education map and now with
the Senate then.
Unfortunate to get to for at
today the good faith one of
those pueblos tribes and nations
were questioned.
Their motives were questioned.
The warranty was questioned.
Pueblos tribes and nations were
mistakenly taken as well as
special interest groups.
And not as the sovereign
governments with the self
determination to garner their
own future on behalf of their
own people on behalf of their
own tribal nations within the
state.
Just trust us mentality of.
This this building.
Has to in what I witnessed this
past week was that it is coming
to an end.
But late last night when.
My mentor.
Mr pay because and I sat in the
gallery watching the debate on
in the Senate.
Having folks come up to us
saying hello this Colin did you
guys go back to tragic committed
now we go home.
We can trust that anymore.
We ride our own narratives all
of us have to write our own
narratives we cannot trust the
political process for our people
will not be able to trust the
political process.
And as a result of this process
that we all can do or.
There is an obvious attempt.
To permitting wage.
People of color in this state
unfortunately.
And I'm sorry to say that but
it's obvious to me.
Hispanics versus native
Americans with our people.
People of color are smarter than
that that we should all
recognize that when they start
talking about.
Minorities in a minority
majority state.
That we are not minorities.
Many of us in this room are not
minorities.
Your Hispanics were is we're
we're we're we're we're Chicano
Chicana mestizos Asian Americans
African Americans.
Indigenous descendants.
Minorities meaning that we are
less than.
No less than.
We are on the same level as
everybody else in this room.
So when I hear.
For political gain.
People of color being utilized
as political pods.
That is the ultimate.
Definition of arrogance.
And that is the ultimate
definition of a system of
oppression.
Individuation of racism in this
state.
So when I stand up today and
talk about this.
But I when is these past couple
of weeks.
Is a resiliency.
Of the people that I've been
here since time immemorial.
But I witnessed these past two
weeks is perhaps once again the
prayers that our ancestors
prayed.
That we look back at those
ancestors we pay back to those
ancestors hoping that those
prayers are ancestors will guide
us in our decisions.
And our statements that we make.
We look to our elders for the
wisdom.
And hope that they can impart
upon us.
How to manage how to avoid the
pitfalls that they may have
encountered.
And how to perhaps do things
with the core values of our
people.
Then we also look through our.
With the energy that they
possess.
To think carry this message to
the greater integrated to the
public on behalf of all of our
nation's.
Again because we are not
minorities.
Many people of color identified
as that we.
When we come together.
United.
We are stronger as one and when
the people.
The leaders will follow.
So Mister speaker.
Generally.
Senator I look forward to
supporting Senate bill two thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentleman
from the Representative Scott.
The lady from the.
Mr speaker I yield.
West
Over.
Specific.
With reference to.
Over here
restore.
Earnings.
The Sooners.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
This bill.
These.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
As we mentioned earlier.
Process is.
When we stated the process and
we follow the CRC processes and
principles.
Sure.
The Senators.
This.
Sixty four percent.
See your C. as.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Much of the structures.
The six.
The performance numbers.
Some.
Inference.
to questions.
Was supposed consideration.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
year C. sterile and here yes.
From the.
This.
Thanks for the service I.
But.
Systems.
All four.
Interest from.
One person.
This was
as soon.
Is.
This legislation.
Consist.
Once.
To us.
Yes.
This morning.
The ruling.
This.
Engine one.
From.
Representative image.
It's.
Press.
I
believe.
The.
For for.
Representative.
Course for.
Commission lady for her answers
thank you chairman there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Chavis Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you for the gentle lady
you'll please Mr speaker I
yield.
Thank you.
I too have lots of problems with
this I I know what the criteria
was in as Representative Scott
pointed out it's trying to keep
communities of interest
together.
Making sure it's one person one
vote we're trying to avoid
hearings we've seen that's what
has happened done in.
The southeastern corner of the
state.
And take into account the hard
work that the C. R. C..
Has done in the public input
that they received whenever they
did help these meetings.
And.
The lady.
I guess I'm very concerned we as
the body.
In the place enacted into law.
The citizens redistricting
committee just for that purpose
to get input from the public.
And I guess Mr speaker gentle
lady my concern is.
One a.
With their recommendations not
adhered to or even really
considered in a lot of.
These maps that have come before
us in the past ten days.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
Senate has considered
discussions as a result of.
Senate ma'am.
House Bill to.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
really didn't answer my
question.
Is this for.
The C. R. C. came up with the
resistant map that was totally
devised by the Senate.
Mr speaker gentle lady Senate
Bill to map is a product of the
Senate.
So Mister speaker I guess
whenever the CRC was going
around the state holding these
meetings asking for input from
the public not just from
Democrats or Republicans all.
Voters of our state especially
those communities of interest.
It was not taken into
consideration when in this
specific matter was devised is
that what I'm hearing you
telling me.
Mr speaker.
Kind gentle lady.
On the C. R. C..
Concept then.
C. one.
So the consideration was not
given to what the C. R. C. came
up with for the Senate wanted to
to try to I am a numbers person
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'd
like to look at performance.
Numbers show me and this is in
black and white and I guess I do
have quite a.
Quite a number of questions on
this.
We have heard of.
I don't know I want to go down
that road or not Mr speaker I I
don't know if there is one
particular.
Precinct on this send a map that
really caught my eye.
News is comprised of sixty six
point seven percent point.
And seventy nine point three
Democrat.
And that seems like it's very.
Lopsided to me.
I know that a lot of lot of our
areas more Hispanics and Anglos
I know that there's lots of.
Areas for the it is.
Overwhelmingly Democrat.
I do want to.
Public to understand that I'm
not here to do it is any party
whether it's Democrat Republican
independent declined to state
green libertarian whatever the
case may be.
It seems like we are.
As was stated earlier by
Representative another
representative.
Packing.
And that would give me great
concern Mr speaker and gentle
lady went to agree with that
that those numbers are a little
bit not a little bit an awful
lot lopsided.
Mr speaker gentle lady we need
you tell us.
What you're talking about.
Yes I will this one particular.
District is comprised of sixty
six point seven percent Anglo
second seventy nine point three
percent Democrat.
And whenever you're looking at
the performance record set is
the one that really does stick
out in my mind.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I intended.
To those meetings C. R. C.
whenever they did take place and
Russell there was great
participation in their.
I also listen to quite a few of
them the is assumed I appreciate
public input Mr speaker.
Those meetings were held.
In the decisions were made by
the committee to ensure that the
public's voice was noted.
Communities of interest were
given.
The opportunity to state why
they needed to but state as one.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm
afraid that the map that is
before us right now that was
passed out of the Senate last
night does not take into
consideration any of those
concerns.
To agree with that or not.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do not
agree.
Mr speaker.
We've seen lots of maps come
before us so I can I have a
whole drawer from right here in
the.
We've killed a lot of trees and
we've used a lot of chemicals to
come up with all these maps that
we are.
Can get right now
It's very troublesome to me
that.
That one person one vote might
be.
Stymie.
We are seeing districts that are
put together.
That they will never be able to
change parties whether it's
going from Republican to
Democrat or Democrat to decline
to state or whatever the case
may be because they are now
stacked Mr speaker gentle lady.
We've had great discussion on
this house floor.
About being fair to all people
of our state in this is not the
way to do it in my opinion.
this is.
This is strictly so that the
Senate sent over with no regard
to what has happened over the
past several months.
In the public voice.
Mr speaker.
Gentle lady.
I understand about.
Avoiding pairings but we didn't
seem to tear that that whenever
we were talking about the house
districts the complete.
Being able to comprise something
that would not harm.
Another sitting member of this
body.
We have seen.
One Representative that is now.
Representing another.
Representatives district we have
seen what they have done to
ensure the.
In our congressional maps for
your.
Everybody seems to think it's a
fair maps but whether we're
talking and I'm going back to
the communities of interest.
We have seen what that has done
that they have all been ski.
So Mister speaker gentle lady my
concern when you're looking at
right now what we have been sent
over from the Senate side.
The guidelines were given.
Communities of interest stayed
together one person one vote
void pairing and follow the
guidelines that are set been set
forth by the C. R. C. Mr speaker
gentle lady.
It was not followed and that is
it is a disgrace.
That was sent over by the Senate
wanting just to confirm with
what they said and with no
regard to any person.
You Mr speaker.
whenever we're talking about.
The local you know won't nobody
in this body knows what money in
medic make up this.
We are all human beings but
whenever those guidelines are
not followed.
It hurts if we have voter and
our state thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you generating this
further debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Allison.
The gentle lady from.
McKinley County.
Mr speaker.
Invasion of catechin I.
In support of Senate bill two.
Explained by.
For the.
Senate bill two.
Canadian history.
Of the time so hi to something
in the range.
Process.
As a committee called those.
Committee meeting.
That was difficult.
Restrictions as well.
Those restrictions.
Redistricting maps.
In.
Committee meetings.
That's commission was spending
some.
To review.
Rights commission was using.
Is.
Full
Some of the.
Little brothers and sisters.
Discuss.
She started.
Asking for wisdom guidance
direction.
Close to the printer.
Into discussions.
Please consider the.
All three of suggestion is
given.
That I was there was at least a
dozen people.
Hi.
It's.
Discussions.
One
thousand three it's.
This is would
come from.
This
call of.
This.
A little.
Are you still owns to this the
only ones.
This is.
That
we were.
Discussions.
Thanks.
Suggestion that was for some.
We started for the.
News for redistricting.
Once
is a discussion this.
Once there was
suggestions.
The specific guide specific
purpose.
This was balanced.
The other way because it was
very very well balance because.
I.
This discussion.
Information that was come.
The state.
About making amendments to this.
Was.
I'm gonna take the space.
The.
The.
It was a key changes that held
us together.
Balanced.
And so.
It's that we have.
That we have.
This is.
Can
instance or.
Is.
I believe that
evolution is commission
confirming that this.
And.
Six.
And the
Kerr.
With his closing words with
those.
this invincible.
This chamber has given.
Invencible.
Sponsored supporters for.
Yes.
And
promotion and.
This.
Thank you gentlemen this further
debate the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Will the gentle lady my
indigenous sister from McKinley
please yield Mister speaker I
yield thank you.
The settlement and the but I'll
just calmly that this gets done
is Catron the.
He can be seen on.
Part is this of those one
around today is does the school
source so it is last month I was
given a representative that I
handed there is this.
Get a lesser would address.
Those as contaminants.
L. as this issue in this case
some of the Santa Fe.
On.
Login no son Representative
that'll.
Okay and so but I love the.
Thank you know so throws out
almost locations this knows the
has a moment this and think this
bill status.
Mr speaker.
As I mentioned at the comments.
Of the special session.
We put the C. R. C. in place.
In order to ensure.
That we had a an inclusive.
And a fair redistricting as fear
of a redistricting process in
place.
I think it's important to note
it has been noted over and over
again by my colleagues.
Throughout this process that has
been.
What we intended it to be.
And perhaps to some more.
So Mister speaker because.
I'd like to honor.
And by Senator as a sponsor I
want to thank.
And on.
For the courage.
To stand up and defend.
Not only this process but to
stand up and defend and push
against.
The.
Sarah.
Negativity.
That has occurred in these
discussions.
And because we have.
Other senators that also stood
up.
And held the line.
In the name of fair
redistricting and had the
courage.
To stand was.
Our sponsor I thank you thank
you to all of you thank you.
My Senator Sanchez thank you.
I also want to remind everyone
as I did at the beginning that
redistricting is about
representation Mr speaker.
It is a process that was set in
place in order to ensure.
Inclusivity fairness equitably
equity.
And to reflect.
What.
The vast populations articulate
to us.
Are what they wish to have in
place.
In order to secure.
Their opportunity to elect.
The representatives of their
choice.
But the systems Mr speaker in
the processes in the structures
have to be in place in order to
do that.
And so.
I also stand because many of you
know I've spent now I hate to
say it but I spent over fifty
five years now fighting for
civil rights for voting rights.
In order to do sentries Mr
speaker of our communities being
left out of these processes.
And being left out of
representation of their choice.
And because it is always
populations are native
populations all of our
communities of color.
The side in every neighborhood.
In every rural and urban area of
the state.
That is what we mean when we
talk about.
Our populations.
Being diverse and spread out
throughout these every corner of
the state of New Mexico.
So it's important Mr speaker.
Gentle lady.
These populations are people.
No.
We've done everything in our
power.
To ensure that they have the
opportunity.
By a fair redistricting process
in place.
To select.
The representatives of their
choice.
And to finally particularly in
the southeast portion of our
state there have been.
Even.
Personally affected.
Hi this general.
A marginalization.
No we know that census after
census after census many of
these communities have migrated
to that part of the state to
seek employment they remain
under counted and therefore
unable.
To be represented.
Too often.
Under representative.
And so now under this particular
redistricting process Mr speaker
they finally have the
opportunity and that's been
articulated to us.
It's been articulated to us
by our spending populations.
Then native populations and by
all of our populations residing
in that area and I intentionally
spoken Spanish.
To let the populations that
still remain.
Mr speaker undercounted and
underrepresented.
To ensure them.
That their voices when they
appeared in those meetings list
times.
Their voices would be heard by
us today.
And that the actions that we
take our men to insure.
They come out of the shadows.
I'm under representation or lack
of representation period.
And that they have the
opportunity in the structures
that we set up in in these
processes.
To register to vote.
And to participate.
In our democracies through the
electoral process this is what I
convey to those populations.
So Mister speaker.
To yield.
To those who continue.
To want to exercise.
The divide and conquer tactics
that have been used.
In generations of colonial rule.
To say.
We are not a conquered people.
We are not alone alliance people
were colonized peoples.
We've never come in from
anywhere.
We've always been here.
For generations that we.
Do not even come to me more for
time immemorial as my sisters
and brothers say.
And we will not allow.
The divide and conquer to
continue to divide us in order
to assert control power
authority and money over us.
We cannot allow this this has
got to stop Mr speaker.
This has got to stop.
This is not this redistricting
is a fair redistricting process.
And that's what we call it a
redistricting process it's not
meant to self serve.
It's not meant to self elevate
it's not meant to ensure anyone
of our.
Reelections it's meant to give
voice to the people that have
historically been marginalized
in our state.
For the reasons that I stated.
And so Mister speaker.
As an organizer.
When we organize rallies.
And we we.
Put our forces together as a
people.
We say.
Level.
The the.
Set up in Seattle.
When little needle.
Set up and see the.
The people United will never be
defeated.
Mr speaker this is the people
snap.
Of the people.
The people.
And it is for the people.
And it is for this reason Mr
speaker.
And gentle lady and Sanchez.
We stand in support of SB two.
Yes yes.
Thank you generally there's
further debate the gentle lady
from ram from Bernalillo
Representative building a.
Mr speaker one of the gentle
lady from McKinley County you.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague thank you and.
Zinger gentlelady I've been a
little bit nervous to get up in
front of everybody yeah I'm
pretty new to this but I have so
much admiration and respect for
everybody here and I have for a
long long time doing this
weekend in Oregon native someone
in community who are and it is
usually on the other side of the
table on these things.
I have so much pride in
supporting SB two.
As the first Asian American
women here is being in the
legislature I have
there is an energy and anxiety
intention of free speech all of
you but I really feeling the
weight of all and mines and
ancestors of my parents and my
family members who came to this
country not every believing that
they would be accepted here my
parents were undocumented I grew
up in a household of makes that
status citizenship I come from a
family where English was not the
dominant language English is my
third language.
For I need to feel like I have a
place here.
Means a lot.
And I don't ever seem to believe
there are a few of that hi
Representative an entire Asian
community I absolutely do not I
can only represent myself and
hopefully lift up the voices of
those that I represent in the
district that I'm part of my
district house district nineteen
is one of them is I think me and
linguistically diverse districts
of all of New Mexico and in my
time doing work in the Asian
community is what I've seen time
and again is this narrative of
pitching communities of color of
indigenous communities against
one another I even remember and
trying to break through in the
immigration narrative here in
New Mexico the pushback of
having Asians as part of that
narrative what we saw in our
work together with communities
who have been doing this work
for a long long time is when you
add a group when you Center
group when you bring equity and
truly do that in a way that.
That respects people.
It doesn't take away anything
from anybody else the only
contribute and add and create
such a more powerful more
dynamic voice that needs to be
represented across the state.
I'm so proud of standing behind
tribal leaders who have been
standing strong throughout this
entire process saying that we
needed.
To have raids we need to have
our communities.
Heard and seen and this to me
get that blow their debt to
writing such a historic wrong.
And again it does not take
anything away from any of us and
for me personally so I am.
I'm curious.
Generating if you could just
clarify for me one more time.
How many adult Hispanic
districts does not include.
Mr speaker gentle lady this map
includes fifteen Hispanic
majority districts.
The gentle lady and can you
remind me as well hi Mimi at the
need of American districts as
this map includes.
Mr speaker.
Kali kind gentle lady this map
includes three native American
majority districts thank you
gentle lady as somebody who
identifies as as about Chinese
American as a woman as a mom.
And heard testimony from people
through this year as the
process.
He has ever been in a
redistricting process for the
state of New Mexico immigrants
refugees from Afghanistan for
Viet nam and China from so many
countries that now called New
Mexico home.
I am really proud to stand
behind this and I think
everybody who held the line I
think everybody who spoke in
support of this and I again do
fall and and have such respect
and admiration for tribal
leaders are indigenous leaders
who paved out this vision for us
today thank you.
Thank you gentle lady there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Sandoval Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thanks.
Two million.
For McKinley you.
Mr speaker I yield Mister
speaker and gentle lady I just
realize I'm not in support of
this piece of legislation
unfortunately I was not able to
be here on my side of the aisle
fought so hard for my district.
One of the things I think that
we're forgetting.
And looking at the state of New
Mexico is New Mexico was built.
Cultural relations.
And.
I think I'm not the only one
that is a native Mexican.
And probably contrary to million
here I was raised in the Navajo
vitamins I was raised in the
Hispanic.
Environment.
And I was also raised in African
American.
Environment.
And quite frankly I'm appalled.
At the division that's taking
place.
Not only here in New Mexico but
throughout the country.
And we're gonna have to come
together.
And advancing the issues that we
have.
This is my second this.
And it's very interesting to be
able to contracts the two.
different processes.
The redistricting I can then.
We were all able to sit down.
And look at that.
The rules.
Look at the nationalities.
And look at the successes.
But we had.
At the time I had the second
largest district.
In the state.
I work.
With the Democrats.
With major at that particular
time to come up with Sarah.
Redistricting.
This process sucks.
Totally on is this process that
we have in that we've gone
through has not been an honest.
Process.
Going into it was for a majority
role at best is called politics.
But the environment we're
creating as politicians
dangerous.
It's not only dangerous.
To the state of New Mexico.
Weapons
in a dangerous process is
happening throughout this
country.
Unfortunately I can't stand.
And say that.
District forty four.
Was destroyed is the only way I
can I can think of.
Because.
I'm a minority in that district
because some black.
Because I'm probably.
Only one of four blacks that
lived in district forty four.
But my district.
Was made up of Democrats is made
up of Republicans is made up of
the independence.
And the representative.
Okay and I have worked very
closely fair in dealing with the
projects in the needs of.
That area.
As I just want everyone to know
that I think that this process.
Have not been.
The maps.
I'm not.
And.
I don't have a problem.
Major native American
communities I grew up.
As I said in native American
communities.
I don't have problems.
With his band in communities I
grew up.
In the Hispanic community.
It of course
African American Community
although the state of New Mexico
keeps putting African Americans
in the state.
I've been treated since time
immemorial someone else said.
And the list of others.
We're on others and every thing
that's here in New Mexico.
What is.
In the twenties.
In the thirties.
Then not others now and they
one of the others then.
They became New Mexicans.
And we are Americans.
And it concerns me as I said the
role that we're going down is
that we have to go down.
Every ten years.
But we as legislators.
Really look at.
The impact we're having on our
state.
Because we've got people that
are going up.
We've got some of those of
parents I'm not but many of us
are parents.
And we're putting in motion.
Some added.
That's going to affect.
Our young people.
And how they succeed and how
they see one another.
So the lady Mr speaker.
I think the process like I said
it sucks.
But we've got.
We're just gonna have fun with
the hand we've been dealt with.
But I think the separation in
the focus.
On separation.
Is going to.
The state of New Mexico.
Wonder.
Companies do not condone
companies the rate will don't
come to the New Mexico.
Don't think for one minute that
they don't look at all are
listening to what we're saying
here today how we're separating
the state.
Saying how it has affected other
states.
Even in modern times the
division.
I don't know only one to one
meetings I don't know how much
work put into this I can look at
and say it was a lot.
The lines are drawn.
By and.
The impact is going to have is
by.
And I believe that once we vote
on.
Senate Bill.
That we're going to put some
actions in place that we're
going to have to work on
individually.
To try.
Because this is not.
Sarah.
And like I said I know it's
politics.
I know it's a quest for control.
Raul is not always the best
thing to put in place.
In my opinion control works so
much better.
We work together.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady thank you gentle
lady seeing no further debate
the gentle lady to close thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
members of the house in closing
I'd like to just say that after
hearing a few of my colleagues
mention our forefathers.
I'd like to say that we all come
from a long line of for fathers
who have made contributions to
our history and purpose in life.
I have a great grandfather
facing surveys so.
He is an was from Sonora Mexico.
And he migrated to Arizona as a
young boy and then on to New
Mexico.
Is he married into the Navajo
family.
Where we stand right now seven
generations strong.
And my great grandfather cases
are the so traveled to
Washington DC.
With the Navajo Nation leaders.
To help interpret and sign the
Navajo Nation treaty of eighteen
sixty eight.
And back in like my.
Shin on shin Antani Mr Allison
said.
In in eighteen sixty eight.
Prayers were said.
Songs were sung.
And talking circles were held.
As.
For today the same.
Those were said songs were said
saying some.
Sacred talking circles and
meetings were held.
With the C. R. C..
Hi leadership here our speaker.
The nation presidents or pueblos
my pension cousins and centered
Turner has and many more.
So with that I stand here and I
think Senator Lopez for working
on this.
And with that Mr speaker I
close.
We are on final passage of
Senate for substitute for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two.
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
Representative those waiver of
thirty eight in the affirmative
twenty two in an innings Center
for substitute for Senate
Judiciary Committee sub two
percent bill to has passed the
house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
We go to the next order of
business concurrence no
objection it is so ordered
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
And there's a concurrence
calendar.
It has been passed out this is
for House Bill eleven
gentle lady to make a motion.
Thank you Mr speaker the Senate
moved to for the house to adopt
on concurrence House Bill eleven
as amended.
within regions across.
And how do you urged the body to
vote gentle lady Mr speaker I
urge the body to vote for
concurrence.
The gentle lady is move the
house to concur in the Senate
amendments to house bill eleven
it is urged the body to vote yes
is there debate.
I see none of those and so on
the board I was low I was only
looking in that moment I only
had eyes for Representative
Townsend.
Hopefully they're not gonna lose
recording of the session.
From Chavis and Lincoln
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker does a lady
from Bernalillo county yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the condom in Travis county.
Thank you Mr speaker and bring
digital is just a couple
questions with respect to what
the Senate has done to our
builder left this house last
week if I'm reading this
correctly.
More in the bill left this house
we have added a one year.
Time
To the.
I called up this step up in
coverage from seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars probably
the testimony was maybe four and
a half for five million dollars
and.
When I read this we've lost some
time have we not could you
explain that.
Mr speaker and gentle and.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Travis county.
The best of our superintendent
of insurance of Mister speaker
John and we have changed the
date although in the same year
from July one to January one for
the purpose of making it easier
for.
Our providers to seek insurance
so that they do not have to
provide a different policy in
the middle of a carrier policy
here.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady of the six months of the
the seven
deleted.
Would have.
Limited affect ideas is that the
right word limited effect on on
the ability of of doctors and
other professionals within our
state to secure
a policy for that entire twenty
twenty three calendar year.
Mr speaker Jim and I just wanted
to that would make it easier for
healthcare providers to provide
insurance and that in this new
context.
Well only only for the years in
which the
limitation does not go up would
that be correct.
Mr speaker gentleman within the
scope of this bill during the
time in which the a new caps
would be and would be instated
for independently owned health
care.
Nations.
providers this bill would make
it easier for them to
get insurance and during that
time when that reprieve is
it's act does not apply to the
new cap that would be instated
after the twenty twenty forty
eight.
The madam speaker and gentle
lady for
thousand the Senate changes
only.
The calendar years twenty twenty
two and twenty twenty three will
the seven hundred fifty thousand
dollar limitation the
observed in twenty twenty four.
That limitation is no longer in
force and effect and it will
then go to five million dollars
minimum insurance policy for
medical providers is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman as it
is written in this bill at this
moment yes that is correct.
And so walking off the six
months and twenty twenty four.
Maybe Dawn for
maybe some insurance purposes
because apparently they only
issue insurance policies for a
year instead of six months I I
don't know why you couldn't get
a six month policy but that's
occurs
would someone argue that maybe
we should have taken it for the
full twenty twenty four year
because.
As I argued on this for the
other day we need a longer
runway
Madam speaker and gentle lady
Madam speaker gentle lady the
way I see this.
Is this gives us two calendar
years.
To once again addresses issue
because the protection of
limitations from seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars and
jumping them to five million
dollars.
I think we're going to hear from
the same people.
Can have the same arguments may.
In.
Probably in the year twenty
twenty three that we have a
crisis on our hands.
And so this is merely delaying.
That debate ideas
them you know I guess we we
delay that debate we're not
really fixing the underlying
issue Madam speaker and gentle
lady because as I pointed out.
We need to be doing everything
within our power.
To encourage doctors to come to
New Mexico particularly rural
New Mexico.
And twenty twenty four having
five million dollars
of liability provision that
having to secure insurance at
that amount.
Is not sending a signal to
the prospect of medical
professionals professionals to
come to our state and so I agree
with the with maybe the bandaid
on a gaping wound but it's not
going to to to
bring health to our medical
community it just extends this
debate for another time probably
in the year twenty twenty three
as I see it so madam speaker and
gentle lady of.
Again side support
the concurrence they made a lot
of other changes to if you all
will read it but.
Ultimately it does not the
Senate amendment does not tackle
real issues that appears before
this body for before that body
and for Committee them down the
road which is a term that we for
the and several sessions of this
body thank you madam speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Thank you would like to remind
the body to keep your comments
to the amendments to the bill.
We recognize the general I
recognize the gentle lady from
Eddy County.
Comments were all on the
amendment.
Thank you I'm reminding the body
to keep the comments to the
amendment and thank you very
much for your comments.
Recognizing the gentle lady from
Eddy County thank you madam
speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo please yield.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
to the committee for many
County.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
So regarding the the Senate
amendment to house bill eleven.
I just have a really short
comment and that is that I don't
think the patients in New Mexico
are going to in the long run
benefit from.
What I would call a temporary
fix here.
It's hard enough Madam speaker
gentle lady in New Mexico to
find a doctor and keep the
doctor.
And that's especially true in
rural areas of the state and
maybe also for the urban areas.
My reference point is down in
the southeastern have the
southeast corner where I live.
So I think the net effect of
this requiring such a high level
of malpractice insurance.
Even though it's phased up.
It still means that it's going
to be extremely expensive to
acquire no practice insurance.
And it's my understanding that
of speaker gentle lady that.
Someone who offices on the
fourth floor wants to have this
handled during the special
session so it is not discussed
much during an election year but
I'm hoping that the voters of
New Mexico.
We'll keep in mind that when
they cannot makes it harder for
them to find a doctor in the
future.
because they can't afford to
practice here and they they they
flee to other states.
That we will remind voters to
pin the tail on the donkey.
It is this bill is.
Is being brought to us by
Democrats and trial lawyers and
at the end of the day the people
who win the most are not the
patients.
Because they can't find a
doctor.
But the trial lawyers.
So.
Bottom line I think this
legislation doesn't really fix
anything.
It is four stalls the inevitable
thank you madam speaker.
Thank you Representative demand
from Lee County.
Madam speaker I yield to the
kinds of moments of
Representative Scott Lee County.
For this legislation some.
Emergency calls.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Lee County thank you for the
question an emergency clause is
necessary because we are facing
a real crisis on January first
and that some of our health care
providers have not been able to
secure malpractice insurance
with the new requirements under
a law we passed last January
there for me months and months
to come in from the county make
these fixes as outlined in this
law so that we don't put
patients at risk and so that we
don't put doctors in a terrible
position of having to practice
without insurance.
Solutions.
Insurance.
The course.
madam speaker gentleman's I I.
Not entirely accurate it's my
understanding that they were
unable to.
They were unable to get
insurance for the new
requirements as they went into
effect on January first it
wasn't for any I'm not but for
the new amounts that were
instated on January first.
Protection from.
The schools schools.
Madam speaker gentleman I you're
gonna have to show me where the
patient protection fund is
referencing this bill I believe
it's beyond the scope of what
we're discussing.
I'm sorry I'm madam speaker
government can you repeat.
Insurance.
Two one.
Madam speaker German and the
definitions on page one are
actually the same exact
definition as we were in the
original house bill seventy five
that was passed into law by this
body in January the reason why
they are reinstated or poor
place to again within the
context of house bill eleven is
because we need one very small
change in the definition of an
independent provider so that we
removed the reference to agency
so this exact definition is not
change from house bill seventy
five and I'm not at liberty to
speak to anything regarding that
patient compensation fund
because we are not changing
anything that was that was not
already placed into law on house
bill seventy five.
The.
This.
Sure.
For
Madam speaker and gentleman so
again House Bill Levin does not
change the limitations other
than the seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar cap which will
process for independent patient
health care facilities and tell
the January one twenty twenty
four date but if you ask me
about the source of money is for
the patient compensation fund
that comes from surcharges that
are paid by both providers and
hospitals alike.
Well there's on the fund.
Phones.
Sure this from the.
This is changes.
Madam speaker gentleman that's
not accurate it is not entirely
because of as a consequence of
these changes for many for the
confluence of circumstances that
led to the current situation
which we find ourselves in the
patient compensation fund
there's a long storied history
but now we cannot say with
certainty with one hundred
percent certainty that the
status of the fund is due to the
higher liability limits now that
is not correct.
Insurance.
Station for.
Again Mr speaker and gentleman
from the county we're talking
about house bill eleven it has
nothing to do with the patient
compensation fund or the status
of that fund what contributes to
the status of that fund and that
at this time.
Thank you Mr speaker now.
For those.
Of.
Positions.
This.
Legislation.
Fifty thousand dollars.
The rest of.
Insurance solutions for.
I'm
not sure of the.
Orders for.
Transition.
Mexico
the state.
This is.
In the past.
Sir.
Thanks to the gentleman from
curry.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
please help Mr speaker I yield
to the condominium curry county
thank you for joining us I just
have one question and and I'm
not an attorney and and did not
state a Holiday Inn express
through that was not so this may
be an off the wall question but
on on page four of the Senate
bill.
Under
B..
The last two sentences says the
current on recovery shall be
adjusted annually by the
consumer price index for all
this is urban communities.
I was always taught when you
read things you also need to
watch for what it doesn't say it
doesn't hang about suburban or
rural communities or so
delighted my question is the new
language and I could not find it
in the original bill is to be
its new language in their
amendment.
Is there a different consumer
price index for rural
communities then there is for
urban communities does this not
applies to rural communities as
it does to.
Urban communities can you talk
about that component of this
ammendment please.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentleman for County I
decided to that this is the same
language same definitional
language we just had to we and
reinstate the house bill eleven
from house bill seventy five but
it is my understanding that that
is just a fancy way of saying
the consumer price index.
Generally I I don't have seventy
five and for me I did have house
bill eleven that I was looking
and trying to compare.
In the what we passed out here
for a fix was amended so I saw
it as something new coming from
the Senate.
And
I am still curious do you have
any ideas or try to know if you
have an expert
is there any difference between
a rural CPR in a urban CPI.
The gentleman with his.
We have to say that that is the
way houses service suggests that
inflation adjusters be placed
into law that is a commonly used
in all states consumer price
index it's being used in every
bill to my knowledge that we
pass it has an inflation
adjusted.
Thank you Mr speaker are
dyslexic caught my attention
because it wasn't in the bill he
was different and I noticed that
it didn't say rural New.
It's and you know you get over
you have to read things twice to
get a half good understanding of
the gentle lady that's my only
question Mr speaker thank you.
The Germans for the debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady please.
Mr speaker I yield to the
committee from all those
counties thank you.
This is generating so.
Very frustrating some and then.
Because my husband has lost to
his doctor actually three we
just lost another doctor who
moved out the state lost a
primary care physician.
So we're having a really hard
time in our household keeping
doctors here I have got.
Hundreds of emails right now but
doctors who may frustrated.
One thing about leaving the
state.
So this is become a big issue.
So when I read this I just look
at this as.
Bandaid trying to fix what
happened with earlier bill.
And we have a hard enough time
keeping doctors here we're
having a hard enough time in
here so Mister speaker gentle
gentle lady.
Your support of this bill also
supporting the long term
consequences of this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
sure how to answer that question
Representative appropriate
question we're here on house
bill eleven I'm the sponsor of
house bill of and I've already
spoken to the body about the
necessity for this bill what
will happen if we don't pass it
I'm not here to speak about we
litigate house bill seventy five
which is already passed into
gonna fight in statute to law
codified center.
Thank you Mr speaker because
that's actually the crux of all
this no matter how we beat
around the bush on this Mr
speaker generating.
No matter how much we try to say
this is just the amendments
trying to fix the situation we
didn't put it there matter fact
when this came through my
committee.
I was when I got this ammendment
I was like oh this is
intelligence amendments because.
It never should have gone
through in the first place the
goal here in New Mexico we have
somebody goals besides crime all
the other issues.
One of the problems we have is
losing doctors things happen
personally this happened in our
house and I see this.
Was me on as well as a doctor
and I was looking at this
maybe I'll just close up shop
they don't just leave and go
somewhere else with thoroughness
bandit on there and we can fix
the problem.
Problem fixer so this is very
very very frustrating.
So I guess in the end of the
day.
All we're doing is restoring
this bandit on their I have to
now reluctantly vote yes for the
bill I absolutely hate I hated
the first one that came through.
Because I have all these doctors
were telling me I'm gonna leave
the leave the state this is not
fair and I can imagine any
doctor in the world going.
Let's go to New Mexico.
Is that your team we taxed too
for all that stuff.
So I'm gonna reluctantly voted
yes for this bill just for the
doctors but this is a horrible
bill it was a bill when it came
about and I told you guys this
came through was going to be a
horrible decision we are and I
will see you again in another
couple years so we can address
this bill and maybe one day
we'll get to the root cause and
things are good for New Mexicans
and not for trial lawyers thank
you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt.
Thank you Mr speaker
Well the gentle lady kneeled
Mister speaker I yield to the
kind of independent for later
thank you the lady my question
is I listen to the debate I
think well we're not done with.
This bill but what we must do in
my opinion today is come Kerr
because lady is it correct the
Senate has already left for the
holidays is that correct Mr
speaker gentleman that is
correct so.
Consideration of anything other
than what's in front of us right
now.
Jeopardises solving New Mexico's
health crisis during the
pandemic is that correct Mr
speaker gentleman that is
correct.
So.
My point is simple I certainly
urge concurrence.
I think we all receive urgent
messages describing the.
Impending disaster.
In health care and and medical
malpractice insurance rates I
don't think we're done based on
the comments but I do think
we're done for today and we
should concur thank you Mr
speaker.
Gentleman is further debate the
gentleman from the
representative of.
Thank you Mr speaker is the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you'll.
Speaker I yield to my friend
from Lee County Representative.
Thank you very much.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Can you explain to me.
In the original hospital of the.
What the liability would be
insurance requirements for
malpractice insurance
requirement would have been for.
The doctor.
In on January first two thousand
twenty four.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
gonna have to answer some
further clarification on your
question on the question talking
about independent healthcare
providers are you talking about
independently owned.
And health care facilities.
Thank you for.
For questions or generating
both.
Thank you Mr speaker don and as
of January first the limits the
liability limit for independent
providers will be seven hundred
and fifty thousand dollars if we
were to pass this bill the
limits for liability for
independently owned outpatient
health care facilities will also
be seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars until January first
twenty twenty four at which
point it will go up to.
Five million dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady in the twenty twenty four
January date is one of concern
about the regional hospital
eleven hundred and five million
as well.
Mr speaker John and thank you
for that question and this will
allow me to give the body some
clarification on why that
changes made original house bill
Levin had a section two which
was a provided a temporary
provision and it was our attempt
at first to stay the
implementation of the four
million dollar cap as it was
supposed to go into effect for
independently owned outpatient
health care facilities on
January one twenty twenty two
which point those facilities
have been unable to secure
insurance up to this point and
we're just a few days away from
January first and so the
temporary provision we were
alerted to problems with that
from a drafting from a technical
perspective by a Council
services and that the better way
to do it would be to just place
in the amendment and so this is
the Senate Judiciary amendment
W. H. date in terms of the
amount implemented and the date
it would be implemented for that
amount so because the original
house bill seventy five in
implementation implementation of
a five million dollar cap by the
twenty twenty four date that we
are pushing this forward to.
It is tracking the original
house bill seventy five it does
not changing anything but we are
attempting to do in the original
house bill eleven.
Thank you for that answer Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
so.
For speaker gentle lady from the
time house bill Levin left from
the house to the time the what's
changed on the Senate side and
brought back to us.
The lady Mr speaker can you tell
me what communications is that
we.
However received.
From doctors and independent
providers said.
The twenty four we got this
covered we we know we're able to
do this.
Mr speaker gentleman I have not
received any specific
communications to that effect
what I have what I do know is
that all the stakeholders who
came around the table to help
the solution agreed as well with
the superintendent of insurance
that this would give us more
time to understand the decision
of the insurance carriers that's
exactly why they're denying
coverage if their issues with
coverage issues but.
What they are using as a basis
to deny coverage will give us an
opportunity to collect those
issues.
Thank you gentle lady for that
answer I a
I think some of my colleagues.
And I'm sure some of the people
I'm very frustrated with this.
And.
I say hi to them second
position.
To provide doctors.
For to stand in line and sit
there and say Hey we told you
guys this is going to be a
problem.
In.
I can't.
Was was basically sit there and
do that to my doctors because.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
We need are not.
But.
By the lack of one vote.
We ended up with this problem
for us to put a bandaid on being
asked to put a band aid on it
instead of actually taking our
time and doing the due
diligence.
Our list of when because.
Because that's our job systems
levels of legislators.
And I feel like we're doing a
disservice Mr speaker and gentle
lady to.
Our constituents.
By doing this.
Hi of course will have to vote
for this cause is what keeps our
doctors going.
We had a a.
Discussion just a second ago.
Hello friends.
In the house.
We must solve the healthcare
crisis in New Mexico.
Each time we do this Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
We create another crisis.
Yes we bypass something on
January first.
This is the wrong way to do
this.
Senator disappoints continues to
do have stuff like this happens
to where we have to make.
The decision to fix problems so
we've been very clear on going
to exist thank you Mr speaker
thank you need only.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative remain.
Thank you Mr speaker will money
from from Bernalillo county
gentle lady you Mr speaker I
yield my friend also from
Bernalillo county.
Mr speaker and gentle lady my
comments a lot of them of
already been addressed so I'll
try to be short but it's.
Forward I and it's a limits.
When the bill was originally
passed from warned about doctors
retiring doctors leaving the
state.
And then the third problem is
going to pay for.
When I look at these limits that
we have here.
It's going to be insurance
companies will soon turns
companies we buy the insurance.
And so we raise the cost of
services to our community by
this bill.
A lot of doctors contact me.
Some told me well I think it's
just time for me to retire.
I had other doctors say I think
I will leave the state and just
this is too much.
I tried to encourage them to
stay.
And I and I told them wait and
give us a chance to fix this.
This is not a fix.
This is a very serious message
to them.
That we are unfriendly to
doctors.
And two of a hospitals
practitioners of all time.
When we look at our current
level six hundred thousand is
the current level the bank and
some and
of acquire.
It's going to twenty twenty six
six million.
Ten times higher.
Many doctors called me and said
they could not get insurance at
the current.
You know meaning next year
level.
Well enough the six million
dollar level.
The legislature needs to address
this in January.
Before we have a mass exodus of
the State.
And we Mr speaker gentle lady I
would like to rest in a position
where we can't fix it right now
but we're going to have to pass
this.
We've got a lot of work to do on
this it would be better if we
address to January not two years
from now.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Thanks to the gentleman from
Chavis eighty under terror.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the kind gentleman from
all those counties.
In the.
Probably should take note off my
name off the board I have
exactly what Representative
green talked about was this bill
takes.
A.
A liability from six hundred
thousand to six million.
On on.
Our medical staff.
Hi
I strongly believe that this
bill out of the fixed sooner
rather than later we don't need
this cloud hanging over he keeps
doctors from moving the and it
causes doctors to move out it's
not in the best interest I I
believe the executive is is
worried about this before her
election I get it I would like
it either but this is a bad
deal.
And of.
My friend from Rossell
was was urging concurrence and I
say with tongue in cheek that he
and all his caucus can vote for
it I don't believe I will thank
you very much.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval Representative Ely.
Sorry this is over San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker disability
from Bernalillo yield Mister
speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
And so.
Bill came through this house.
And went over to the other
chamber.
There were several questions
about house bill seventy five.
And I and I just say multiple
times that this is not house
bill seventy five for not
litigating we're not debating
house bill seventy five.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I believe the way it was
written.
And one from this chamber to
that chamber.
I believe that's the.
We use of our argument to some
degree Mr speaker and and
ingenuity as I heard of.
New the.
Debating Representative Lord.
The state of that again Mr
speaker and gentle lady I I
would disagree.
Because the way that the Senate.
Substitute is written.
This is a statement.
Passed out of your house bill
seventy five that created the
problem.
Six one portion of the problem
Mr speaker I cannot vote for
this because.
What I'm reading here.
That I just can not support is
what Representative Lord stated.
Which is.
Perpetuating the problem I don't
understand why people would vote
for this.
I understand and would vote for
this because of the impending
problem that happens.
On Jan would happen on January
first if this is not passed.
As I read through this Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
The problem is one or.
Taking.
The damages.
Literally.
Multiplying them ten times over.
From six hundred thousand
dollars with the currently are
as we stand here today.
Six million dollars instance and
it's in this Senate Bill
gentleman we're going to again
ask that you keep the debate to
the amendment what you just
stated is incorrect.
The limitations on liability to
which you refer are already in
the law.
The reason they are printed on
this amendment is because as you
know Sir when you amend a
section of of bill you have to
for the entire section in the
bill you don't just put the
four words the you're deleting
so the language that you were
reading right now those
limitations of liability are the
current law of the state of New
Mexico this bill in the
amendment does not do anything
to those limitations on
liability.
So that is indisputable Sir that
is how the bill drafting works
so please let's keep the debate
today has just been asked many
times to the Senate amendments.
Mr speaker the Senate amendments
added and all this language
again no Sir that is not correct
that is correct Sir the reason
that is printed there is because
it is printing on an amendment
text is already in the law you
have to print the entire section
your mandate that is in the
section is being amended to
limitations on liability do not
change with house bill Levin for
the Senate amendments Mr speaker
I would agree with that had that
means the only language that was
change but the Senate
substitute.
For whatever reason at all that
language back in some Mr speaker
all I'm saying is as I read the
text in front of me it reminds
me the problem.
What is facing us.
And I am just I just can not.
Support mandated when I seen
right from my face as this is
written and is any exception can
read if they just go and look
this up on the legislative
website.
The real problem of the
impending doom.
That our medical profession is
facing and health care and
patients are facing in New
Mexico yeah we're just kicking
the can down the road I just
can't support thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Thanks for the gentle lady from
Chavis.
Thank you the gentle lady the
shingles Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Travis
county.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have
already received three phone
calls from doctors in my area I
live in a rural part of the
state which made mainly western
New Mexico is the rural part of
the state with the exception of
the more metropolitan areas.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
have hard enough time getting
doctors keeping doctors having
nurses that will stay in our
community we have problems and
with our hospitals especially
with the indigent fund that we
have to put up with in each
different county out there Mr
speaker.
The doctor said have gotten hold
of me so far so we can't do
this.
We are going to shut down our
doors we are going to be leaving
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
hope this doesn't apply to
veterinarians because that's
gonna probably gonna be my
primary provider from here on
out.
This will affect all of New
Mexico Mr speaker and gentle
lady and as was stated earlier
all we're doing is kicking the
can down the road I understand
that right now we're happen this
bandaid on this bed bed bill
that was introduced that I voted
no one originally last term.
But we have to come up with a
solution that's beneficial to
our doctors our nurses are
hospitals or institutions and
most importantly the citizens of
the state of New Mexico and what
we're doing here.
It will take this into January.
A point here on the twenty
twenty.
For twenty.
What.
Twenty twenty three.
Twenty twenty four.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Doctors you need to pay
attention what this bill is
going to do to your practice.
since you need to look at
helping you will be affected by
this as well.
Hospitals don't rely just on
your lobbyist to say.
Thank you for bill is going to
be good because as it stands
right now Mr speaker with these
amendments on it it will do this
through January of twenty twenty
four but after that there will
be a mass exodus as was stated
earlier.
Everybody leaving the state and
we're going to be left high and
dry.
Mr speaker.
On this particular vote it's
going to be damned if you do
damned if you don't.
Either way Mr speaker gentle
lady.
This is just a topical ointment.
Something that is deeper than
that thank you.
Next year the gentleman doing
immigrant and this year.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please healed.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from all those
counties thank you my friend
each of us.
You know I I know we're all
ready to go home I am to
come in but I have to speak for
my district I have a small
hospital.
This is going to do for my
hospital.
It's been on the on the brink of
bankruptcy for.
Four years.
The last few years has really
struggled.
And I can tell you right now
again I traders say this the
first time people are dying in
my area for lack of having
health care.
Lack of doctors.
The person go to the emergency
room and they have to wait in
line to thirty hours to get care
because of lack of doctors.
I work with doctors of every day
in my business and I can tell
you they're leaving for good
doctors are leaving.
I talked to some of the seals
and in my area.
For the hospitals.
Is that a five doctors are five
dot five and cations will happy
the love New Mexico he wanted to
be here.
They all this after reading the
start in digging into what
they're going to put their faced
with.
They all they all of related
incoming.
This is this is a lot of times
amended and I know that we're
dodging a bullet in a few days
for the state of New Mexico in
the residence but I can tell you
this is gonna be higher health
care healthcare costs for
people.
People that are we were in an
impoverished state.
And I'm worried very worried
about my hospital for what the
further fallout from this from
this legislation is going to
cause from my hospital.
I don't know where to go.
We we live far from places and
and and you know from and from
other health care if it's so I'm
I'm afraid that.
This extension does is it just
gives doctors of enormous
support it because it's the
right thing to do.
It's going to give doctors just
enough time to sell their homes.
Enough time to find another
place to move to.
And I feel that's what's going
to happen.
And I always try when I'm
reading stuff like this I try to
put myself in that person's
shoes and sort of as a doctor.
If I was a a doctor looking at
state of New Mexico.
This is no time to invest into
New Mexico can I trust the
legislature are they going to
actually fix it in twenty twenty
four.
This is a again just a small
food fix we're just we're just
fixing a minor minor things
that's a major thing.
It's a major thing but it's a
minor fix.
And so it worries me my friend
from worries me Mr speaker and
my friend from Bernalillo that
We just lose opportunity to have
more doctors and again.
He said that my arrangement
table and here the families
crying.
About the lack of the care they
were the the lack of care
because of the of the lack of
health care workers doctors in
particular sessions.
We have a problem.
Proposals for more government
through the end.
And and and and it'll become
available says the problem on.
I hope that in in January we
thanks to really take a good
look at what we need to do fixes
because I can I think it'll be
for the for the fall I thank you
my friend thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman the motion for
this to occur in the sentiment
is yes the Levin generally users
the body vote yes all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was in a.
The eyes have it the house house
concurred in the Senate
amendments to house bill eleven.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business committee reports.
No objections so ordered.
To read.
Mr speaker you're rolling into
goals in committee to is been
referred house bill eight has
had it under consideration
reports that same has been doing
enrolled in girls preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
submitted Brittney Barreras
chair.
Please we are adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill eight all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
I was posing a committee for to
drive.
Mr speaker and rolling and
closing committee team is been
referred house bill eleven
thousand ended with emergency
clause has had it under
consideration for the same has
been duly enrolled in gross
perpetrated signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Brittney
Barreras chair.
Option credit option favorable
committee report on house bill
eleven as amended with an
emergency clause all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Most of those name.
Committee reports and how to.
Really I think the next business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objection it is so ordered.
Members I have some Committee
the news to announce.
Vacancy as vice chair of the
energy committee created by the
election of former New Mexico
representative Stansbury to the
US Congress.
Representative Debbie Sariñana
will serve as vice chair of the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee.
We have a vacancy in the
chairmanship of the taxation and
revenue committee to the
election of Representative
Martinez has been Majority
Leader Representative Christine
Chandler will serve as chair of
the committee on taxation and
revenue.
Representative Armstrong
Bernalillo county is resigning
as chair of the committee on
health and Human Services her
successor will be Representative
Liz Thomson into share of health
and Human Services.
That creativity can see with the
consumer public affairs
committee chair position the new
chair of that committee will be
Representative for our.
New chair of consumer public
affairs.
Representative Ely is stepping
aside as chair of the house
rules committee his successor
will be Representative Andrea
Romero the new chair of house
rules committee.
I also hear by accepting the
resignation of Miguel Garcia as
chair of the local governments.
Language and cultural affairs
committee that committee is
hereby dissolved
that will create any for folks
who are on the committee to move
to other committees and we will
be in touch with those members
the to Martinez with Davis and I
will be in touch with members as
well as for Representative
Johnson.
To get members preferences on
where they would like to be
assigned to the committees on
their so that is I ordered.
The gentleman from Chavis and
you know terrible thank you Mr
speaker.
Can you give the body an update
on the archive of websites
videos has that been resolved.
The letter has been recovered
ten is still in process.
The having been here multiple
times I don't know the status
as I said I'm.
Personally interested in that
because that contains the
recording of the first day in a
song for my daughter so
hopefully that can be recovered.
that concludes the business of
the house of representatives are
there any other announcements
before we adjourn.
Okay the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
As the chair of the committee
of.
On the Senate.
House has completed its work and
is rated with sanity is.
I will appoint Representative
Gallegos Representative Hochman
Vigil and representative Nibert
to email the Senate.
Generated you and said.
Really I think it was the
chairman of the committee to
advise the governor that the
house has completed its work and
is ready to return seen in the.
Five point Representative
Sarinana Representative Sweetser
and Representative taught us us.
To notify the governor.
I'm sorry generally familiar a
second motion of those three
members your interjection I
those two members are appointed
to inform the governor.
Is.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
As an action definitely and all
bills remaining on the speakers
table on the calendar and
committee except the bills
goals in committee.
All those in favor need at the
gentle if you.
Second that motion as I take a
motion I will recognize
gentlelady from Valencia.
Mr speaker as we get to finally
go home and celebrate the
holidays with their families I
have one quick question for you
what do you call a kid who
doesn't believe in Santa Claus
generally what a rebel without a
cause.
Thank you for saving your best
for last.
Gentleman earlier.
House June the Senate.
Filet Mignon I second that
motion all those in favor of
adjourning seen ADA signify by
saying aye.
All those of those may.
The nays have it we are still.
The eyes have it the house is
adjourned the scene ADA.
