Well as close we have a quorum
business in addition so ordered
is been requested that members
remove while.
Representative Martinez is ready
to go.
and also we will be doing
committee reports a little bit
of introduction and that will.
Be the end of our evening
together.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered.
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Dan often feel chair
Mr speaker move about move
adoption or in adoption of a
favorable commuter port Senate
bill one two as amended the
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill one twelve
as amended has had it under
consideration point I with
recommendation that a do pass as
I'm sorry house bill one twelve
as amended all in favor signify
by saying aye.
This bill is a yes have a good
productive.
Mr speaker your appropriations
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're in an optional
from committee for the house
bill two forty as amended all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
All those opposed may the
respectfully submitted a that
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're on adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill three zero for all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
recommendation to do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
that small chair Mr speaker move
adoption option will Ferrell
Committee for the house with
House memorial nineteen House
memorial twenty two House
memorial forty three House
memorial sixty one has had them
under consideration reports the
same have been duly enrolled in
Mr speaker move adoption where
the option of federal committee
reports on house memorials for
nineteen twenty two forty three
role that the Canadian rolling
engrossed copies of house
memorial for nineteen twenty two
forty three and sixty one were
signed by the officers of the
This is the primary go to that
order business messages in
addition it is so ordered click
to read message from the Senate
Mr speaker I'm directed to
Senate bill two twenty six as
amended Senate bill two to fifty
four as amended Senate bill two
house respectfully submitted
sherry do them on Senate chief
clerk this message will be
entered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
House memorial seventy six
introduced by representatives
Irish American day in the house
of representatives House
memorial seventy six introduced
by representatives block Duncan
Representative Allen Martinez
To have that.
Was Joint Memorial eight
introduced by Representative
stabilize us lord Karia Hemphill
Townsend and Jones the Joint
Memorial eight introduced by
representatives to get us lord
Karia Hemphill Senator Correa
Hempel excuse me Townsend and
amended introduced by Senator
Stefanics and representative
Thompson and act relating to
health care including physician
assistants and pharmacists in
policy declaring an emergency
Senate bill one oh six as
amended introduced by Senator
Stefanics and representative
Thompson Senate bill one zero
six as amended have equipment
introduced by senators Padilla
and hope and act relating to
military affairs and acting the
National Guard death benefit act
creating the National Guard
death benefit fund making
to the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
advanced the House
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill two twenty six as
officer within the state
personnel office creating
diversity and inclusion liaisons
within state agencies creating
the workforce diversity and
inclusion council providing
state agencies shall implement
such policies requiring a report
making appropriation senator to
twenty six as amended introduced
Senate bill two fifty four as
amended introduced by senators
Nevil and Campos and act
relating to license fees
amending came information
amended introduced by senators
level and Campos.
But two fifty Senate bill two
fifty four as amended having
been read twice by title is
introduced by senators Ingle and
pope and act making
appropriation to the Martin
Luther king junior commission
for salaries contracts or other
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rural development
land grants and cultural affairs
committee and the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Three oh one as amended
adoption of free roaming horses
under certain circumstances
allowing free roaming our expert
to control the population of
free roaming roaming horses on
certain ran through certain
roaming horse expert prohibiting
the slaughter or export for
slaughter of free roaming horses
providing a penalty Senate bill
three oh one as amended
committee events House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill three of seven as
amended introduced by Senator
Stewart and act relating to
least half time providing
technical clean up Senator three
of seven as amended introduced
by Senator Stewart.
Senator three oh seven as
and Representative Borrego and
act relating to county officials
increasing the amount of
additional compensation
accounting we provide to
Twenty four have been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
Senate Joint Memorial eleven
for rating disabilities systems
failure to make reading
determinations in a timely
manner Senate Joint Memorial
eleven introduced by Senator
Brandt.
The lady from.
Before we go to the gym lady
from Bernalillo.
Delayed from early older
gentleman announcements.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee advance House
Judiciary Committee attentive I
number is two two five four four
Committee potential I number is
two two five four four two point
one see no objection it is so
ordered.
committee M. and placed on the
calendar.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
our leadership assistant in the
major office and I would love if
you all to join me in singing
Happy Birthday to him and have
him be recognized gentle lady to
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business third reading
of legislation seeing no
Garcia ready on item number
seventeen.
Thank you Mr speaker can you
give me that point.
The record reflect that all
bill Mr speaker I do have a of
the.
Special guest well a special.
The Mr speaker bill house bill
one twice amended related
professional licensure boards
extending the gentleman that
termination date of the letter
private investigators by the
public accountability.
real estate appraisers General
Services emanating the
with that Mr speaker I stand for
questions senior debate the
gentleman close.
Mr speaker of the house building
Was about to close.
I have sixty five in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house bill two zero one as
amended has duly passed this
house is a gentleman from the
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker house bill
two twenty six will allow our
gentleman to close Mr speaker I
now to move the house bill two
twenty six do now pass.
Final passage of house bill two
twenty six the vote is now open.
What close.
as in the past this house.
Gentleman from Santa Fe Iranian
item number ten.
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill Mr
speaker I bring to you in the
house of a house bill one eighty
tax certificate anytime during
the year and get credit for and
with that Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
six as amended the vote is now
open and.
Gentleman when you pass a second
bill you have to sing a song.
Not because I want to see
significant inseminated house
bill one eighty six as we pass
this house.
Deleted from Bernalillo ready
and item number twenty one.
Representative Matthews.
replacing house commerce
committee no Development
Committee subsystem for House
Bill eighty three has been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment.
And I introduce my expert Linda
Trujillo formally of this house
and now superintendent of
regulation of licensing.
Mexico Medical Board this is the
final step in consolidating
administration and enforcement
of medical doctors osteopathic
Yes there is generated from
Santa Fe represents sort of the
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
R. Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe thank
a concern anymore with the
changes that you're making.
Mr speaker at.
wasn't a divisive issue or to
figure out all the definitions
that might apply to moral
turpitude it is no longer in the
bill thank you Mr speaker that
Mr speaker I move that H. B.
eighty three do now pass we are
on final passage of house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
affirmative zero negative house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House eighty three has duly
passed this house.
Delayed from Santa Fe are you
ready on item number nineteen.
twenty eight of of as it has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
generated explained the bill
thank you Mr speaker House Bill
the I'm sorry the committee
substitute for house bill two to
their buildings including adding
solar or even becoming carbon
neutral this really is an
economic development tool that
we see in over thirty states
that we can utilize here we work
significantly with counties to
owners or commercial property
owners are reducing their costs
while increasing their value and
and opportunities to eggs to
attracting businesses without a
to the gentleman from Lee.
Speaker gentle lady could you
describe for the.
What
energy efficiency and it can
range a number of products that
are attached to it.
Mr speaker house for.
effectively the order and leans
that would fall into was it was
taking priority over others this
no longer has that priority in
place it ensures that the
current priorities exist for
the essentially this now the new
structure the new energy
efficient unit or units are then
tied to the building and so then
it would be up to the treasurer
to than collect that assessment
The capital costs to.
Suppliers of the equipment for.
To to the finance to quickly
thank correct thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman yes
it would go back to the lender
to be a suitable to what they're
attempting to do.
Mr speaker gentle lady is our.
special assessments that do
exist what this bill also does
is it removes the residential
pace program the residential
special assessment that that
exist already and and we said we
Mr speaker gentle lady there was
no.
Perspective if you will from
county tax assessors on
implementing this piece of
all agreed on no they they
agreed that they like this
version and actually during
committees at testified in favor
of it.
Senator.
Chavis Mr speaker thank you very
much for yielding I do have
concerns whenever you talk to me
about the agricultural aspect of
this I have not had a chance to
that are involved in that thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for thank you gentle
lady my apologies thank you Mr
thank you gentle lady the lovely
lady.
built into this assessment I
want to start there it would
allow for low finance options
for in agricultural settings to
use for drip irrigation water
it we can extend over thirty
years really making those
payments and evidently lower for
the building owners or for the
property owners.
Mr speaker how does this
implement whenever there might
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I'm gonna take a
moment to pull it up in the bill
itself because that was a big
piece that came up prior to all
and all we do here written
consent from any holder of a
lien mortgage or security
interest in the real property in
that the property may
participate the program the
signed that over to them and
this was critical to receiving
the the support of the county
because that became the
competing interests but by
allowing the other leads to take
precedent that helped in the
that is correct it would not be
in first position unless the
other lien holders assigned and
allow them to be.
Okay and I know that can be a
problem with some of the lien
agricultural properties.
Being.
In what your bill is proposing
here could it be one tract of
generally for the question on
page two online's eight three
two oh sorry not on page two
wines thirteen through seventeen
you'll see the eligible property
does not talk further on that so
as long as it is a privately
owned commercial and industrial
agricultural or this otherwise I
think that they could they could
ask you one more question just a
body of.
What if there is electric coop
that wants to apply for this but
they be eligible thank you Mr
So Mister speaker with the lives
saved money and I'm just
throwing this out too because I
I'm kind of curious hear you my
interest in this whenever I'm
talking about electric
parts of it and let's say they
also service the oil and gas
industry.
So they would be qualified for
that which in turn would make
together thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady it because
it is a permanent fixture on to
commercial property covered
under commercial property it
the change their business park
to be carbon neutral this
attracted to house breaks to
come over to Cuesta and created
all kinds of new jobs out there
so the the the energy efficiency
of financing to develop energy
efficiency and add that as a
value add when they're reaching
out to business to occupy their
space that facility would then
whenever you're talking about a
multi family will hold on to
multi family residential real
property with five for more
dwelling units would that be
Tell me about the real property
owned by an entity formally
recognized as taxis CM pursuant
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
completely new those typically
are a hundred percent covered in
costs but it's also available to
offer like rehabs or or
improvements upon V. vacant lots
are billions of dollars are
invested in thousands of
projects to make efforts Morris.
The assessors don't do not have
a problem with the language the
to have put in here it my
understanding that correct thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady yes that's correct we were
able to read get their support
took care of by making this
committee substitute thank you
Mr speaker thank you generally
as you use actually some of the
issues that you in particular
brought up on the concern that
them to oversee once we're able
to come to this agreement they
did not feel like that was the
need anymore because of
concerns.
Mr speaker thank you for answer
my questions I do appreciate it.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe you
yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle and family.
Thank you.
You gave somebody a thirty year
loan.
You care the loan and you've
been carrying that loan Mr
speaker and gentle lady for
twenty years.
By chance you get in here you're
not aware of this but at this
point in time Mr speaker and
Who is the company that wants to
make improvements and then they
get a notice from the state of
New Mexico that you no longer
have the primary lien on the
property.
that happened to you that I'm
just trying to build the dynamic
of the storyline thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen I I
will say that I I would imagine
that be frustrating but in this
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
that in the scenario that I
built would you give up your
priority Mr speaker gentleman of
of course on that front I
wouldn't and I don't think
that's expected in these cases
that was one of the agreements
more questions.
This.
The lady from canton center
support of an as a
representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker of the gentle
lady from Santa Fe yield thank
you Mr speaker I yield to the
two hundred thousand dollars
recurring.
And N. F. T. and a hundred
thousand nonrecurring to create
the guidelines for the county
the loans can be used to pay for
the administration so for
example one of the things that
is called for in this program
actually concede in section
eight
include the cost of materials
and labor necessary permit fees
etcetera etcetera.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
but it also says to create the
guidelines for the county
but as we saw in the FIR it was
a nominal expense because this
would have to be on a county by
county basis.
Thank you Mr speaker.
This would you be doing from San
one of things about this bill
that my County did not like at
first was when it was
residential when I went to
visit with them as they looked
over the bill and and we talked
back and forth for several days
over this they're still not
happy with some of a but but I
A. said the good thing about
gently the speaker it I hope
that we don't have this bill
next year the comes back and
says now you have to thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen I
have zero interest in making it
if Mr speaker gentleman your
County feels that this is a an
opportune they want to add and
they want to promote business
coming in that way that's their
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr president ladies
you thank you Mr speaker I yield
to the gentle lady from Santa Fe
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I don't believe so
however in this bill in
particular we lay out the you
must get up above prove all to
place.
Generally just for clarification
so the approval have the lean
has to be already existing for
this to get approval.
Mr speaker.
have a lien on it then you said
Hey I this is great opportunity
through our you know to the
state or through our a to to add
energy efficiency I want to take
advantage of it and there's of a
receive priority over the other
liens they would have to have
approval from the other priority
liens.
think Mr speaker thank you Mr
thank you.
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady Santa Fe yield thank
you Mr speaker I yield to the
catch up but I when I read the
page two line eighteen.
In the bill.
It identifies.
Is energy efficient improvements
mean measures equipment or
devices that result in a
decrease in consumption.
Of or demand for electricity or
natural gas.
a more efficient natural gas
unit or a more efficient it
doesn't necessarily have to be a
sober unit is that correct thank
you Mr speaker thank you Jim and
that is correct yes if it is a
On the new designs gentlelady Mr
speaker if you had a design for
a new.
Building construction.
I'm sorry Mr speaker John can
you say that we raised the
question or maybe I
misunderstood it.
Well I'm just
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
applicable on new construction.
that.
Maybe a developer chose a more
more energy efficient both case
that would qualify.
In late thank you Mr speaker
there's a gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert to.
In going through this which I
didn't see before tonight.
It makes me question.
Why.
exciting to me so from one
aspect if you're lending out
money money tomorrow is always
worth more than money today
that's a fundamental principle
of of Lente you can ask anyone
decreases the cost that you have
to lower your costs but then it
also may be a way to attract
businesses to utilize your
commercial property if you're
factoring you know a lot of the
lot of companies are looking at
know again it's it's insurers of
about the the value the property
may increase because it has
energy efficiency piece the one
thing I'll also see that's very
unique about this why we're
efficiency units on there are
shorter terms however on this
allows for longer terms of up to
thirty years.
So Mister speaker gentle lady as
of lending money and borrowing
money for these energy
efficiency projects and then you
have the county.
Who would in essence Services
that correct thank you Mr
speaker essential and Mr
chairman yes essentially that's
right and you know honestly from
a are you that I've attended a
few the economic development
opportunities that we've heard
increase of that so increasing
opportunities for adding value
to commercial property is is the
budget but yes.
it's necessary to have the
governmental entity involved in
the transaction thank you do
explain that thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen
because the energy efficient
doesn't matter who owns it that
that would be rendered from
there.
Mr speaker delay that that would
occur anyway you if you if you
borrow money from a bank to put
real property in that lane with
the taxed would run with the
land just slide this claim would
run and so again I'm I'm a bit.
the collector and the pay your
of the money that's involved in
the transaction thank you
speaker they they Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen you know
when it comes to these types
building itself it decreases the
costs overall for for the owners
who want to engage in this or
for the lenders that we want to
engage and and we'll get working
with the county's we found a way
The money that the lender or not
yes the lender would be paying.
Would be on their tax bill would
not and with that that allow
tax however it would include
improve the value of the
property potentially so that may
come into play but again that's
that's you know speculative in
that sense so Mister speaker
perplexed as to what.
Advantage there is in having
this three party.
System set up and involving a
advantage to either the lender
for the owner of the property
Is representative and.
thank you gentlemen for the
question I mean again what
you're looking at this type of
financing it isn't readily
available everywhere and again
this is something that as I
mentioned earlier over nine
decrease the cost of property
owners.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I will remain
confused but I guess also
express my appreciation to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe for a
building within the design of
this legislation that it is
discretionary for local counties
for the R. thirty three counties
Santa Fe of a question on page
nine of the bill.
Representative I.
Mr speaker gentle and resent
very on page nine paragraph I
application for this I have to
have obtain written consent from
each lien holder of record that
they are consenting to me being
Mister speaker July from Santa
Fe and so I I guess.
My experience
Both as a lawyer and then also
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe I mean is that a fair
assumption thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen absolutely
and I think one thing I say is
that this is why it's taken so
long for us to come to this bill
and education with others to
make sure that it was a fair
process and if that New Mexico.
Mr speaker generally from Santa
Fe and I appreciate
what the bills trying to do but
a mortgage on the building
otherwise you're asking the the
financing company to take a
junior position as a lien holder
gentlemen again the financers
you know have their you know
disruption which they're looking
at this you know in
conversations with some of the
groups that you financing the
would be easier absolutely for
someone but no other leans on
their property to engage in this
however it would be you know
still available to everyone.
state they they take out a loan
to purchase a commercial
property I do think there we
need to evaluate
what we need to do as a body to
make sure that there's capital
disagree with that but because
of the lien priority issue and
having to get written consent Mr
speaker joined from Santa Fe the
only other thing I want to say
Mr speaker Julie from Santa Fe
something that you might take a
peek at is that one fifteen
right now reads written consent
from any holder of Ilene and I
think of what what there's
every single wing holder and at
the end it sort of cards out
except for liens for general
at the lower property taxes born
for improvement district claim
you might consider also putting
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does a
gentle lady from Santa Fe of
thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from someone.
A property owner were to default
on their taxes.
And the in the county for two or
whatever government entity of
the payments of for the lender
who the third party lender in
that instance Mr speaker and
gently thank you Mr speaker
the the priority one.
Thank you Mr leader
speaker gentle lady if
in the instance of a.
The.
The lien holder of for any of
these improvements.
And the lien holder for these
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Again there I I believe this is
a question earlier from from
understanding what you're asking
there has been a program in the
the commercial because we feel
that we more effective
especially for economic
development.
Some speaker July maybe I maybe
I can ask the question correctly
I didn't understand correctly
something happened not correctly
collecting the payments.
If.
The property owner were to
default on the loan is the
county responsible.
To force that and would they be
responsible for collecting
unpaid payments.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jim and I believe we address the
bill's going one moment to pull
that section.
fourteen section sixty Madam
says that this is the holder of
a special assessment assignable
certificate the institute
proceedings to forclose and it
the special assessment lien
against the property that is
delinquent in payment of the
does the committee sub did it
remove any question of moral
turpitude.
All Mr speaker gentleman we are
continuously fighting moral
Gentleman from Katrin grant the
the the representative of the
losses.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally please yield thank you
trying to wrap my mind around
this and so I I know for a fact
that there the Mr speaker gently
that the
mortgage company is not going to
person and because I'm trying to
see what how this works and why
we would do this normally when
we go get alone on something
to get a loan separately never
tie the house it with the bank
and get this loan for this
improvement is that what does
does that sound correct Mr
with with these improvements is
to get them at lower costs okay
Mister speaker generally I guess
what so what maybe I'll ask you
a question you can tell me so I
How would I pay for that through
this company because I don't
have the money to pay it and so
I go with and I would have to go
through some sort of financing
can you explain that walking
if you for example your your
your parents die and they hand
over to you some commercial
property and it needs
improvements in order to make
it's all it's it's been you know
property to then and you could
do it be it being financed
through one of these banks that
specifically does that if your
county has signed up for it so
for example in Santa Fe I would
before when the the inherent
this kinds of commercial
property you know this would
make it more affordable for them
to make it attractive for new
businesses to move in.
want to get this financing
you're telling me that the story
that or the.
The example you gave me is only
because I want to make it more
good building because I'm trying
to understand why I would want
to just why would.
I would have to have a building
that's in great shape for all I
have to do is upgraded with
is that right Mr additionally
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman you know what I
believe the the the second part
is you're right you're county
would have to be part of this
however whatever agreement you
can't claim that you know how
perfect or pristine the building
would have to be before it was
you know the it received energy
efficiency it would just have to
have units that were more
efficient than had previously
thought my grasping at hi I
received inheriting some
inheriting something and I'm
either going to sell it.
Mr speaker gentle lady or I'm
commercial lender to make that
happen.
And and so I think from just
confused is if I have to go to
I'm not going to carve out just
you know everything except for
this the improvement on new air
conditioners or solar panels or
something it would usually be
There is their first position
when I have to improve a piece
of property
for this to take place and I
think that's where I'm confused
counties that do I'm more
confused on the positioning of
of of someone releasing their
first position about how I would
do a remodel or a construction
position to
alternative company thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman and
if someone denied that first
position that's fine they would
be junior to that firstly that's
new part of the reason why is
that they anticipate three
payment because it already is
and take tied and all the other
payments that are being made and
again as I mentioned the
beginning for when you're
are financing so for many banks
and was a mentioned over three
hundred banks that is a
worthwhile effort to engage the
to lend to that person okay
Mister speaker generally that
work on the second
Lean because of the improvement
I did through efficiency I'm
efficiency of you know I don't I
put into our commissioners
separately.
I go to I sell the building.
does it carry over you know the
the but obviously the pay off of
the first mortgage what happens
to that second position do they
have to pay it off in order to
unless the new lien holder would
would then offer it to them and
again it would still go to the
county and that they wouldn't
have to pay off the entire
what's the remainder on their
come down to it is a different
health care many other issues
this is about building and and
economic competitiveness for
each of our counties that is
unique to itself and really
helping our business owners a
speaker I ask I move that a
committee substitute for H. B.
two two eight do now pass from
final passage of house commerce
and economic development
development committee substitute
for House Bill to twenty eight
has duly passed this house.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
consent that the rules be
suspended journal show that all
those present in this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session there's
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
miscellaneous business in
addition this order.
Members thanks for another
productive evening we've we're
getting through quite a few
bills graduations to all of you.
thank you Mr speaker members
signaled the gentleman from
Santa Fe Avenue and San Juan
Representative lead thank you Mr
speaker your house taxation and
revenue committee will meet
tomorrow at eight thirty in room
will meet tomorrow at one thirty
and three seventeen members take
note.
Munoz was generated from
McKinley is in alignment
percentage of Johnson thank you
Mr speaker your government
burritos try to arrive early.
Thank you Mr speaker members
technology lady from Los Alamos
Dixon thank you Mr speaker your
house appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting
tomorrow at one thirty in room
three oh four thank you thank
recess until eleven AM Wednesday
March first.
It is already March it is hard
to believe thank you members the
house was in recess until eleven
