That may happen madam.
Well at least a lots of bills
referred to this committee thank
you for for being here we will
hear your bill now Senator Lopez
thank you very much madam chair
and good morning to everybody I
know these are the last few days
of sessions of both chambers
were kind of like our my
caffeine was everything else
that I need to get going at a
bowl of it.
They bring us and.
On.
SO thank you senator.
madam chair I am honored to sit
in front of you with a simple
bill but a simple bill that has
I think a huge
makes a huge statement for the
state of New Mexico and who we
are here at this is to honor the
lotus where's the just by
designating April ten it's not
asking for state holiday or
anything madam chair members the
committee but just to designate
April ten which is her birthday.
As the lotus we're sitting.
And as we know her history has
long has been long of the work
that she's done across the
country namely working of course
in the in food workers movement
in California we'll have stories
maybe of what the effect has
been of system Chavez and others
but agency where the in home
right as a Hispana Latino
Chicana
has been a leader in many many
different ways advocating for
rights of Family family's
Education and many other issues
that we have always discussed
here in the legislature she's
from dust in New Mexico a mining
community just north here and I
know in in many aspects I think
New Mexico since she's one of
our daughters is that we should
look just to see what we can do
to preserve some special places
an das in New Mexico because she
I think it's just an icon for me
and I know many persons that I
speak with quite regularly.
So I'm here in front of your
committee again just designating
April ten as the lotus with the
day in New Mexico on a stand for
questions thank you senator on
we're gonna go to the public if
you're here in favor of this
bill please raise your hand.
Opposition.
There anyone on the zoom.
Bernie to questions from
committee.
Etcetera any questions.
Of that one.
Is and I I have a couple of.
That chair of Senator at the I
have no questions to be truthful
just we appreciate you coming in
presenting this bill this
morning and
With the.
Stand in full support you know
it the.
It's there are history no matter
what.
If what it is is to me is our
history is what we are that's
what we learn.
You know of
In our schools you know they
want to one of my big thing is I
want to take this out of our
history or they want to put this
out of our history the good bad
and the ugly is our history and
it needs to be preserved.
And our state history is very
special thank you ma'am for
bringing this to the madam chair
thank you Representative Mason
foster customer thank you madam
chair Senator I think this is a
great field she has done a lot
of work for respond those are
Chicanos and I think it's
something that we need to keep
her legacy going and thank you
for bringing this forward thank
you thank you senator I'm from
the central San Joaquin Valley
of California so the lord's work
that says our child is our icons
the state.
So many of us but definitely who
I am my grandmother's a
farm worker everyone in my
family was a farmer great except
for my generation which I'm you
know I'm grateful that my family
allowed me to explore something
different because that is how of
back breaking work being the
centerpiece of of that the
economy and I know that the
lower court that has had such
influence I grew up thinking
that it was all of us has our
Chavis he he was he was out and
about but the lord's work that
was was the woman that really
created the framework of the
movie and I would say she's
forgotten but for me
It took me some time to
recognize how she was the
centerpiece of that movie I'm
grateful for this this bill I am
grateful for her and and thank
you senator I would like to into
motion.
I would just mention a second
seconded the to pass by
Representative by your customers
I could invite Representative
Sweetser.
Representative Lujan
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Maribel Molina
yes Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Terrazas by your
because they no yes and chair or
has yes Senator you have to do
pass on Senate bill four sixty
as amended thank thank you I
appreciate good morning
everybody good morning.
Committee members this this is
it I think we might have
something on Thursday but it is
an honor and a pleasure.
Some of the factors that are
very pleasant.
Thank you to our committee
attendance thank you to our
committee analyze within this
you guys all of our analyst
thank you I mean we may be doing
this again on Thursday so you
know what time thank you to all
of the all of our sergeants all
of the keeping us all safe we'll
