Madam vice chair Johnson.
Here.
Madam chair blue.
So Representative Ely we didn't
get your official as well as
Representative Rehm.
Representative reams here.
Representative Ely scare.
You might have as a new.
Representative Eli.
Hello.
He's having tech issues.
Okay we have a quorum.
And I'll text Representative
Eli.
Let him know he can't hear.
And let's go ahead and continue
with house bill five
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair I want to
be sure that
we've added to the panelists
both Daymon Martinez.
Of former
U. S. attorney and now working
for the City of Albuquerque and
also
James Grayson the deputy
district attorney okay we will
pull them over as panelists.
Representative Ely can you hear
us.
Representative Ely.
Now.
Barely.
What.
Sure can.
Yeah we can hear you now great
yeah I don't know what's
happening I couldn't hear you
now you can see you twice to
well cool wall I'm gonna turn
this.
Okay.
There.
Thank.
Sure.
So Representative Eli you were
the.
Person that was had the floor
last.
Thank you madam chair so we've
gone through the bill I'm not
gonna do that again I if this
gets out of
This committee we will readers
of the bill I'm sure and
judiciary but I do want to give
madam chair I could is the
representatives experts still
there.
Yes okay are so I because I'm
such a nerd about this stuff my
kids give me a hard time I went
and looked up on the basis that
that the experts cited and I
just want to give me a heads up
about this both the direct to
cases that he cited in the
system so I decided really R.
I'm I I want to say this gently
do not have an application of
what we're talking about.
Decided first to Jessica's case
which is a first circuit federal
decision if you're re judge then
judge Pryor's decision what
you'll discover is is that most
of that discussion had to do
with the congressional record as
it was passing the pre detention
of pre trial detention statute
as she knows our state District
Court judges in interpreting a
statute are not going to be
looking at the congressional
record we have a state system
and what I can be relying on the
federal courts and their
interpretation of a statute that
has nothing to do with this very
case which is a New Mexico Texas
and I just I I just think it's
fair to give everybody a heads
up if this gets out goes to
Judiciary was cited for the
proposition that all you needed
was the charge that is not true
the very case justice Chavis was
very clear about it while he
talked about the charge she said
under our records to section
thirteen even if the defendant
poses a threat the state must
still prove by clear and
convincing evidence under
article two section thirteen
that no release conditions for
reasonably protect the safety or
other person or the community
instead prosecutors must present
evidence like to finance a
restraining orders dangerous
conduct in violation of a court
order intimidation tactics
threatening Beitbridge stalking
witnesses victims or victims
family members or inability or
refusal to abide by conditions
released in other cases that's
our current system that we
already have so
the statute would change that
would not be consistent with
state forces very
there were two other systems
cited so that I'm clear about
this one is New Jersey
and I've I've heard that
repeatedly in support of this
kind of statute and and here's
the problem there's a couple of
things one New Jersey limits
presumptive Dane.
First Mr murder and crimes
during licenses this statutes
much broader than that and
otherwise prisons release but
the most important thing about
New Jersey and the other system
that we're talking about which
is the federal system their
speedy trial archer rigorously
enforced so for example in New
Jersey you can't be an attention
more than a hundred eighty days
at gan as we get into Judiciary
what you're gonna find yes I
have all kinds of examples where
people sit in jail for a couple
years or are indicted and don't
get tried for a couple years we
just had a recent case on that
couple of recent cases and the
federal system of course has a
whole panoply of alternative
programs that people get while
they're in detention drug rehab
mental health counselling
medical care all kinds of
treatments and care that we are
woefully missing in New Mexico
all you have to do is read this
morning's paper the Albuquerque
journal to see how dire the
conditions are M. D. C. where
most of I think of the people
we're talking about are gonna
end up and so I I don't I just
want to give everybody a heads
up that as we go forward relying
on other systems and cases from
outside the jurisdiction
particularly federal cases are
really going to service to New
Mexicans because it does not
reflect the real world in New
Mexico but I want to switch on
you before I turn it over to the
other panelists and I want to
ask and this is again directed
Madam chair representative at
your expert on I heard our our
D. A. tortious testimony in
Senate Judiciary talking about
the LFC report which we'll get
to in a minute what I would like
to know is if your expert has
read the institute for social
justice Representative.
Forward in December of twenty
twenty one and if so what
lessons did he think we're drawn
from that report that we could
use going forward.
Madam chair I as Mr Grayson to
respond to that.
Sure.
Representative Eli thank you for
your question so if we're
talking about the federal system
it's important to note that to
them New Mexico Supreme Court
self relied on the federal model
and the federal scheme for bail
reform in state actual torrez
verses with personal it is
directly applicable to New
Mexico.
I'm also in terms of speedy
trial.
Ricky at least Bernalillo county
and potentially other districts
are going forward operating the
case management order that does
have strict timelines for going
to trial and in addition the
second judicial district
attorney's office as indicating
the response to the LFC years
report has an eighty three
percent conviction rate.
With respect to the LFC
she's more by our report
Representative you live
mentioned I could not find a
December two thousand twenty one
I just our report if you go to
the I. S. AJ website there's an
August two thousand twenty one
report I have read that but I do
not find a December report and
so if Representative Eli has a
copy of that were
In direct us to where we can
find that out of I would be much
appreciated in terms of the
August two thousand twenty one I
just our report it reports on
data for all defendants released
not data on defendants that were
released
after that I'll of a motion for
pretrial detention.
And therefore the statistics
provided by the I. S. R. do not
apply to what we're talking
about today which is what
happens when a defendant who is
presumptively dangerous is
released
Our own statistics in our office
showed that.
eighteen percent of defendants
who have been released after the
filing of a motion for pre trial
detention have gone on to commit
either a felony.
Or a violent misdemeanor.
Eighteen percent is a number
that is much higher than other
states that have bail reform.
I hope that answers your
question Representative I chair.
Yeah madam chair and
representative that expert I'm
looking right at right here it's
December two to twenty twenty
wanted to entitle the public
safety assessment preventive
detention will bubble
presumption from Bernalillo
county I'm sorry I don't have
any problems finding it is
prepared by their Mexico sensing
Commission so if you haven't
read it let me go through its
use some of the question Senator
learned in and again.
Let me just tell you what my
real concern is policy wise
particularly with the second
judicial district DA's office.
Instead of trying to learn
something constructive from
these reports it's always gosh
the data is wrong you know it is
this is wrong that's wrong it is
a legislature.
Early on in my career as a
legislator there was a halfway
house in the south valley that
was reporting an eleven percent
recidivism rate.
So we went down there.
Ought to look at this because
that would be extraordinary.
And I was with Senator with
another legislators staff
members from the LFC our chief
of staff the speaker's office
and what we discovered in about
ten minutes is that the
recidivism rate was fifty
percent why they were just
skewing the data in a way that
supported their positions and so
what I learned as a legislator
is you cannot rely on the
people.
That are gathering the data for
their own purposes to then
report on the success of that.
They have to share that with
people like LFC and in this case
LFC specifically asked for the
data and I will tell you that
the the main frustration that I
have with the district
attorney's office is that it's
this silo approach we've got to
break down the silos so that we
have access to information and
people that are not directly
related to the criminal justice
system like the sentencing
commission like LFC that aren't
kind of and as so to speak in
the line of fire maybe a poor
metaphor can look at the data
and evaluate you guys were asked
with the state at and you did
not find and what I read in the
Albuquerque journal just two
days ago is that you're gonna
blame a staffer for that give me
a break LFC is calling and
asking you for the data you find
you don't rely on the staff
there are lessons to be learned
from this our New Mexico's
sentencing report that was
prepared by the institute for
Social Research including things
like and they're talking about
rebuttable presumptions so would
seem to me that would be very
important for you as an expert
to know that this report exists
and to take a look at it so I
mean I'll go through it with you
but I'm not going to ask for
response because I don't think
that's fair since you haven't
read it but I will find its
Representative Matthews if she
doesn't have and she may not I
don't expect the sponsor to have
it I would expect the expert to
have it
so the kinds of mistakes that
can be made in on in these kind
of pre trial detentions or
things like false positives and
false negatives so the science
question and I'm reading now
from the reporters how much each
kind of miss it proposed Karcher
would make and so what you're
looking for is to see what
system works the best and what
the institute for.
R. Social Research concluded
through the sentencing
commission is that actually this
system that works the best in
terms of making sure you're
reducing false positives and
false negatives and I have
summaries if you'd like I can
give you all kinds of summaries
are based on a variety of
evidence is the current system
if you're gonna have more false
positives and more false
negatives using these kinds of
would blanket rebuttable
presumptions by the way I I as
at you you referred to the
constitution I'm gonna leave
that to other members I don't
trust you so anyway but I'll
leave that to others but I would
really like you to look at this
report or have they need a look
at this report prior to the
Judiciary Committee hearing if
this gets out of this committee
which you know if it does I
would really like your response
to this but what I'd like you
something a little less depends
not gosh they got it wrong the
data is wrong what are we
learning I mean one of the
things that it seems like we can
work.
Is that one of the most
effective deterrents to crime is
swift and certain punishment
everybody seems to agree that
and yes it looks like the
district attorney's office is
moving in the opposite direction
they're they're fighting pre
trial hearings our preliminary
hearings which would force the
prosecution to gather their
evidence quickly put it in front
of a judge training there
prosecutors by the way because
they'll be in a courtroom put it
out there so that the defense
lawyer can cross examine
witnesses so wetness becomes
unavailable you can use that
evidence later and not have
trials two years later after an
indictment and then how trials
declared a mistrial because your
witness unavailable or witnesses
on cooperative or otherwise
falls within the rules of
unavailability so that you can
still have a trial you can still
convict the person so my
question now goes to since we're
not gonna talk about this could
you have read it is now I want
to ask you what lessons can be
learned from the January
seventeenth twenty twenty two
report from LFC.
Madam chair representative I'm
just waiting for an answer can
you hear me.
Can't hear.
Chair Representative Eli I'm
sorry I thought you were we were
still.
I didn't realize you were
switching to us question yeah.
It thank god let me try that
again so now what I'm asking
about since he hasn't read the
December twenty twenty one
report which is white on
rebuttable presumptions were
wiped out of the very subject
we're talking about now I'm
gonna ask him what is his
response I don't need a they
didn't have the data kind of
response I'd like to know if he
views anything constructive
things that he thinks are
valuable to know from the
January seventeenth twenty
twenty two report that was
prepared by LFC I know you have
that because the district
attorney referred to it is
testimony before Senate
Judiciary so what was your
blessings what things can we
learn from the LFC report in
January of twenty twenty two.
Madam chair I defer to Mr
Grayson to answer that.
Madam chair representative Ely.
There seems to be at the
misunderstanding about the
criminal justice system
Preliminary examinations would
not increase within certain
promotion luminary examinations
actually prevent us from
launching cases they prevent us
from initiating cases
preliminary examinations and
Bernalillo county actually go to
hearing less than five percent
of the time so those hearings
are not being held in a way that
would determine whether there is
probable cause to present
evidence at trial those hearings
are not taking place in a way
that we train attorneys those
hearings are taking place in a
way that takes police officers
off the streets so they have to
sit in a courtroom for an entire
day during the trailing docket
only for the defendant to fail
to appear and hearing to be
reset.
Civilian witnesses who must take
time off work you must pay for
daycare must sit in a courtroom
for an entire day waiting for a
hearing to take place only to
have to come back after the
defendant fails to appear.
So Representative Ely that is
not part of the system that will
assist in a swift and certain
punishment
in terms of data what we have
learned is that social
scientists and researchers have
very little understanding of the
criminal justice system we have
very little understanding of how
the system works and what helps
in in terms of fighting crime.
We have a ballooning crime rate
crime rate in New Mexico right
now and part of that crime rate
is driven by people who have
been released from pre trial
detention.
We have eight percent of people
who were released from pre trial
detention or committing felonies
or violent misdemeanors.
Those individuals can be we can
protect the community by holding
those injured individuals in
jail pending trial because they
are danger to the community.
So in terms of the.
LFC porch Mr grace and we can't
hear you.
Sure.
Was any of that audible dot.
Yes it's just when you started
back up again so now we can hear
you thank you madam chair.
in terms of the LFC LFC report
specifically there are many
things that can be learned and
we've we've learned many things
in response to that and provided
a detailed response I I don't
know if Representative Eli has
that detail response but it does
have many answers to what was
presented in the LFC report we
will be meeting with analysts
from the LFC this week we will
be discussing our data with them
and we we will be sharing our
data and our data approach and
have a conversation with them
about.
So madam chair representative
and
discretion I are still going to
answer my question I would like
to know from you.
What's changed in the LFC report
which you have I and I read the
response but I would like to
know from you what things do you
think we've learned.
That are useful from the LFC
report January seventeenth
twenty twenty two.
Madam chair I defer again to Mr
Grayson.
Sure Representative Eli if I may
have a minute to pull the
reports specifically discussed
in
specific things in the report no
I'm I'm waiting I I I would hi I
want to know if there are things
that you found useful in this
report it seems like your
question we can work off of that
maybe we can find some common
ground.
Sure Representative Eli I'm
scrolling through the report
right now and I think there are
many valuable things in that
report in particular the crime
rates the crime rates that are
detailed as being applicable
statewide.
Rather than in Bernalillo county
alone
there are significant increases
in current and crime rates as
well as homicides.
Across the state.
Keep scrolling Representative
Eli if you'd like me to I would.
I'd like to know what we can
agree on I'd like to see if
there are areas of common
understanding.
All right let me see if I can
direct you okay let's go to page
five.
Research shows this is the under
heading to research shows the
certainty of being caught is a
more powerful deterrent to crime
and severity of punishment for
criminal justice system this
means it is important
prioritized solving crimes in
securing convictions
particularly for serious
offenses is that is that out our
conclusion you agree with don't
agree with.
Social science research Madam
chair representative Ely I
believe shows that swiftness
certainty and severity all have
an impact on deterrence
looking at sixty.
If we can turn instead to page
H..
We're talking about the
percentage of cases
Dismissed and conviction rate in
Bernalillo county
again I know Representative Eli
doesn't want to hear
defensiveness or
Contradiction but in fact we
have run numbers ourselves and
those are those numbers wrong we
have a three percent conviction
rate in a sixteen percent
dismissal rate what is of
particular note here though is
there is agreement between our
office and the LESC that
conviction rates were
significantly affected by the
case management order in two
thousand fifteen and I bill
reform in two thousand
seventeen.
Rebuttable presumptions are way
to mitigate the.
Act bill reform has had and the
the case management order has
had on to the streets well I'll
be asking LFC that today I think
we're getting a presentation
this afternoon but here's what
it says it says however hello
she's two thousand eighteen or
valuation this is from four
years ago found that is crime
rose the mid nineteen twenties
arrests and convictions remained
flat or declined as that's
something you disagree with.
This is again operating from the
same paragraph on page five just
so I can direct you just right
underneath what I just read to.
The arrests and convictions
remains let know that we do not
agree with that Representative
sorry Madam chair representative
Ely our our data indicates the
connection rates dropped
dramatically with the
involvement implement
implementation of the case
management order conviction
rates then dropped again with
bail reform two thousand
seventeen but we have worked
very hard to collaborate with
the Albuquerque police
department to increase our
conviction rates and to mitigate
the harm that was caused by the
CMO and bill reforming
conviction rates have been
increasing since two thousand
seventeen.
Think that's my criticism of the
DA's office why not sure that
that up early and not at the
last minute where you can sorry
but I am concerned that because
your being the folk your the
focus of this that the data
might not be as accurate as
you're presenting it to us which
is why we need more than a
couple of days to evaluate the
state of why would you share
that with the LFC months ago
years ago I don't get it in the
problem in the criminal justice
system continues to be silage
the people for information and
then use information for their
own purposes we are now getting
this information in real time at
the last minute when you knew
this bill was coming up the LFC
had asked for and you did not
provided to them I don't mean
you personally but your office I
don't get it if the information
is so secure as you say it is
why not put it out there for
everybody to see early and often
and in real time why isn't that
happening.
Chair representative Ely it is
happening we have shared our
numbers ways yeah hi Committee
when when the ad hoc committee
took place in two thousand
nineteen we did share numbers
with the LFC in two thousand
eighteen response to that report
we have been sharing numbers all
along and in fact we asked the
institute of Social Research for
their data and we were told that
we could not have access to.
we were not given back and
access to this city until very
recently so I agree with
Representative you live that we
should not operate in silos we
should all be sharing
information but in fact the
district attorney's office has
insurance information
information we share is that
there is a significant
recidivism rate among those
defendants who are released pre
trial and that significant
recidivism rate can be reduced
by rebuttable presumptions so I
would encourage you madam chair
representative discretion to
read the quotes from the
district attorney's office the
Albuquerque journal where he
said the information wasn't here
because he didn't know that LESC
was asking for it and apparently
was some anonymous staffer that
receive the request and is now
will no longer with the dust out
so now hearing yes the
information was provided is
completely opposite with what
the district attorney said to
the Albuquerque journal just a
couple days ago just so you know
so our rest upper down not
connections now our rest up or
down since the mid two a twenty
chance because it says LOC two
thousand eighteen about UA ation
found that is crime rose noted
back in the mid **** twenty
chance arrests taking out
conditions for now remained flat
or declined do you know if
that's true or not have you
looked at that.
Madam chair representative Ely I
believe Representative I
misunderstood what I said we we
will be sharing information with
the LFC analysts this week.
and and I I was not
contradicting what district
attorney Raul Torrez instead in
the Albuquerque journal what I'm
saying is that we have ensuring
information along with the with
the interested parties with the
judiciary with the answers to
Social Research all of those
entities with the shared data
with
as as far as restaurants
Representative Ely do not have
those from.
Okay so you don't know one way
or the other whether restaurant
right now.
Madam chair representative Ely
no so if they're flat or not is
up matching the high crime rate
the district attorney so far as
you know is doing nothing to
help address that working with
APD said Sarah that would be a
PED's responsibility and you
guys are involved center that is
not fair Madam chair
representative Ely I do not have
that information in front of me.
that is the answer to that
question yes no question is not
that that.
S. rates are going up and that
we are not helping AP in fact
the opposite is true we
collaborate very closely with
the Albuquerque police
department and as Mr Martinez in
the past and we work very
closely together to ensure that
the community is protected and
that the safety of our
communities improve.
Madam chair Representative
discretion so then on page six
it says Albuquerque's violent
crime rate rose by eighty five
percent from twenty twelve to
twenty seventeen
is that do you know is that
correct not correct consistent
with your data.
Sure Representative Eli I again
I do not have the data in front
of me right now but I don't
dispute that generate right here
okay and it says and as remain
stuck and persistently high
levels some assuming that since
two thousand seventeen will
check with LFC but I'm sure
that's right you don't know that
either and I I'm not I'm just
saying that given your answer
would expect you know so it says
over the same time period
arrests for violent offenses
rose by only twenty percent
resulting in a widening
accountability gap for the most
serious offenses closing this
gap should be a key goal for APD
and the second judicial district
attorney's office do you agree
with that.
Madam chair representative you
are what I agree with is that
there are.
That that.
Lowering crime rates and
preventing crime is very complex
issue and there are many things
that can be done within the
system.
To assist in protecting our
communities one of those things
is an acting rebuttable
presumptions that will assist
judges in determining which
offenders are most likely to
commit additional crimes while
pre trial release.
But but my question really is
this goes now back five years
right we're talking about this
is historical data that
the crime rate went up eighty
five percent and the arrest
rates only went up twenty
percent is that part of the
problem do you know.
There's this accountability gap
in terms arrests I'm not twenty
of the right to do I'm just
trying to figure out what's
going on here and does the DA's
office no.
Madam chair representative Ely
the DA's office is very
interested in the orange primary
the DA's office is also very
interested in working with APD
to do so I do not have the
specific data in front of me so
I can't answer questions about
the specific data what I can say
is that we work very closely
with the Albuquerque police
department we at we have very.
difficult procedural
circumstances in the in Burleigh
county specifically with the
case management order with bill
reform with a reduction in the
grand jury all of those things
have reduced our ability to
initiate cases and to prosecute
cases but again we work very
closely with the outreach with
police department to shore has
high conviction rate as
possible.
Yeah.
Madam chair representative
demonstration I I mean I
appreciate the talking point
that we're going to keep going
back to rebuttable presumption
I'm not asking about convictions
I'm not asking about anything
that has to do with the same I'm
asking about a wretch are you
saying that arrests are down
because the CMO is that going to
be your testimony today because
it is I'd like to know why.
I don't Representative Ely madam
chair I don't have an answer for
whether arrests are down I don't
have that data from me so I
can't say what is the cost of
the resting down what I can say
is that police officers are
being taken off the street they
are being taken off of
patrolling the streets in
keeping our community safe to
attend preliminary examinations
to attend pretrial interviews
these are procedural issues that
are at that arises in Bernalillo
county that prevent police
officers from doing their job.
So you are sure that arrests are
down at least in part because
the CM up correct.
Madam chair representative Ely
again I do not have that
information from me with the
data for rest I'm not saying
arrests are down what I'm saying
is that officers are taken off
the street to spend time in
courtrooms we're waiting for
preacher primaries animations to
court when they could be
patrolling streets and we can
have more grand jury time to
launch cases.
K. I promise you that judiciaire
were and talk a lot about grand
jurors my question to you is
let's assume for purposes of
this question the rest of lack
goes just assumed that I want
you to assume that you can tell
me I'm wrong you one of the data
I just need an answer this
question if they're flat does
the DA's office have a position
on whether that is in part
caused by the CMO is that what
you're saying and do you have
data think back to the office to
support that position.
Madam chair representative Ely
if I make an assumption the rest
of flat.
I can't then make an assumption
and then a tribute to a position
to the district attorney's
office related to that
presumption so what you're
asking me to do is not only
assume the arrests are flat but
also say why we think that is
true.
If if I don't know whether it's
true or not because I don't have
the data in front of me I can't
tell you what our offices
position is with respect to
that.
Yeah madam chair and I'm I'm
gonna get off is pretty quick
but I have to tell you madam
chair representative Mr grace
and on the one hand you quickly
save for taking officers off the
street implying that they can't
be out there arresting people
but on the other hand when I ask
you to use our data that
supports that that is impacting
rescue that's a very unfair
question I don't think you can
have it both ways if you don't
know you don't know so I would
appreciate it if you would be
clear with the public and say
Gee we don't know the CMO has
anything to do with the rest one
way or the other rather than
what we're taking officers off
the street and implying to the
public that that somehow is
impacting rest when it appears
that you don't know that is that
fair Madam chair representative
Mr Gration I don't think you can
have it both ways.
Madam chair representative Ely
what I'm saying is that at the
attendance of preliminary
hearings and pre trial
interviews.
Takes up officer time they can
be spent while officers are can
be spent patrolling streets and
keeping our community safe so
that's what that's what I'm
saying Representative Eli and it
whether that affects arrest
rates I think it's common sense
of course it affects what real
restaurants if police officers
are not on the street and they
can't make an arrest then it
would affect your restaurant.
But I don't know I don't have
that information from me I'm not
saying my office doesn't have
that information I can certainly
check with the members of my
office we're doing statistical
analysis but I don't have the
information from me and so
that's not a question that my
office can answer this question
I can't answer today because I
don't have information from our
Mr I had madam chair
representative Mr Gration you
can expect to that question will
be asked to get a judicial
I don't think it is common sense
I think what's Clemente Sanchez
is it yes you and the APD the
district attorney's office and
the APD would work closely
together share data understand
what's going on with each other
so that you can recite it for
legislators know that there's a
sentencing commission study out
there having study to study the
LFC report and say this is how
we can get swift and certain
justice for people Larry hearing
sure part of that process
whatever it is we need to put in
front of the defendants what
they're facing quickly with a
real average with the right of
confrontation so that it's
bulletproof so the police can be
worked out because once
everybody knows what's on the
table then you can quickly get
to whatever the punishment is as
opposed to indicting people and
waiting two years until the
evidence gets stale and now
you've got real problems and I
just I gotta tell you none of
what you just said make sense to
me it just does you so what
makes common sense would doesn't
it's all part of the process we
need officers to testify to put
violent offenders away that is
part of the deal that is our
justice system we need to do
that we can't get away from that
and to preserve the evidence you
put the defendant in a position
where they got to make a choice
they got to take a chance with
real witnesses who have now
testified they've been have the
ability to their lawyer cross
examined are they gonna take a
chance of going to trial or the
going to plea that.
That's how you move the system
forward as opposed to the stop
of we don't want cops showing up
at the preliminary hearing why
would they do that well they do
that to get swift and certain
justice which you and I have
just agreed as an effective
deterrent to crime now let me
switch subjects on the violence
intervention program the LFC.
Talks about it being a promising
model is that something we is
the legislature should be
looking at.
This is on page nine.
Madam chair representative Ely
if they're going to questions
about the violence intervention
program I think our Mr Martinez
we better position to answer
those questions.
Okay fair enough she here with
us today.
Madam chair representative Ely
members of the committee yes
good morning.
This is a Martinez senior policy
adviser for the Albuquerque
police department.
Mr chair question Representative
WHEELAND yes please madam chair
representative Mr Martinez I
appreciate.
Madam chair Representative Eli.
Honorable members absolutely the
violence and repent the violence
prevention program is something
that.
is already working in
Albuquerque with the program we
have here
the numbers are proving itself
at this point and
so just for clarity
representative Ely
City of Albuquerque.
Has implemented this program and
is meant to have intervention
early to stop violence from
occurring and currently of madam
chair Chasey is sponsoring a
bill for
for the more for the City of
Albuquerque us that New Mexico
create a violence intervention
program for the state.
And what's important for this
legislation is we are we're not
saying Taylor these probation
Klay it would be a grant
program.
Through the department of
health.
And it would apply to native
American communities to small
rural communities and two more
metro areas and so everyone
would have a chance to submit a
grant for this and we're not
saying tailor your grants to
what Albuquerque's doing but
there would be some criteria in
there specifically for to deal
with violent crime in that area
of New Mexico that's applying
for the grant so we see this is
a very promising a program from
what's already the numbers in
Albuquerque that people do not
recommit and let me just give
you an example of of what we're
talking about here is if there's
gang violence.
Then.
We'll try to have some
identifiers going on and the the
statistics of someone trying to
retribution because of the gang
gang shooting is pretty high so
we try to identify those
individuals that we can then
approach and say look look
hurting somebody shooting
somebody else retribution isn't
the right way we have we have
resources for you and by the way
you know we we know about this
incident and are watching and so
Representative I
this morning I don't have the
specific number on this but I
want to say that of it's either
around ninety to ninety two
percent of those people who we
have approached that there
hasn't been further violence
involved in those situations.
not from I I'm looking at the
report the I don't know if you
have in front of you that I've
been referring to a Mr Gration
LC report it also talks about
these programs and I don't know
that you or Mr Gration can
answer this but I would like to
know why these diversion
programs are being under
utilized and why the drug courts
should continue to decline I
just think that's something
we've got a look at.
Madam chair representative Ely
members of the committee
This last summer more Keller
convene thank call the metro
crime initiative.
And the purpose of this was to
bring together everybody who has
a stake so we were able to
determine general's office the
DA's office the courts both
metro District Court
stakeholders in the community
such as Ranidae mesa
of indoor from power was there
and so we at the end of this we
started at the beginning of
summer theand we came out with
forty initiatives that we
thought were that we could take
immediate action on.
So as far as hello and what one
of the stakeholders I'm
forgetting to mention is the
public defender's office and so
we try to identify through the
process issues or gaps in the
criminal justice system here
that we could that we could
basically tech and try to fix or
try to work out so
Representative Ely when you're
talking about at the end of the
report the various participation
in drug court
the treatment one of the one of
the things that was identified
was a program that is a
diversion program with the DA's
office and the public defender's
office and just threw it and
this is where I really think
that the communication works is
through talking Mr Grayson and
talking to have been Baur about
this we were able to eliminate
some of the road road road bumps
and that and my senses and I
would ask Mr Graeser if he has
information which I think you
would as we were able to iron
out some issues I think the
program is working a lot better
concerning the District Court we
were able to and again this was
we have forty prongs of this MCI
we were I did where we were able
to identify a couple of issues
one with the federal court for
the need for the
For the District Court and
We were able to identify need
there that we're trying to
support a funding request for
that and then on another issue
was to leave program.
And you know the lead program is
something that's very a cutting
edge it's something that's a
diversion program and so
We're the report that you're
referring to talks about there's
none there's not as many people
should be going into this
program well we're working on
that issue too
I can I can represent you
Representative Ely that are
spoken to one of our.
Lead APD officers it diverts I'm
trying to figure out what the
road bumps in that are but we
are paying attention to that and
this is a priority for this more
and for this police chief to to
work on these issues all right
thank you one last thing Mr
grace I wanted to find out how
many requests are outside I'm
sorry Madam chair representative
Mr Gration I want to find out
how many LFC requests are
outstanding from the district of
from the district during this
season once you have not
responded to there are seven.
Have any idea you may not know
this Madam chair representative
Mr Gration why are there seven
outstanding requests for data
from from the LFC that the DA
has not responded to you now.
Yeah out short I apologize
That's it's it's frustrating for
for me as it is for you I
apologize for the audio Madam
chair representative Ely.
I I do not have that information
the only information I have with
respect to that is the same
information that Representative
I mentioned in terms of
that district attorney Raul
Torrez response.
to enquiries about that what I
can say is that we we have a
meeting set up for I believe
tomorrow with LFC analysts at
which we will be sharing data I
think the those requests for
data
My understanding is that they
were inadvertently missed so we
is not just a matter of us not
wanting to share data we simply
just didn't turn out.
Didn't get that data over them
or didn't get those those
requests back in in a way where
we can respond but we we we we
will be meeting with them
tomorrow
in terms of the diversion
programs that representative Ely
asked about one of those is pre
prosecution diversions.
I I was a prosecutor in the
fourth judicial district before
coming to Bernalillo county and
pre prosecution diversion is a
very important program that the
legislature has provided for
And it works very well with low
with low in defenders Law and
defenders
it's a program that basically is
diverting certain defendants out
of the criminal justice system.
that program does not work well
in Bernalillo county and the
reason it doesn't is because we
get a very very low acceptance
rates from the public defender's
office we have been increasing
the number of offers we make for
pre prosecution diversion and we
still have extremely low numbers
I believe they're lower than ten
percent I don't have those
current numbers with me but they
certainly were at the time of
the crime initiative when that
Mr Martinez mentioned so what we
work with
the city on work with public
defenders on was eliminating
some of the roadblocks as as Mr
Martinez said choose to pre
prosecution diversion we did do
that particularly in terms of
admissions that was a hang up
for the public defender
Department we we did remove that
requirement on in many cases but
we still have very low
acceptance rates and so that
that is an important program I
think Representative be live did
you mentioned diversion is very
important and and it's important
not only because these offenders
don't need to be in the criminal
justice system but also allows
resources to be used on the more
dangerous offenders like those
that we're talking with the
school.
Madam chair
Representative discretion I
think we found the point of
COVID drugs and up I would I do
want to point out that the
American Bar Association just
literally within the last couple
of days came out with a report
on New Mexico public defenders
that they have a third of what
they need the state so it's an
issue that we're gonna have to
address I just you know if this
is not your fault but I want to
be clear with you you know if it
was one or two request from LOC
okay I think I get it you Mr but
seven's a pattern and frankly
it's been a pattern and I am
really troubled by it I one of
the things that we tried to do
back in two thousand nineteen
with house bill two sixty seven
was to break down the silos it
should be automatic that is data
is gathered the district
attorney's office should be
sharing it with the other actors
in the criminal justice system
and with the LFC and what the
sentencing commission it's
certainly something that we're
required to request and
certainly not seven times we're
all trying to do the same thing
tab violent crime get violent
offenders off the street gets
within certain punishment get
those people that can return to
productive life back to
productive life but he doesn't
work when one of the actors to
the criminal justice system does
not play well with others and
that's what I'm seeing that's
why the frustration if you're
feeling for me it's for that
reason and so with that I will
all look forward to you reading
the sentencing commission report
are through the institute for
Social Research on and
responding to some of these
questions should this bill get
out and go Judiciary you can
expect the same questions over
again in Judiciary but I
appreciate your time thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Matthews for for
bringing this bill I think it it
it's prompting a lot of
discussion and I I know it's
it's prompting a lot of
questions for me I've talked to
folks in my community about this
lawyers and
folks who've gone through the
system and I have a lot of deep
concerns you know just
especially because we we know so
much about how the criminal
legal system and the justice
system that facts are brown and
black brothers and sisters all
around the state
I I.
I have a lot of heartburn around
this you know and I know that
so many of the the challenges
that we're facing now is because
of a lack of resources in in the
system at every single level of
the system right and what I
would like to understand is how
folks who work to protect the
rights of you know of the poor
and those that don't have access
to the resources as they go
through this system how how have
they been involved in this
process of creating the bill you
know I'm thinking specifically
of the racial justice commission
the ACLU of criminal defense
attorneys can you tell me a
little bit about that and how
how how those folks had input if
any thank you madam chair.
Chair Representative Ortez thank
you for the question.
the number a lot of different
organizations and individuals
have been involved in.
Working on this bill and trying
to figure out what we do that
the level of violence in our
communities not only in
Albuquerque but throughout the
state and one of the things I
want to share is station
organization Albuquerque New
Monday one of the
representatives spoke and it's
called rob R. O. B. B. ET and
every year they do a program at
this civic centre at the the
outdoor Civic Center there in
Albuquerque and the families of
the victims of homicides come
and there's just green under
some speakers and they put up
to.
The picture of all if each of
the individuals who has been a
homicide victim in Albuquerque
for a period of years just it's
more than one year period of.
Several years this year there
they put up I believe it was
three hundred and thirty three
pictures and names the names are
read the date of their death in
the family so candles
and it is a moving and.
Impactful experience so one of
the groups that we work with our
advocate groups who
Know about the victim's side of
mind crime.
And they have a brochure that
they have and they have all the
names and I took that and as I
was watching the names flashed
on the screen on this giant
screen I noticed and I was
standing next to my Estes and I
was struck by the number of
names the victim list who were
Hispanic or native American the
last names and that's not a
hundred percent you can always
use up a last name to for sure
yes somebody's ethnicity but
it's it's but it certainly is an
indication and I went back and I
went through the entire list and
I calculated again just based on
the last names what percent of
the victims of violent crime.
Homicides how many were
minorities and the number I came
up with and it didn't include
African Americans because can't
tell by the last name generally
as two African Americans but
just the Hispanic native
American names sixty nine
percent the victims homicides in
the city of Albuquerque.
To me.
Obviously we have to have a
situation in which defendants.
Have just as clearly but we also
have to have a system in which
victims have justice and the
reality is that we have a
disproportionate number of the
victims in our society being
people of color
Wait some possible Tafoya list
PP people who are poor.
They deserve their families
deserve closure and they deserve
somebody to be held accountable
for what happened to their to
the left.
We heard from many of those
people last time talking about
the pain that they suffered as a
result of that level of
violence.
In addition to working with
those groups and hearing them
and trying to be sensitive to
their needs
I spent
More than an hour
A good time with representatives
of the public defender's office
and we talked about a number of
these issues
We didn't necessarily agree but
we shared our our views
and we had a very positive good
exchange and I would going
forward
and if this bill passes would
continue to be working with the
public defender's office to be
sure that we are ensuring
justice for defendants as well
as for victims and victims
advocates
in addition I participated in
the process that.
We C. Martinez.
Talked about which was involving
to the City of Albuquerque did
these these meetings I think
there are six or seven I mean
maybe it's five or six I can't
remember I think I missed one
but this front community people
together from all walks of life.
And we would talk about the
various issues and then when we
go in to work at sessions.
Breakout sessions are not work
out breakout sessions and we
would talk about
what they would like to see one
of the things that.
Struck me because it was a time
we were sort of talking about
what changes should be made in a
particular area was and this was
an incredible brought.
Scope of people I'm very diverse
ethnically.
At age wise all kinds of waste.
We went into the break up
session I think was the last
break out sessions into and and
it one of the questions was what
would you like what do you think
the most important thing we
should change about the criminal
justice system and.
Three or four of our group of
about seven I can't remember
exactly three for those people
said we need to not be releasing
people and we should even do it
without a hearing which of
course.
That would deny justice to the
defendant it was amazing the
strength of feeling I'm on
community members in Albuquerque
New Mexico or participating in
the sessions.
There.
CERN the fear and the fact that
they see the release process as
being eight major Kerr's device
that we have in the city so I I
hope that answers your question
I I would simply say also that
certainly moving forward this is
a process it's not a yes it's
not a one off.
Fixing the problems in our
criminal justice system is going
to take and then some matter
were and it has to be a dialogue
it continues and it's not just
one thing this is a piece a tool
if you will to whole lot of ways
that we work including social
programs and anti poverty
programs.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Matthews I I
remain concerned that we we
don't have the input from
you know from all the folks who
have been working on these
issues for for years I I'm also
really concerned based on the
testimony a few days ago that
you that our LGBTQ I a community
has not been part of this
process either you know those
folks it the LGBTQ folks are
incarcerated at.
At higher rates and you know how
do we how do we protect folks
that are in jail waiting for
their you know waiting for their
pre trial release you know it
should this happen that you know
that that's the one of the
biggest concerns I have how do
we protect the folks who are.
Who are in jail waiting because
we have the lack of resources in
you know with the with the
criminal defense attorneys and
because we have the lack of
resources in the system.
Madam chair at Representative
Ortez and first of all I I want
to correct something there were
absolutely members of the LGBTQ
community that were part of the
dialogue in the city meetings
this was a very inclusive group
in on a I'm not sure who you.
The who.
You mentioned people were left
out I'm not sure who your.
Referring to because it was
unbelievably diverse group.
and everybody was participating
it was a really major initiative
by the City of Albuquerque to
have a community dialogue now it
was limited to our and and in
that sense
that Albuquerque is that
unfortunately sort of the leader
in the what the problem of
violence in it in the state
In terms of how do we protect
people in the jails.
Okay I wonder first if either of
Mr Gration or Mr Martinez would.
Want to weigh in on the issue.
Okay all right let me let me
that
Representative Matthews
Representative Ortez or or yes
first if I could clarify
something I will make sure that
I'm not misrepresenting so when
I said that all these groups
came together in this and MCI
initiative not everybody agreed
on all the forty prongs but
there there was consensus on the
drugs that your blood but let me
give you an example so on the
issue that we're talking about
today obviously the public
defender's office and public
defender about art don't agree
to it but yet they were they
were part of the process and
they gave you input they were so
that's just an example by I
don't want to over promise to
say that everybody agreed to
everything that that that didn't
hurt.
Representative.
Madam chair representative
protest concern your question
about the jails
That's an issue because the
McClinton agreement was signed
in two thousand seventeen I
believe and the City of
Albuquerque prior to this
administration signed on to that
but the issue was
constitutional you know people
incarcerated have constitutional
rights and so that was a
consideration there so that is
something that from a PED's
perspective we're still very
sensitive to because we're still
enforcing the McClinton
agreement and but something
that's changed from when I first
started in nineteen I think it
was nineteen ninety five when
the issue started surfing
servicing with the jail at that
point the City of Albuquerque
was responsible for the jail at
this at this point and when this
the Clinton was signed in two
thousand seventeen that's now
with the county
with that with Bernalillo county
itself to run that and I think
we've been seeing in the.
the new stories where you know
they're they're having staffing
and resource issues there.
Thank you.
Madam chair Representative Ortez
let me add to that
the question of the county jails
has been an issue I have met
with the association of counties
to have a conversation with them
about their concerns I also met
with the Bernalillo county
representatives including people
who run in CD eight in in the
state sorry.
Right
this is an ongoing conversation
about
It's not so much a physical
capacity problem the problem is
sufficient manpower person power
to staff the jails I.
But I would noted in at least
some situations and
M. D. C. is is an interesting
one we heard this testimony this
summer in the health and Human
Services interim committee they
actually have.
Programs in M. D. C. in
Albuquerque in which people with
addictions are able to get
and I'm not gonna always
remember the names to get to
deal with them with heroin
addictions and other kinds of
addictions and can actually help
them at a level of.
Beginning the process in dealing
with the drug addictions I mean.
Concept that it's all awful.
And there's no programming and
there's no effort to try to work
with people on addiction efforts
on addiction problems and those
kinds of things is not
necessarily true at least in DC
there are some real programs I
also know my background and
Peavey NJ family services which
which is a child abuse
prevention and treatment program
that and I and one of these I
just learned from in the state
we ramp parenting programs
indicate in the jails and
prisons and working with inmates
to help keep families together
and help them.
Work with their with their kids
and the M. D. C. just got a
federal grant and that program
is going to start up again and
there will be
eight vigorous effort to work
with people who are inmates
to maintain a relationship with
their families and help them
with parenting issues and I I
used to go and some of those
visits are and and it it is it
is stunning how powerful those
are in terms of helping people.
Get back to where did not get
back but but maintain
relationships and so forth so
it's it's again there's there
are there are numbers of things
that are happening
and obviously it would be great
if we could do more to statewide
because it's really good
programs.
You madam chair thank you
Representative Matthews I think
that's my biggest concern
actually you know I'm from a
rural.
District
and we hear a lot about what's
happening at at M. D. C. in
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county but this is a statewide
statute this is not just for
Albuquerque and I also do know
that crime is you know is are
increasing all over the state
and and I and I really want to
make clear that I am not I'm not
discounting that at all right
but but the programs that you
talk about like you know I I'd
like to know if there's money in
the budget that will increase
these kinds of resources you
know all around the state not
just in in Albuquerque you know
I'd like to know you know it you
know as we as we put more people
in jail awaiting pre trial
release
you know how are they going to
have access to their attorneys
how you know are they are they
going to be protected does does
our budget which is our
priorities reflect that as well
you know should we have a flood
of you know of of folks going to
jail awaiting how we're going to
also and madam chair
Representative Matthews how how
are we going to ensure that
rural communities have these
these resources as well.
Madam chair representative
artist I'm not on the budget
committee and I cannot possibly.
Know that it is not a member of
the budget committee I I don't
know the details of what all the
programs are that they are
looking at funding I do not it
to state is making major
investments and social social
programs and programs to and
that should over time reduce
crime
I'm it before I I add anything
to that I just wanted to see if
if either Mr Martinez and Mr
grace and would like to.
Weigh in on on the question yet
I need to ask.
Madam Representative Ortez thank
you Representative Matthews
thank you for your question
Representative Ortez
You know it's it is an important
thing to be able to protect
defendants rights to be able to
make sure defense can to meet
with our attorneys to make sure
that they are safe and general
in terms of the flood of
deferments that you mentioned
at.
This this bill is very narrowly
written.
it's very narrowly drafted to to
reach only the most violent
offenses and violent offenders
it it it should.
It does not reach a broad group
of defendants basically and so
there will be a flood of
defendants being held in jail as
a result of this bill
As I mentioned before to
Bernalillo county district
attorney's office and that's
only data I have and so I can
understand it applies statewide
but just to use the data I have
our office.
Files a motion to detain in only
twelve percent of cases and we
thought a motion for detention
sixty nine percent of the time
that we do file it's in violent
cases.
so this is this is a bill that
targets offenders who have
committed violent crime and
there has to be a balance of
course between community safety
and the safety of those inmates
in jail
this bill doesn't address the
safety of inmates in jail
there's certainly other ways to
do that but it does address the
safety of the community.
Thank you.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews Representative Ortez
members of the committee so if I
could go back to this MCI
initiative we're
you're asking what other things
are being put in place to.
One of the one of the examples I
can give you again of of the
forty was currently there is an
effort by Representative date
Hochman Vigil.
To look at the violent crime is
a public health issue.
It's my understanding that
there's going to be at office
through her efforts established
the department of health and
that there's I believe it's one
point one million dollars in the
budget so this is obviously
something that is very important
for the more for the city that
we support and we anticipate
that as the budget process
proceeds will be there to speak
in support of or testify on on
the need for something like
this.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative Matthews Mr
Martinez and Mr president I
really appreciate your comments
and.
We need to understand what we
need to do to
you to address the the wave of
violence and what we need to do
and community to.
to tackle this issue so I
appreciate that completes my
questions thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Matthews and your
experts I have a number of
Madam chair thank may I and
Representative just for a second
I'm sorry I was on mute and I'm
sorry Representative Chasey I'm
not trying to be rude but I did
I think there's been out.
And as I'm listening to the the
conversation and the questions
and so forth I think there's a
number of issues that would
raise that
It's great require some
additional order and I would
like to do at this point is to
not sure what the official word
is
I think you want to roll the
bill.
The yes I'm sorry
Yes bill at this point let us do
a little bit more working and in
and interactions with some of
the some of the people were
raising concerns I think that
would probably be the best at
this point if that's all right
with the with the chair.
Representative Matthews that's
fine you know I know
Representative Chasey and
representative Nibert still had
their hands up so I'm I I just
want to go to them briefly that
way they might be able to point
out some other issues that you
want to look at
so
you know otherwise they can get
off line with you but yeah we
can totally do that
Representative Chasey.
I appreciate that madam chair
and I do think a big budget for
the representative to hear from
both of us would probably have
different
Things that have occurred I
wanted to let everyone know that
in House Judiciary.
This bill doesn't have to
advance at a certain rate for
for this to happen but we're
going to hear the LFC present on
its data it's
First the memo that was written
by the LFC choose the finance
committee and then the the FIR
for House Bill five that's been
updated.
I'm going to find all of the
groups an opportunity to respond
whether it's the prosecution the
public defender's I would get
all of the research that is a
two results research as well
just we just need to hear and
all we're going to do that
intruders during.
And
One of the things that I really
really want the victims to here
is that those of us who have
concerns about this bill are
not.
We're not unsympathetic we are
completely with you on trying to
make our communities safer we
are.
We want to do it right we want
to do it in a way where we are
making good policy.
And I know Mr racing you said
that many of these people see
they releases the cons for their
particular losses and.
It.
Have the staff here
Representative reading I believe
that I understand.
Not all of those who were the
perpetrators were on this pre
trial release and I so I don't
want a confounding their.
Just really quickly Mr race and
I think you said you can't think
culinary interview and I think
about preliminary hearing right
so you're talking about.
What was required for
preliminary hearing and
so forthright.
Sure K. to see
I was saying preliminary
hearings and pre trial
interviews okay so those are all
separate parts of the process I
think that it.
Taking notes and and not you I
got confused about what you were
state.
Also
Want to know if there are
suggested solutions for the
availability of law enforcement
for.
The preliminary hearings
in the detention hearings
because that is that that's
something we need to address as
a and in policy if you're gonna
have a detention hearing on make
sure everybody's there because
you don't want to
What the judge handicapped.
With his or her decision.
And
I think.
I just want to say to I think we
should be looking at the cost
with the updated F. I. R. it
really annoys me when there's a
whole paragraph about the
success of the violence
intervention program and we
asked for ten million dollars to
get that program just started to
go statewide and the LESC
estimates that it could cost up
to twenty two million dollars.
Recurring ultimately to
implement the proposed system
yeah only one million dollars to
send house bill two for the
violence intervention program.
So it just seems to me that we
we can think of is is is a
response this.
Currently terribly expensive and
may not restore society so
without all let Representative
Nibert but you know I I do have
a number of constitutional
concerts.
Thank you representative
Representative Albert.
Thank you madam chair of.
I really don't know.
What I need to do your well if
it's been rolled growths I
My my concerns are really all.
Constitutional in nature of.
I recognize that the state of
New Mexico is.
In a.
Pretty precarious situation work
the events that have happened as
a result of
The changes have been made with
respect to the subject matter of
the state
but my comments and I've
discussed so we're we're.
With the representatives of.
Are are all constitutional
nature and so the the madam
chair if you want me to go
through these constitutional
issues I'm happy to do so or I'm
happy to of.
Be quiet go on to the next
matter it's kinda your.
Your call as to what what we
need to do here but all my
concerns are are constitutional
in nature.
Your if you want to go through
those I'm happy to.
And Representative Nibert to and
Representative Matthews I don't
know if you want to just find a
time to meet later on the floor.
If you both are okay with that.
Chair representative Nibert at
week we did have some discussion
yesterday Ms and that I think
that we could continue those
discussions
individual with each other and
not involve the entire community
if that's alright Representative
Nibert.
It that's fine and I think I
think we have another measure
coming up
before us regarding the
constitutional of for calling
for a constitutional amendment
all these very things and and
frankly my discussion could fit
in well on that one as well
because as we discussed
yesterday Madam chair
representative
the citizens of New Mexico.
Change the constitution.
And so in my view of the
Legislative.
Our service is somewhat
constrained in this regard
because.
What the people New Mexico did
in two thousand sixteen so I
your it's the people the Mexico
that are going to have to the
paper exchange but that's that's
kind of the basis of my
discussion so I'm happy to allow
the committee move on to the
next batter and discuss this
further Representative what life
for to have this discussion in
connection with the other
legislation that will come up in
front of the strip it possibly
before up this comes back thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
thank you for agreeing to go
take some time away from
committee so that we can move on
that I appreciate that and.
Representative Matthews I think
once you've been able to address
some of the concerns that the
committee members have raised
then you can let us know how you
want to proceed but until then
we'll just role this bill over
until then thank you madam chair
and I
think just one thing
This problem.
Is this from violence is not
going to go away and I checked
yesterday.
He has had eleven homicides
already this year and we need
solutions I'm.
I am happy to talk with anybody
who has some good ideas thank
you.
Thank you next we are moving on
to.
House memorial.
Number five I believe and
Representative.
I don't know excuse me.
House memorial eleven.
Representative contenant you
would raise your hand and we can
promote you to the panel last
and Representative lane if
you're also.
Available we can promote you as
well.
Okay great so welcome
Representative Cadena and
Representative Lane we are ready
for House memorial eleven.
Good morning madam chair and
committee thank you for the
opportunity to present today
we're in front of you with house
memorial eleven which request
that the New Mexico association
of counties convene a task force
to study the cost benefit and
feasibility of a unified jail
and prison system currently as
many of you know and understand
jails are operated as individual
detention facilities by
individual counties.
The presentation of our our
memorial this morning I think
they couldn't be more timely
given the really insightful and
important discussion you all now
had over two days including of
which the question was often
raised about what the current
strains and limitations to
capacities are faced by the
county jails so with that I
would just offer that again all
our task force does again it's
just a memorial just a task
force is study with the
appropriate partners what the
feasibility could be for me my
commitment to this issue is
considering the outcomes for
folks that are moving to New
Mexico's criminal legal system
currently we don't have standard
procedures or policies we don't
have standard ways of tracking
someone's health care records
are making sure that we are
attentive to their behavioral
health needs we also know that
counties including mine have
sometimes been strapped with the
cost of.
What it looks like to
incarcerate someone so with that
I think it's a conversation
worth having I will if we have a
just a quick minute madam chair
turned to my co sponsor
representative Brantley to make
a quick comment before we go
back to you all.
Thank you madam chair a good
morning members the committee
for me I this comes down to it I
just you don't know what you
don't know there's you know
twenty seven different detention
facilities and I think I think
we owe it to the taxpayers to so
we study and analyze is there a
more efficient way of managing
the system and also I think
there is also the chair inside
of it besides the dollars and
cents which is depending on
which jurisdiction and you you
make it a different level
service depending on which which
detention facility and so I
think that needs to be looked at
and thought through as well and
for those reasons I support this
thank you.
Great thank you
Representative will go ahead and
open a pull for those that would
like to vote in support of this
memorial or in opposition.
House memorial eleven it's now
open and will keep it open for
about thirty seconds.
And then once we once we close
that will keep it open for a
little while on longer but once
we close it will take comment
from those folks that want to
speak an op art in support
excuse me as part.
Great okay so we have ten people
that voted in support zero that
voted in opposition and we will
go to market Donatelli you are
now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I speak in support of this as a
criminal defense attorney public
defender and prosecutor and.
A member of the sensing
Commission over the last twenty
years I've witnessed all the
ways that the counties and the
corrections department have been
involved in criminal justice
issues that if they were
coordinated could address public
safety this is what long needed
whether it ends up being unified
constitutionally or it leads to
better coordination and strongly
in the public interest to study
this question come up with
recommendations to the
legislature thank you very much.
Great thank you next we have
Selena and Jones you are now
unmuted.
Selena you'll have to and then
on your end.
Thank you madam chair
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Selena
Jones and I'm the general
counsel for the administrative
office of the courts we believe
in the benefits of the goals
mission of this memorial and we
are a name to member of the task
force and we look forward to
participating so I speak in
support of this memorial thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
Next we have then it.
There.
You are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is been a
power in the to public defender
for the state of New Mexico but
I support this memorial and I
think it's one of more probably
important and substantive
memorials that you're gonna hear
the session origin prison
systems have developed over
decades I think with little fox
about how they actually operates
together is a system and it's
always important to challenge
our assumptions and examine the
foundations of our institutions
we haven't done that for a long
time I think of many of our
jails and prisons are in sort of
a functional Crisis now through
no fault of the people who are
in good faith trying to run them
well and so it's important to go
forward with with this kind of
examination thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next we have grace
Phillips.
You are now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm grace Phillips
general counsel for the New
Mexico association of counties
and this memorial is in fact a
New Mexico counties initiative
we as you know are counties are
responsible for for many years
the statue dates to eighteen
sixty five I'm for responsible
for running detention facilities
throughout the state and
currently there are twenty seven
adult facilities and the ability
to do that is largely based on
individual county resources and
every year you have seen
evidence of that the challenges
the challenges that are involved
with having
multiple governmental entities
running detention facilities in
the state running prisons
including
legislation every year to
appropriate money to see which
bucket of taxpayer dollars
should be used to pay for which
a detainee here in May and as a
representatives have already
mentioned as a Sanchez of are
you mentioned we think that at a
sincere exploration of our
system how it might be better
arranged could is is really an
important thing to do we we know
that we don't have uniformed
medical records we don't have
uniformed in may management
systems and there are really you
know significant challenges that
that creates for people in the
system and and we would we would
very much welcome the
opportunity to work with this
small task force to see what
what we can learn and to share
that with the legislature at the
end of the interim thank you.
Thank you next we have Rikki Lee
Chavez.
You're now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Richie this on
behalf of the New Mexico from
all defense lawyers association
we also in our encourage you to
support this memorial and
appreciate the work of the
Sanchez we often ask their the
members of the Legislature to
consider the impact of our
correction facility on
individuals who find themselves
in the criminal legal system we
appreciate your time and
consideration of this
important legislation and our
I'm always available as a
resource to members of the
committee and members of the
legislature with regard to
criminal justice issues thank
you.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay I'm near record I don't
know years per opposition.
you are now needed.
I I apologize yes I'm here in
support of and so yes near
record on behalf of the ACLU of
New Mexico
I'm here today are to support
our bill HB SR eight seven
eleven.
Local jails are inefficient and
costly to the public and produce
numerous civil rights violations
that are often reported to the
ACLU for investigation so
because of that we would support
a feasibility study and urge
this committee to pass this
memorial built thank you.
Thank you.
Okay and that concludes public
comment and we will go to
representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
I was contacted earlier early on
on this so memorial and.
Hello my but former County
commission have and
in that regard but I do have
some concerns of and the text of
the bill.
It's now been introduced still
gives me some pause for concern.
So all spend a few moments madam
chair going through those
concerns are and it's not that
I.
don't think that the study's
warranted but the I'm a little
concerned about the
confines within which this
memorial the.
What steps.
Will be conducted so we'll give
them to the
Madam chair and and
representative
Stated our goals as I heard them
in in yours and the co sponsors
of remarks were.
Vied standardization maybe
reduce costs to the counties are
become more efficient and to
address some humanitarian issues
are.
And.
I would like to.
Explore some of those because
of.
As I see it if we if the
counties what we but it's a
counties turned over.
The responsibility of detaining.
Our citizens
you have a statewide system as
opposed to a local system.
My fear.
My concern is.
You're going to accomplish your
standardization.
There's going to be.
Some tremendous effort by
department of corrections to
keep those costs as well as
possible.
And to become more efficient
system that there are
what is being advanced.
But I'd like to look at maybe
some of the cost or or some of
the other facts about and so if
we have that a station system.
It seems to me that the
department of corrections is
going to want to consolidate.
The Senators.
Probably largely along the Rio
Grande Valley.
My concern is that if your.
detained in.
Western for far eastern New
Mexico.
Are your you're going to spend
time in a facility that's a
hundred to two hundred miles
distant.
And
I'm not sure.
is a good thank you for this
service Ms of HLT.
To have to experience the their
their loved ones or or the
actual person who's been accused
of the crime and is being
detained.
And so well it sufficient.
It may save some costs will be
some added costs due to travel
but overall probably just save
some costs are certainly
standardized things but.
costs to the individuals in the
county.
may be exasperated.
When you have a local detention
center.
There's an ability for family
there's an ability for our
thanks to occur locally.
That would not exist in this
sufficient system.
You would not have work release
type program.
If we used in your local
community because it's likely
for these outlying counties
there will be those facilities.
So so those are some of the
things that I'm concerned with.
And madam chair and
representative of.
I discussed not with you but
with some of the people
advancing this.
Some thoughts that I had to deal
with the efficiency of the cost
maybe even a little bit of the
standardization and that would
be to authorize.
Counties to enter into
collective agreements and have.
Regional.
Detention facilities that that
the counties would be in control
and what of course by them be
more centralized
and.
That issue.
Would not be an issue to be
discussed because on page three
lines.
Three four five.
The goal of this task forces to
study the cost benefits of these
abilities of transitioning the
state to a unified Jehlum
presences.
I don't see any anything in
there that would give this a
committee the the ability to to
look outside of that and to
consider some of these other
ideas.
and if you could point me to
some language that would maybe
allow that expand the those
expanded discussions to take
place I sure would like you to
point that out.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and representative.
I really appreciate these
considerations and like you one
of the first questions I raised
from looking at this memorial is
that question of what would
happen if we were incarcerating
our community members farther
away from the places they call
home.
And when I looked closely at
these maps and push further into
the language we have presented
here before you.
I reminded myself that again
this is just a study but also
what this study does not include
looking at the language is an
inclination that the prison
system is somehow run better
than these county jails I would
say potentially it's not and I
just also point out to the
information we have that some of
the jails in New Mexico that are
accredited and actually modeling
what it looks like to do this in
a way that is both humane and
cost effective are the
facilities in rural New Mexico
including sign on county curry
county Roosevelt County Lee
County so I might offer that
it's actually the facilities are
this to right from the Rio
Grande Valley and and our
central corridor that have taken
this immense responsibility of
incarcerating people to a level
that actually needs the needs of
the communities and the
taxpayers that they serve to the
question of the transition
language I actually read that to
myself again today and I don't
know if you noticed but when I
introduced the bill I don't use
the word transition because I
think when we come convene a
body with such expertise
including leadership from the
corrections department the
counties which I imagine would
send
this detention facility managers
from real New Mexico as well as
the bigger populations like mine
and then yeah as the as and
finally with the AOC that if it
if they if they studied what was
possible in a unified system and
found shortfalls are found ways
that it just wasn't going to be
the right policy for New Mexico
that out of that conversation my
hope would be that with the
right people in the room we
start to coalesce and build
residents around where those
gaps are but for me the
reassurances is if we can start
to identify the gaps whether or
not they come out in a report
that would come from this task
force I still think there's a
possibility to do so but at
least we would have documented
why this may not work what those
reasons were and that could be a
starting point for.
For the exploration I think the
the possibility you suggested
sounds like something worth
pursuing as well so I don't
think again this is.
The task force the study we had
to have a research questions so
that's why it's to study the
transition but the outcomes of
that could certainly include the
shortfalls of this proposal and
I imagine the possibilities of
others that counties and and
specifically might like to bring
to the table I'm not sure if
Representative lane would like
to offer anything else that
doesn't make us.
Thank you madam chair.
Chair just briefly just two
things are in response to
Representative Nibert one I
think if this if this goes
forward after the study and
there's any kind of what I would
describe a billing legislation I
think you can put confines
within an enabling legislation
try to address some of these
concerns and I also think
there's a practical component
where if you have a criminal
digit detainee who's waiting
trial let's say an aspect
I have a hard time thinking that
he's gonna get shipped to
Albuquerque.
While he's waiting trial come
back up for pre trial hearing
come back up for a motion
hearing those kinds of things I
have a hard time seeing that
happening I think maybe what
what you're describing is this
post trial and in long term Kerr
serration but I think some of
the practical components to all
dressed up.
We'll give madam chair and and
Representative I I see a very
specific focus.
In this piece of legislation.
I don't see the flexibility
that.
If I were still sitting on the
county commission that I would
want to see in this study
because to a certain extent
right now county commissioners
are charged with and are
responsible for that the
painting of incarcerated
People are within their county
at least.
Up until their their tried and
then possibly there after
sentences under three hundred
sixty five days
We county commissioners will be
giving up.
That authority of the state and
you know if it's feasible and
that's about and I note with
interest the member states or
the states that have a unified
system.
And I look at that and with the
exception of Alaska which of.
Has its own unique attributes.
All of the other states that
have this unified system.
Are smaller.
Then.
Some of our counties.
You can drive from Rhode Island
from one end to the other.
And.
A matter of.
Maybe under an hour of.
Or less
In New Mexico.
I can't get to the next town.
Within an hour.
Driving north from Ross.
One is ninety miles of.
And so.
I see these examples of a
unified system but I go well
that's great.
People don't have to drive very
far to.
C..
The incarcerated individuals
would cost rated individual can
be transported fairly easy
I see this upward again if we're
going to meet the efficiencies
that we're going to meet the all
all the things that the
Representative said they wanted
to be
population demands of those
facilities be aware of the
population is greatest it's not
going to be in Union County it's
not going to be in a dog okay
you know
they're going to have
centralized facilities where the
populations justify of.
To meet certain.
HSD thresholds and and we as
legislators will probably demand
that because we want the biggest
bang for our Buck
So I I.
I think you're I see the tea
leaves of Science going to move
forward but I would encourage
the the sponsors to expand the
scope.
Expand the scope of the study
and have it go beyond just
transitioning the state to a
unified jail prison system but
to basically study whether or
not.
Counties themselves could
deliver the services in a more
efficient manner and allow them
some flexibility to enter into
those agreements that I talked
about or to those still have
maybe not transition to a
unified prison system under the
department of corrections but
but still give the county some
flexibility about maybe the
counties of want to get
completely out of this and and
if that's the case of you know
that study auto auto be able to.
detail that as well but I think
there county commissioners
throughout the state need to
recognize
yeah the cost the cost to them
part of their budget may go away
if this occurs.
Unless the state imposes a three
on detaining those county
prisoners you can in the unified
the jail and prison system and
don't be surprised if the state
would require the counties to
reimburse the state for those
costs
it you know.
I just really think that it
needs to be expanded I think the
study is probably good but I
think what needs to be studied
is goes well beyond a very
narrow focus of transitioning
state to a you know I jail and
prison system because I don't
think that New Mexico.
Can do what dell work.
In Vermont and New Hampshire and
Rhode Island.
I just don't think that it's our
I don't think it's so good for
our service and and well there
may be some cost savings I don't
think it's good for
The counties to.
After.
Have it citizens travel in many
cases hundred hundred two
hundred miles to
interact with people that are
detained
so that's.
Madam chair my comments and
concerns a lot of expressly used
to.
Of the association counties as
well as so
one of the representatives are
sponsoring this of him but I I
just hope that if it moves
forward or as a group forward
that we expand the scope given
the study group a little more
flexibility and what the study
should consist of and not just
focus them on
from Bernalillo county detention
system to a state your I need
all.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and before
I ask the questions that I have
I wanted to ask.
Representative condenado because
she raised the issue initially
if you would use a different
word now than transitioning and
if so what because maybe we
could
address Representative diverts
issue.
Thank you Representative Chasey
potentially some kind of
considering or consideration I
haven't looked to words math it
yet as I've been paying
attention but I would feel that
it might be appropriate to to
roll that back from the
transition to a consideration.
Okay so let's let's just just
keep that question out there in
the air for the future because
sometimes I think we're better
off in the memorials not
suggested an outcome.
And and have it be a little bit
more open ended problem solving.
What I want to state madam chair
is that.
I worked with the counties with
very Johnson was governor and I
was a fairly new legislator
because the burden of the county
detention centers on the
counties is enormous and I know
grace Phillips.
wasn't the attorney for the New
Mexico counties at the time that
she could certainly attest to
that now.
In order to carry the bill that
helped a lot because we used to
have
We used to be incarcerated
people for their inability to
pay a fine and so there
incarcerated so they're not
earning any money they're not
they're in their ability to pay
a fine isn't increasing while
they're in jail so what the bill
I had.
Started giving them credit for
an hourly rate well there's
research
and.
You know zero out there fine and
that was a huge relief to the
counties because they were it
costs a whole lot more than the
fine to incarcerate those
individuals.
I was I was working at.
Twenty years ago I guess but as
when I was practicing and had
clients who had children CYFD
CYFD custody who may be detained
in the county detention center
Sandoval County detention rents
a cottage attention what I found
is and I had some newer in Santa
Fe County as well though the
cases were not in Santa Fe
County but there's such a
variation as the member of the
state on services available in
the center and it really.
It could really.
Help the whole system is the
Cruces we're able to provide
more services is when people are
in incarcerated in their
facilities and let me just say
that Representative Cadena
brought this thought that some
of the outlying counties have
been more.
Creative.
Responsive with the treatment
programs and the thinking
specifically in San Miguel
County offering medication
assisted treatment in the county
detention center and that is
just a very effective.
Method of treatment and it's
it's restored to the individual
to the community so I I think we
really should look at trying to.
The word isn't make everything
alike but greatly ally in the
array of services available in
the County detention centers I
also really here Representative
Nibert about the distance.
Because.
When I was first before I was
ever in the legislature and I
was working and early childhood
special education.
What we were able to through in
getting three and four year old
public education for children
with disabilities is remind
folks Mexico is the fifth
largest state geographically.
And people were having to drive
the distance from Washington DC
to Philadelphia to get services
for an infant or toddler with
special needs so that's really
untenable.
And and I think that what
Representative Nibert is saying
is you don't want to end up with
people so far from their
communities you what restoring
them to the community you're not
maintaining the times and
maintain with highs is what gets
you
better recidivism performances
so I think that's something to
look at and with one of the
state but this could be really
good to is that.
A client in the Leinster county
who whose children were in C. Y.
T. services it had nothing to do
with his incarceration it was
incarcerated before the children
were deemed to have been
neglected.
But he wanted to come to the
hearings and I would I would
transport order and let's see
County sheriff's would go get
him in he was in Lee County.
And he would come to solicit
County and then come to the
hearing.
After awhile he didn't want to
be transferred because he was
losing good time.
Because he was leaving the
county so.
By standardizing in some way or
aligning services or aligning
the classification of the
services.
I think you could get away with
that problem because you
wouldn't be if you were in a
facility that perhaps was
The that would let me just say
if you don't align them and they
don't become state programs
that's a that's an issue to
address for this task force
because your bills want to keep.
Adults from showing up in court
regarding their children's well
being is that turned up these
children were reunified.
Because he was released and
doing well and so you really
it's too bad that he didn't get
to see them when it was you
didn't get to see the when he
was in town and he would have
seen them at the court hearing.
So
Covers issues and I I definitely
think this is an excellent idea
for study and and perhaps find a
way not to presuppose.
A conclusion but maybe could
done little more open that might
be helpful.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair in one of
my
My only comment is that I think
while they look at this they
should also look at
The juvenile detention our
issues there's so many counties
that are having to take their
juveniles.
To several counties away but.
That's my only comment thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and that
committee members I just have a
quick comment thank you
Representative Cadena we're
bringing this of house memorial
forward.
As we look at correctional
facilities that continue to fail
are populations and as you look
at.
The study of revolving doors
and this transition into a state
of high yield system I wanted to
know if you or if I could
request that you look at the
institutional way of life as a
way of restoring a person's
pathway to society and I guess
I'm mention the institutional
and life because I've been to
some facilities and they're
cold.
You know they're built
with us that the man and it's
cold emotionally mentally and
physically and then you know
they all wear the same type of
uniform.
are we going to look at and
explore a holistic way of life
and healing life skills.
And the social issues that
because people to.
To.
Get into trouble lack of jobs
housing transportation health
care I know that's not the main
topic of your house memorial and
the study that I wanted to know
if later on those are the things
that we will be looking at and
then I wanted to dovetail our
food Representative Chasey
comments about the distance in
my community we are very
connected families and
communities support one another
so they're gonna want to visit.
Be supportive so those are just
thoughts that I wanted to
mention thank you.
Chairman representative.
Thank you representative
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Thank you for bringing this
memorial forward
I guess every county is going to
be different my question madam
chair to Representative and then
I is like in Guadalupe County
they don't have a jail so right
now all they're going through
the issues that Representative
Nibert brought up is that
they're having to transport
prisoners
all the way to rent to own to.
As far as Representative tone
and and then sometimes a little
closer.
To keep their prisoners in the
facility when they need to be so
then.
What are the chances that the
state run prison.
In Santa Rosa could be a multi
use facility and house.
Prisoners for the county and
also houses.
The state prisoners.
Madam chair and representative
of the.
Madam chair representative I'm
not I think question again as
you've noted there are
a handful of counties that don't
currently operated detention
facility as the statute allows
thirty three dash street to we
already allow for jointly
operated facilities and then we
give permission to counties to
contract to house their
incarcerated folks in other
communities in statute thirty
dot thirty three dash three dash
eighteen but to your question
It depends it depends what this
study comes up with and if there
were considerations that will
just towards a unified system it
wouldn't necessarily need that
the counties where under it
needs eight but that potentially
there was some kind of
collaboration and and more
standardization so that they
could safely hello folks that
needed to be locked up to that
point inside some of the state
correctional facilities the
state units they have multiple
uses there is as I understand it
I think you know that County
they have contracts to house
federal inmates ice detainees
and state prisoners that are
there on in in the custody of an
MCD I believe in some of the
eastern state prisons that they
also have federal contracts so
again you if if this were to be
considered within a unified
system there are correctional
facilities that already have the
capacity to program and House
differently inmates depending on
the custody or whoever has the
authority to house them so I
would say it could be a
possibility that in order that
it was that they would and and
and might operate one facility
that had a different kind of
inmates within it.
Right and and thank you madam
chair and thank you for that
answer and I'm finding this a
real interest in interesting
memorial
and I think I think every county
is going to be different but.
But we need to address what's
better for the state as a whole
and and thank you for the
answers.
Madam chair.
Yes thank you Representative go
ahead I would like to offer an
amendment if that's something
you're committee is willing to
consider given the insight that
we had from you all it looks
like our transition language
exists in our title as well as
on page three so potentially we
could leave it in the title or
strike it out in both places but
on page one it's line thirteen
if we struck the language
beginning with transitioning so
page one line thirteen if we
start transitioning detention
facilities from individual
county operations to ending a
line fourteen it would then read
study the cost benefits of
usability of a unified jail
prison system.
So we be striking from the we're
transitioning online thirteen to
the word to line fourteen.
Okay maybe doing something
similar on page three line I we
would strike transitioning from
transitioning again to to so it
would read feasibility of it
uniformed jumpers and system so
from transitioning to to.
I'm playing I page state.
Okay great so Representative
average.
Discussion.
Thank you madam chair
Appreciate that but I think that
if you want to expand the
Fox.
Or consider many of the the
other ideas that baby out there
I think it's going to take more
than just changing those two
words of.
you know I I'm not gonna stand
in the way of this moving
forward
But I would hope that the in the
course of a few days of the
Sanchez could come up with some
more expansive language to give
this task force a broader scope
of what they can study and give
them a more open ended.
Well I do it because
again a unified telepresence
system that tells me still the
state of New Mexico I certainly
would.
again think about it we studied
whether regional county operated
facilities might might the might
be appropriate or something else
I just would want to hedge M.
stratum
White this current bill the
stress.
I think you're right we.
They are so reflection made by
get him out of that are to be a
what like which is is there but
but I want to mandate now that's
fine but it still doesn't four
we get.
Yep my issues so we address to
I'd like to make a broader Task
Force or break a broader study
the just what the
Representative suggested thank
you.
Yes Representative but matter we
just have a single referral so
this is the only committee that
will be presenting this memorial
with and and then as we all
imagine I don't I'm don't expect
to do this again on the floor on
the other language we came up
with today otherwise would
consider if if potentially we
would have another opportunity
to appear in front of your
committee which is to strike the
transition language and then the
third piece of that is to add in
that title or on page three
quote and other strategies to
improve services and
efficiencies to get at the vote
just that it seems might be
appropriate for such a task
force also we can add that
either to the short title
or page state and madam chair
whether we did attempt to do
that now in committee or if
you'd like us to come back and
would be willing to give us
another chance with that
prepared ahead of time we defer
to your leadership thank you
madam chair and representative.
Thank you Representative
I don't see an issue and doing
those on the fly right now
they're pretty straightforward.
so if you want to I I can move
those amendments and we can
build on them.
is there any discussion.
Could you restate that madam
chair.
Yes Representative will you.
Yes those placed on do I start
with the language to strike yes.
so we would request that we
might strike on page one.
Nine.
Thirteen the word transitioning.
Following the rest of line
thirteen on to line fourteen
until the word to so we had
strike from transitioning to the
word to.
Next.
Yes we're to right through the
word to.
Exactly thank you for
clarifying.
On page three line I we would
strike beginning with the word
transitioning through the word
to online I.
Okay and then we'd like to add
their on page three line I.
After the semi colon.
Other strategies to improve
services and efficiencies.
So moved chair.
Right so we have a motion and a
second that is there any
discussion on those amendments.
Is there any opposition to
propose amendments.
Okay seeing none we have amended
House memorial eleven.
Is there further discussion on
the bill.
What's the committee okay great
thank you so we have a motion
for do passed by Representative
Gail Chasey and a second by
Representative Ortez is there
any opposition.
Okay seeing line you have a do
pass on house memorial eleven as
amended.
Showing all members present
voting in the affirmative.
Thank you representatives.
And now we are moving on to.
House joint resolution three
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
be joined by Representative Eli
as well
I'll just make this very short
because this is a piece of
legislation that we've heard I
believe a couple times it's
similar to our the so we passed
out of committee of the last
time.
What this resolution does it
calls for constitutional member
to.
Find for the legislative branch
to be
Can be seen by special called
the governor.
If the governor desires for a
state of emergency to
continue in effect beyond ninety
days and then the requires
Reconvening every sixty days
thereafter until the.
Declaration of emergency is
terminated it also provides.
A mechanism by which we have
the legislative branch wishes to
terminate.
The emergency it has to do so by
a three fifths vote which is a
super majority but are
otherwise the order remains in
place the whole idea behind this
measure is to.
Recognize that the legislative
branch of government as a.
But role here dealing with the
public policy issues and also
the the.
Oversight of the treasury the
expenditure of money at the.
So when we have these extended
emergencies and I would submit
extended emergencies require the
expenditure of more than the
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars authorized by statute
that we be brought into the mix
and be able to
do the constitutional duties
that are placed in the
legislative branch of
government.
And I'm I'm I'm just that this.
Article four section two of the
constitution all right some of
the criticism has been levelled
of by the executive branch on
this measure are basically says
that it so if should restrain
how or may not be as efficient
but the an article four section
two.
Yes our government we're subject
to martial law.
And we were being overtaken by
forces.
The constitution of the
forefathers of the State group
prostitution recognize the mess
us of the of the legislative
branch to be M. session during
that extreme emergency.
M. provides that we will be in
session during that emergency
and we can not recessed for more
than three decades.
During the pendency of that
empire emergency
so so many of the the issue is
that or many of the issues that
have been raised by the answer
service a little in a fair
share.
it's.
Going to maybe constrain the
executive of.
I thank you your does not.
Recognize the authority and
power of the legislative branch
of government and how critical
we are in dealing with the
issues that arise and it's not
that we're here to.
Do the day to day operations but
it is our job to finance the
mechanisms by which government
acts and
we've now.
Been under.
Several states of emergency for
for over over here you're now
actually longer than that and in
the up so
there's been very little.
Specific direction given by the
legislative branch of government
as to the dealings with that and
it wasn't until a lawsuit was
filed in December but the spring
quarter dollars that money.
For the emergency also have to
go through the legislative
process and so I think
Representative so we need to
recognize that we have a roll
and
In this issue that we have a
role to play as a right of equal
branch of government and that
the it's necessary for us to
engage in this and to be the
for you so the districts that we
represent and
In these times of emergency even
though it might be inconvenient
right but you but no thank you
gonna finish up I think that the
ability to meet to deal with the
financial issues as well as our
raising the voices from our
respective districts is an
important role and function that
is placed in the hands of this
legislative body with that I'll
turn it over to my co sponsored
you may have a few remarks and
and will stand for questions.
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'll just be very
brief this is an this is on us
we did this.
Unintentionally back twenty
years ago as a result of nine
eleven not really anticipating
that there would be a crisis
that would last this long and so
this is intended relate to
address the that the met a
legislature right are having
nothing to do with the
governor's office I just think
this is something that we have
to re visit and that's why I
continue to support this it's
it's a principal issue for me
regarding legislative
prerogatives this isn't about
the current crisis this is
really about something very
different which is reasserting
legislative priorities in a way
that's consistent with our
system on the balance of power
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative we'll
go ahead and go to the public
and open up will right now for
those that want to raise their
hand in support or in opposition
of age there are three and we'll
keep that open for about thirty
seconds and if folks want to
raise their hand and they would
like to speak in support go
ahead and do that now.
And then after that we'll take
up comments for opposition.
Okay it looks like folks stopped
voting so we can close it now we
have two and support and one in
opposition so if anyone would
like to speak please raise your
hand and support.
And seeing nine if you would
like to speak in opposition.
Okay so no one from the public
would like to make public
comments but we will go now to
the committee.
Committee members Representative
Zamora.
Madam chair I move it to pass.
We have a motion for do passed
by Representative Zamora.
And the second from
Representative Nibert.
Is there any discussion.
Okay a clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Eli yes
Representative dago.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Ortez.
Well.
Green yes ma'am Representative
Zamora yes.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Now.
Madam chair with.
No.
And what is amended I was trying
to keep track but.
For for for.
Okay.
So we have a time.
Okay Representative so we have a
tie
Yeah that will just keep it on
the table for now and then
we can come back to it if
someone wants to change their
vote or if we get another member
to join us.
Madam chair I a little
disappointed because I I really
do think it's worthy of debate
on the floor regardless of
whether groups forward from the
floor but I do think we as a
body need to have the debate of
the right
place of the legislative branch
of government general and on
this issue specifically on the
subject so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative will
move on to house joint
resolution former Representative
Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and the.
D. A. of loose was going to join
us it appears that she has
another meeting at eleven
o'clock so I'm gonna have a list
of the Johnson join in seven's
computer problems but I just
sent her a link which we it's a
point of to our panel so.
If she can get to another
computer and get it opened just
a moment check the.
Okay and also less but if you
can hear once you get on if you
will raise your hand we can also
promote you to a panelist it it
appears she's just going to have
to use my computer here in the
office so okay
When we begin by there's still a
lot of discussion about
What would be the proper
procedure to amend the bail all
right and in my discussion with
several attorneys they.
Stated that if we pass something
such as we looked at earlier
today with Representative
Matthews that the Supreme Court
could say where we have a
separation of powers and
therefore you can't tell us how
to determine dangerous stunts
and rule that legislation
unconstitutional.
If that's done then we would
have to come back into a new
beta women.
That we have an election this
fall.
It we could change the bail
right now which I feel the
center serves of New Mexico are
demanding.
Four if we took the other Avenue
it would be three years before
we have another election and
would have an opportunity to go
ahead and change that.
So with house joint resolution
for this is a constitutional
amendment go to the voters in
November and ask if they want to
change the bail amendment which
from my constituents they have
overwhelmingly told me they
want.
And with that madam chair we
will stand for Williams.
We stand for questions.
Thank you Representative we will
open up the pole for the public
to vote if you are in favor of
house joint resolution for or if
you would like to vote and
opposition of that you can do so
now we'll keep the call open for
about thirty seconds and then we
can go to the public.
Okay and we can close it now and
we have four people in
opposition.
If anyone would like to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Okay if anyone would like to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
Okay so we will go to the hills
the lose lose health staff
Campos I'm sorry I mispronounce
your name you are now in muted.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Lucy let
Campos I'm a policy manager both
futures New Mexico was in
opposition to H. J. R. for.
There have been challenges with
the implementation of bail
reform it created important
changes in New Mexico's criminal
legal system to ensure someone's
rights
do not depend on their income.
The mental level we can not
violate people's constitutional
rights by denying them bail
imprisoning them guilty an
investigation in pre trial phase
removing the requirements that
bail decisions be made only by
court of record and shifting
that responsibility to
legislators would be detrimental
to our state and detention
facilities New Mexico judges
have the training to consider
also comes dancers and unique
facts about a case and
percentage for them to identify
the most effective conditions
of.
Please oppose H. A. R. for thank
you.
Thank you near record you are
now and made it.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is near record
the policy council and regional
manager of the ACLU of New
Mexico based in Los crucis I'm
here on behalf of the ACLU of
New Mexico and strong opposition
to it H. J. R. for.
Conditions of bill should be set
by the court of record and not
by legislators.
This bill raises the number of
constitutional concerns that
would violate the rights of all
the issues but in particular
impacting by pop in poor
communities I urge this
committee to oppose this
resolution thank you.
Thank you so that concludes our
public comment.
And we will go to the committee
now.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative
We heard.
In our last meeting and and
earlier today
He's a legislation that dealt
with the same issue that we're
not.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert yes Sir the length.
Madam chair representative
One of the concerns that I had
with respect that legislation
was.
Yet in my opinion.
It did by legislative action.
What the people of New Mexico
has already dealt with
by amending the constitution and
so it one concerns with
our that legislation was that.
We were going to.
For lack of a better word
override the.
People's decision.
Through legislative action and
and I had some significant cost
to for concerns of my conclusion
was.
But if we really want to fix
this issue.
That we need to go back to the
people.
And.
See if they are willing to
deal with this issue in a manner
that differs from how they dealt
with that in two thousand
sixteen and so I read this joint
resolution proposing an
amendment and if I understand it
correctly.
You're wanting to take to the
people of New Mexico.
A constitutional amendment that.
Make some.
Changes to the existing
constitution that was adopted in
two thousand sixteen is that
correct.
Representative wiper Act we
when that was proposed to the
voters and
as well as to the legislature.
It was that that constitutional
amendment would detain dangerous
people and make our community
safer what I've heard from many
constituents says that they
don't believe that that
amendment accomplish that.
And they don't feel safe and
therefore they want us to
Redo it if you will and this is
that proposal.
And madam chairman and
representative of it if I read
this language correctly I don't
see.
tremendously significant.
Changes can you.
Can you explain that either slot
the drastic changes or how that
works would
change their methodology by
which they would determine
whether belt
Could be divide in certain
instances are and about.
The violent folks have been
complained of with respect to
the earlier legislation would
not be released simply to do
harm in their community upon
release so could you kind of go
over the there's not that many
changes so to kind of go over
the the changes of help with the
application would would
accomplish maybe your goal.
Madam chair and Representative
night predominate have to defer
to my experts to help explain
that.
Here we go.
Representative Nibert the
primary change and
Representative brings proposal
here is okay.
is still focused on dangerous
yes but also have the component
addressing a flight risk and it
also gives the judge
jurisdiction to do this instead
of requiring the dust to
initiate thank you at the
hearing
and I think the most notable
peace on this isn't subsection
do it reuse intact in large part
the issue about money bonds and
those that cannot post bond so I
just want to point that out also
thank you.
So madam chair and
representative for a.
I.
I really in in reading mass I I
did not see of.
The what I consider a a drastic
change other than our.
I guess itself initiated would
stand up for our the DNA but you
still have to have a hearing.
Yes bills divide.
You have to have a finding by
the court of clear and
convincing evidence that the
release conditions will
reasonably assure the appearance
of the person as required or
protect the safety
of any other person or the
community.
And so
It in my mind it it's kind of a
middle of the road.
Approach of it doesn't get us
back to where we necessarily
were prior to two thousand
sixteen.
But it seems to me and correct
me if I'm wrong that it does
tighten up.
Maybe the ability of the Courts
to.
Consider these violent offenders
and to have a mechanism by which
they can are more.
Reveille deal with them and keep
them R. O. detained.
Without.
Without in my mind compromising
the integrity of the of efforts
in two thousand sixteen to make
sure that we're just not keeping
people in jail for.
These lesser offenses because I
couldn't post bail and so am I
reading this correctly that this
kind of a middle of the road
type of approach.
Representative Nibert yet that
thank you for reading this thing
and I think
One notable back Representative
reads proposal is that it
expedite the hearing process so
the hearing process is largely
the same but by allowing it to
because sort of.
Help execute versus having to be
initiated by the prosecuting
authority it X. but I process
but it's largely the same and it
is and and and Representative
Rehm opinion at a middle of the
road approach to this
problem.
But but madam chair and and
Representative Rehm of miss
Johnson it it still requires the
hearing where the district
attorney has to present.
Clear convincing evidence and
the court has to make that
finding is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
I'm pretty under wraps.
I think of the the prior
legislation the that that we
looked out of certainly.
Certainly
Was more.
Prosecutorial friendly there
that this piece of legislation
of your by understood that
legislation correctly because
that legislation created a
presumption as well one of the
representatives noted.
And frankly not only create a
presumption but but the made a
presentation case.
And so it really looks to me
like that I'm kind of surprised
to hear the objections filed by
those groups because this looks
to me like it so.
A lot more of it tightens it up
slightly but it's a lot more of.
Along the lines of our.
Current rules with a few tweaks
to try to be able to detain
those are.
Violent offenders that seem to
be falling through the cracks
and getting out of particularly
in the second congressional
district.
Not second Representative Ezzell
district second judicial
district and.
Still of.
Provides a mechanism by which of
most people particularly those
who are accused of Bond Bilic
drugs.
Get the benefit of the our
constitutional amendment that
was passed in two thousand
sixteen so I'm a bit surprised
by the reaction is heard because
this is so in my mind
More sensible or or maybe
illustrious county and that that
the piece of legislation we are
and yet it still accomplishes
that through the mechanism that
I believe is required and that
is amending the constitution and
not legislating the change in
the overriding the the
Will of the people of New Mexico
again this doesn't become
effective until the people vote
on it so it seems to me that the
it ought to get for brought
right good support while madam
chair Representative my last
question.
Is on page one line twenty four
I have this discussion with our
the representative that brought
forth the.
Our legislation and that is the
exception the that's online
twenty four except for capital
fences when the proof is
evident.
Presumption is great
I would just point out that if
you are going to.
Of if this thing gets advance
you might consider altering that
language a little bit because
there are no capital census The
New Mexico anymore and so we
might want to say that suffer
capital offenses or
Violent crimes are or or
something that tries to capture
the the the the people who are
falling through this current
system that are them are causing
the problems that the of news is
picking up and and creating of
the the issues that are before
us this term and certainly the
the governor has as a place that
on the call in because
highlighted the house you would
like to see if the apple so I
would I would point out that
language and and you may want to
tweak that a little bit of your
fifty years for that to me this
is number one the mechanism by
which we need to proceed on this
issue and number two it looks to
me like it's pretty carefully
crafted to address the specific
issue but not
not get.
Not capture within that that a
lot of people who the two
thousand sixteen amendment was
intended to of.
Keep them out of jail on their
own recognizance during the
pendency of time that they're
awaiting trial so I thank you
for bringing to I would
supported support more of the
did will tweak on on that first
page of about the appreciate
your program legislation thank
you madam chair but
Representative.
Thank you Representative.
Members.
I would move to do past madam
chair on house present joint
resolution for.
And madam chair I would second
that motion okay we have a
motion printed pants and a
second Representative Chasey
discussion.
Thank you madam chair
Representative breed.
I guess I'm.
News about.
About this.
Because.
We.
Reintroducing bail as an
element.
Is the system totally and I I I
get that it is a constitutional
amendment so would do another
one that we are reintroducing
bail bonds.
Madam chair representative yeah
I don't believe that we are re
if the introducing bell and it
and and maybe I'm not
understanding the question.
We we Representative greens
intention is to amend the
constitutional provision for pre
trial detention that we have now
but it's more workable I'm.
prosecutors and it's also you
know clear what and and need to
And their pre trial hearing
so I I may have misunderstood
the question but no I I don't
think we're reintroducing bail.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative I guess.
Right.
That.
I don't know what Representative
Nibert is constitutional
objections were to the earlier
case of legislation but it seems
to be here we're shifting the
burden of proof thank you can
and so I I have concerns about
that Madam chair representative.
Thank you Representative is
there further discussion.
Okay the clerk to call the roll
on the do passed motion.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Eli well.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Nibert.
yes.
Representative Ortez.
No.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Madam chair Lewis no.
So that motion fails.
Do we want to do a substitute
motion to table or would leave
it on the.
Table as is.
Madam chair.
Yeah I I would job move a do not
pass.
A motion to table Representative
Ely short motion to table I'm
sitting here trying to figure
out my computer's motion to
table I apologize so we have a
motion to table Representative
Eli and a second by
Representative Chasey the clerk
to call the roll on the tabling
motion.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
I'm assuming they called my name
so it's yes.
Yeah we can't hear.
Goodly systems on my computer
okay okay I was needed.
Katie.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Nibert.
No.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am.
Representative Zamora no to
table.
The madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair Lewis yes.
Okay so we have tabled House.
Joint resolution for and that
concludes.
Our agenda and will meet again
on Friday morning and thanks to
everyone for participating today
especially the members of the
public so with that we're
adjourned thank you madam chair.
