Three.
Representative Zamora your.
By Senator here madam chair.
Here.
Thank you and we have
housekeeping House Bill
I will be ruled at the request
of his Sanchez said we will not
hear that this morning.
And good morning senator.
will begin with the Senate.
Hi great thank you madam chair
good morning everyone the
premise Senate bill forty four
is straightforward.
and wallows guns and Alexion's
don't mess.
What this bill does is here that
the hearing firearm within a
hundred feet of a polling place.
is drafted to contain
perceptions for a peace officer
and for security.
Authorized by the local
government to the station.
Within a hundred feet of a
polling place.
This bill would basically create
the same set of rules.
Laces are currently in election.
Are currently in schools
right now guns are not allowed
point places and schools all
this bill does extend that to
the rest of the family places so
levels the playing fields reach
the same set of rules for
polling places throughout our
state and that's the gist of the
bill the penalty is a petty
misdemeanor which is punishable
of up to six months of your
that's the extent of what this
bill does thank you let's go to
the audience do we have the.
Supporting or opposing comments
in the audience supporting all
started right please.
Madam chair representative the
line of work with the secretary
of state's office we appreciate
the Sanchez bring this bill we
stand strong support of.
This common sense legislation to
uniformly applying his research
on forty locations.
With that in a lot of
administrative years.
Each year for we are locations
so so I do appreciate that thank
you very much.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is ask questions.
I really appreciate the support
of those released wants peace.
It's.
Thank you very much for your
thank you for the comments.
This
is an examination of human
election share of the they
limited hours of New Mexico.
Hundred three years of age is
been advocating for legislation
and systems that allow the
maximum number of people to
participate in elections.
The.
Recent mass shootings I've seen
people with firearms at the.
Advisory locations could
discourage some dollars from
from voting it doesn't even
major imposition to ask people
the the lonely there firearms at
home are in the vehicles so we
stand is trying to support this
speed forty four in think just
send related for thank you for
the comments please madam
chairman name is Ellen Peterman
member of Mexicans for backup
files and also long term poll
worker in support of this bill
it was truly so this year I have
to go through that active
shooting training to be a poll
worker it was really and I think
that this bill will help for
workers actually feel safer and
also help the needy people to
bring their children to the
polls to vote
that confidence and support this
bill thank you.
Further comments the webcast.
Shannon curdled comical go
ahead.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee
Shannon Kunkle outreach director
for common cause New Mexico we
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing forward this
legislation we feel as the forty
four is a common sense expansion
of existing law that will permit
safety and prevent intimidation
for voters and poll workers at
polling sites during this time
and we're saying such a rise in
political violence including
exactly right here in New Mexico
we believe that this bill and
others like it are important
additions to maintain the
security of elections and we ask
for do pass on SB forty four
thanks so much thank you Shannon
Janet Williams go ahead.
Morning my name is madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Janet Williams I'm with
the national organization for
women and we strongly strongly
support this bill we believe it
will make everybody feel safer
at the polls thank you.
Thank you Janet might go ahead.
Right.
Yes I I admitted thank you my
name is Michael Pearson I have I
guess I'm running upstream today
but I would say that I've voted
in every election in New Mexico
since nineteen seventy two I've
never heard anybody anywhere at
anytime explained that there's
any issue whatsoever with
firearms in the vicinity of any
voting location ever also
I can walk into the dollar store
and be within this distance of a
polling place and it but I.
I'm at the dollar store about at
the polling place but I it seems
to me I would still be in
violation of that law the way
that it's written and the last a
point I'd like to make an thank
you I I apologize for not
stating my appreciation for the
opportunity to speak
chairman members of the
committee and Mr Sanchez well up
it is that I'm sure that most of
you are aware that the incidents
of criminality among those
license for concealed carry is
the lowest of any group in
society to include foreign
police officers and that
allowing those of us who are
licensed to carry under New
Mexico law would not bring any
additional risk
to a polling place no we can't
what we're we're supposed to be
concealed Kerry so the fact that
somebody can see our economic we
would be in violation of the
concealed carry law anyway.
So that's all I have to say
thank you for your time and.
I hope you consider what I sat.
Thank you might Ellen pract go
ahead.
Go ahead numb you.
Yes.
Thank you for the opportunity to
address Madam chairman members
of the committee my name's Alan
cracked I was.
Opposed to SB forty four for the
following reasons.
One R. L. echo Mike's comments
on is this how big a problem is
this in New Mexico.
And.
Because.
Of the citizens of New Mexico
really.
Pointed this out as being a
serious problems thanks so.
Number two.
Can't help but think that this.
Legislation can be added to our
existing laws.
You know why we need to make.
Clause two.
Put this legislation for.
And number three I have a
problem with the definition of
Kerry.
What does that really mean is
someones person Representative
vehicle or.
I know I'm very rural locations
you can drive up to within a few
feet of a polling place so if
you have a firearm in the
vehicle was at.
To be considered care and.
Thank you for your
consideration.
I appreciate the opportunity to
address the committee thank you.
Website we're taking of public
comment in support of the bill.
Michael here in support of the
bill go ahead.
would capture customers of
stores in those malls that are
fairly even there to vote and
that would include concealed
handgun licensees people that
are licensed by the state of New
Mexico to carry a firearm after
passing a rigorous training
course the state federal
records.
It's unclear whether the term
holding place in the bill means
the specific portion of the
process for voting machines are
placed or whether the entire
building complex where voting is
taking place if it's the latter
then that could mean sidewalks
and parking lots in a shopping
mall or next to a shopping mall
for example
the other stated that voting
takes place schools in SB for
simply levels the playing field
all polling locations I think
the big differences school
buildings are not supposed to be
open to the public shopping
malls big box stores those types
of locations for polling places
are are open to the public and
so again you're capturing people
that maybe necessarily aren't
even there.
But could be licensed to carry
concealed as they go to and from
school thank you thank you
further comments from the
audience in opposition to the
bill.
Seeing let's go back to the
webcast.
They just keep go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm sure you're
all familiar with jokes about
law making within a particular
member of the public sector area
of expertise such them part of
that job with this bill part of
living in the Albuquerque area I
read nonprofit focused on
violence prevention response and
schools working with schools and
law enforcement agencies to
prevent and effectively respond
to acts of violence including
mass shootings starting
children.
Today to tell you this bill
makes our polling places more
vulnerable regardless of what
people may feel to mass shooters
and politically motivated
violence over ninety five
percent of mass shootings occur
in areas where firearms are
prohibited the average mass
shooter kills or injures one
person every ten seconds until
they run out of victims are
stopped by someone were to stop
of their own accord .
Fifty four percent of the time
when confronted by police a mass
shooter will surrender or commit
suicide immediately that number
is over ninety percent when
they're confronted by an armed
citizen interviews with measures
of consistently reveal that they
targeted areas where firearms
are prohibited physically
because they felt they would
have further into murder in that
period of time before police
arrived some plan sure that with
police but most when confronted
by an intended victim were
shocked when a mass shooter
stops due to police intervention
the average time they're
actively killing people is over
eight minutes when our system is
involved the averages under two
there's no example of an armed
citizen ever miss identifying
the threat when faced with a
mass shooter was please do so on
a semi regular basis which is an
armada and twenty twenty one I
don't know it takes prefer it
when their intended victims are
disarmed and helpless this bill
will help them hurt the innocent
arm systems aren't a complete
solution for mating we're we're
out of state.
That's time thank you.
Icardi spoke Steven white go
ahead.
Yes my name is Stephen white I
live in Farmington my polling
places about two blocks from me
and walking it's a church
I'm concerned about there's no
definition about what
constitutes the hundred feet I
walk my dog regularly around the
church.
And.
And I'm an everyday carry so I I
could easily break the law
unintentionally by walking might
simply walking my dog around the
church properties where the
polling places act and the that
concerns me a lot.
And here in Farmington and
I believe three of our polling
places are in churches where.
Other residents that live nearby
could be subject to the same.
Problem.
I thank you for listening to my
comments and have a good
afternoon everybody good
morning.
Thank you Stephen enough there
go ahead.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Nina fair and
I stand with my colleagues at
the American Association of
university women in support of
SB forty four.
Prohibiting firearms within one
hundred feet of polling places.
The presence of a firearm loaded
or unloaded is in itself
intimidating to many people and
has no place in or near a a
polling place with the
exceptions of security and
police I urge you to join a a U.
W. in support of voting places
free from fear and intimidation.
Thank you thank you.
David yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I am so David being just
summon up this Albuquerque and
I'm in opposition still for the
reasons that the state earlier
specifically concerning of
banning concealed carry of folks
who are being of point place it
also that was mentioned about
the hundred foot zone around
point place which I think can be
problematic in a shopping center
in Los crucis I oppose this bill
thank you very much thank you
David we're gonna go back to
Michael
if you fixed your problem go
ahead Michael.
Please on you.
For.
There you go yes you can hear
you almost yes thank sorry for
the trouble
I I oppose this bill
if anything what I go to a
polling put in place that.
Do not see people with the
and guns in a longer hip that
makes the more scared because
knowing that if something does
happen there's no one there to
react.
So I'm against it so I'd rather
have people with guns who
because usually it's a good guy
the stuff about got.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you for.
Thank you committee members
Representative right excuse me
representative of Littleton and
Representative right.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you senator for bringing
this forward.
I wanted to start with.
Heard also
hello.
Cool an extensive this threat is
where is this happening and
what's been the experience not
in just a couple of places but
and.
Other areas.
So madam chair and
representative I appreciate the
question this bill wasn't
brought to me by any advocacy
group this bill wasn't brought
to you by the secretary of state
this bill came to me from
constituents who during this
last election cycle for working
at the polls and experienced
folks going places with guns and
expressed extreme concern about
that.
On it to my attention and I took
a look at the law and it just
seems in the.
It makes sense to have one set
of rules for polling places in
certain places another set
somewhere else it's about like
with this bill together but this
wasn't driven by any advocacy
group this truly came from
constituents and you know you
heard from the speed ahead here
works the poll workers need also
one of those constituents in
mind let me know.
Thank you thank you center madam
chair
how.
How will this affect the
protective what is going to be
involved in protecting.
People who are there.
Madam chair of the as I said
right up front the premise of
this bill is that having guns
mixed into polling places given
the toxicity of our election
cycles these days it just it
doesn't make sense so I thank
you for tax them there's an
exception here that I put into
this bill started with the
exception for peace officers and
security that are within the
polling place but I just think
that that again creating the
same set of rules for our
schools as for other important
places make sense and what I
understand that there's a
philosophical difference about
the belief that people are safer
with concealed carry that not I
don't.
But that's a fundamental
philosophical differences we're
gonna have a discussion Senate
judiciary today on guns and
restaurants again in Centerville
of the bill to tweak some
language there so this is
something that's been around
for.
You know what allows for those
of us who served a long time in
the legislature we have built
and and I really don't in any
way disparage my colleagues on
the other side of the field
differently about this but this
is one that again came to me
from constituents and that's the
basis of the bill.
Thank you thank you senator and
madam chair
so in following that thought.
Will the.
There are individuals that made.
Carry a gun.
On the side can you tell me who
they are.
So Madam chair representative
right now under or lost someone
could open carry and a polling
place someone could conceal
carry one place that's not in
the school that's the key to
station
if this bill were to pass you
could not hold been caring for
concealed carry within a hundred
feet of a school I would notice
the same rules that exist in the
state of Arizona next door to us
and says in the FIR in the back
you know sixteen states and the
district of Columbia have
restrictions on firearms the
following places ten of those
explicitly prohibit concealed
carry and open carry including
Arizona California district of
Columbia Florida Georgia
Louisiana I mean these are red
and blue states this is a policy
decision that we need to make
and also one more thing that I'm
sure that it's important some of
my colleagues fifty eight
hundred feet was in the.
Your noted the FY are secretary
of state noted intentionally
discussed that up to five
hundred feet.
one is a significant issue
section it bank they say for
increase in the hunt for about
three to five hundred being able
to help solidify professions we
didn't do that and the reason we
kept at a hundred feet is that
that's where the protest line is
that you can protest or you can
paying for or against a
candidate at a hundred feet and
just seems creating a separate
set of rules for another
demarcation line felt like it
went too far so I started a
hundred feet despite you know
request to amend this to go
further I didn't accept that.
Thank you senator.
Of the madam chair the Senators
Regarding the distance
I can't recall whether there are
signs that are currently posted.
at a police station.
Or someone please remind the
weather that that exists.
And follow one two that would be
all.
At to prevent anyone from no no
we only Kerry
into that.
Legislative.
will there be signage if it
doesn't currently exist to
advise people to with them in
the vehicle of where
Thank you madam chair so chair
representative I think yield
Mister Lang about whether I
don't believe there's a
requirement for science now the
school when it comes to pulling
this bill doesn't require
signage I will tell you that you
know our our law when it comes
to conceal Kerry is that
concealed carry licenses do not
allow guns where otherwise
prohibited by state law so there
always is the faults here
doesn't require affirmative
posting I think part of this is
education and I have and I have
great respect for those that
have concealed carry in and they
certainly work within the
confines of the law the place
the place.
I think you see.
Thank you for your responses
those are the questions that I
had
thank you thank you
Representative right here you
madam chair and long time friend
Senator
First of all I think the first
amendment issue with this of
when I look at this of
restriction of a hundred feet.
So you have an individual assays
concealed Kerry or open carry I
don't care which one any comes
and parks within a hundred feet
he's carrying a firearm in that
car so he's now in violation of
it whether intentional or not.
What if a holy place is next to
a gun store a retail store you
have now closed that store
during the election process and
I think that we need to have one
page that that says that.
And madam chair and senator when
we go to the back page and I'm
talking to one I police officers
official duties.
That relief implies that these
on duty.
An off duty.
Of would not be allowed to carry
a firearm that.
So we're now police officers who
basically is required Karia
firearm off duty and we're
telling concealed carry people
you have done in your car leave
it in the car which is your
argument that I hear from the
other side about the guns teen
stole.
I really think that that we
should have an exception for the
concealed carry they've gone
through additional background
the.
Of they they have to keep it
concealed and anyway of what are
your thoughts on that senator
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative bring that is
good to see you up so we have
that proposed amendment in the
Senate rules committee it was
rejected we are proposed
amendments to the Senate
Judiciary Committee rejected we
have the proposed amendment on
the Senate floor and it was
rejected again I think this is
this goes in no disrespect
whatsoever just as a
fundamental kind of
disagreements and we've heard
you know you've heard it in that
in a testimony from both sides
whether or not.
We're safer with concealed carry
that's a debate you and I can
continue to ask but I think
that's the reason that I would
consider that not for.
Yeah madam chair and senator I.
It this is not more of a are you
safer issues this is more of an
issue of of are you violating
law and so I mean they have to
keep it concealed if it's seen
that just not concealed and
that's violation of the
concealed carry and with that
madam chair I have ago
management if you could have a
pastel.
Thank you.
Representative I will move the
minutes of the session yes Sir
two two number.
Madam chair of the two members
two two five six nine one point
one.
And Senator basically what this
does is allow concealed carry
persons to go ahead and carry a
firearm again they have to keep
the concealed.
But that's the gist of this.
So madam chair and and
Representative this amendment is
identical to the one carried to
sack Committee floor and again
for the reasons stated all the
respect that I would close the.
And madam chair I would go in
off the amendment for adoption.
All righty make a motion for I
have those three percent off
them and then the second by
Representative block the state
role.
As of this morning no one in
New.
Representative block yes.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little known.
Representative every yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Budget Figueroa.
Gentleman.
Madam chair jobs.
This is not yes I agree.
Representative then amendment
did not pass that to fill.
Madam chair and senator my
concern also how are we gonna
treat my Celerio where there can
be firearm store in a shopping
mall.
I think that there needs to be
some language in here that says
that that of policy you know
those site location can't be
closed to firearms store.
So madam chair Representative
reading I think that you know
that one hypothetical that might
need to be addressed I think
that could be addressed through
a rulemaking process certainly I
just think we try to go into the
staff to come up with different
hypotheticals of life that the
justice challenging again I
think that certainly as well
with polling places are
designated one three dash seven
you know that's something that
also can be can be looked at in
setting up polling places
you know some unintended
consequence nice I I hear what
you're saying but again I don't
think that it makes sense to put
that to trying to get into the
bill.
And get into that level of
specifics.
Well of madam chair Senator I
think that that's problematic I
think that
you know I understand how you're
trying to allow the police
officers that I think is vague
on on
off duty police officers I think
that is vague on a person
actually having a farm in a car
and then parking within a
hundred feet because most of the
polling places in Albuquerque
are in shopping malls that's
where I go and vote
and unfortunately the what the
reserves sign you know no
campaigning within a hundred
feet well we probably take a
poll in this room and say what
is a hundred feet you know show
me.
Hello I think we have you know a
whole bunch of different answers
anyway thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Representative online you yes
thank you madam chair and thank
you for bringing this bill
forward I have a question about
for students and I apologize for
the trust already that has led
me to skip it
but how what are the plans for
four sessions.
So madam chair and
representative I think that the
plans will be no different that
how the law is currently
enforced when the polling places
and school and I think this is
one of the things that I just
want to go back to it also
response Representative read you
know got a charter school in a
shopping mall right now and it's
at the polling place up all the
seeing hypotheticals or place so
all we're trying to do is create
the same rules across the board
and I think there was obviously
V. notification whether there
was security posted there or
someone notified that will be in
a lurch and you go through
exactly the same scenario
somebody.
You know carrying a rifle into a
school point place were
concealed carrying a school
place and so things that
standards excellent thank you
very much madam chair and
senator for for that answer.
Because I also noted that a lot
of places are schools that
already have a no firearm
policies in place in the seems
to be just kind of an expansion
of that and how we treat those
polling places and in the before
times I was the an election
worker and and that the
legislature and I've definitely
seen
Behavior.
Part of this.
Station not to the level that I
ever had to file any reports
thankfully but I think this bill
will help address some of those
concerns so thank you very much.
That's all the questions thank
you Representative loft thank
you madam chair thank you
senator.
So I have a few questions for
your I won't say if you cause
and hold me to that but.
Can you just provide for you
what a polling place is
regarding your bill I don't see
a definition so madam chair that
question came up in some other
committees that is a term of
markets in our code and so if
again it's the it's the exactly
how it's going to be defined
under the election code we do
have secretary of state here got
specific questions so often over
the term of our election code is
my understanding see is a yes
okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative for Senator
rather than the same
representative on the side of
the.
The chamber so.
A holy place would.
Jeff please for the elections to
save them all madam chair and
let's just say it's just that
area in the mall or is that the
entire mall madam chair Senator.
And so madam chair it's going to
be the same set of rules that
exist if you have a charter
school in the fall and again I
can use the secretary of state
if I could mention resigned.
Madam chair representative it is
a for market polling places
normally are decided by the
county commissions serve our
county clerks and the PJ's.
I know we're talking about malls
most of us but but most County
for state as resumes of one dash
three dash eighteen right they
go and expect inspected
buildings rise and a and a from
the side if there's more than
one insurance more than and we
would be a hundred feet from
each.
Insurance but it's up to the
individual counties are in it
for the entire mall or just a
hundred feet from where that
opening is so if it is a small.
Was counties have one way in one
way and one way out to the
boarding location it's not like
it's a.
That Madam chair representative
dispensers where you can go in
for many at any direction right
so that our county clerks are
very intentional about were the
hundred feet are where is and
and the entry and exit and to
the point of the point locations
really R. as a hundred feet is
where the voting machines are
for everyone lines up so that is
How how counties handle the
situations with patients and
also signage is also the one
creating the state answer yes
Representative Scott
so and Representative ream also
indicated he signs about
election year would put signs
about.
Firearms of this work order pass
as well the.
Enter the Senators.
Sorry to lean on your experience
but could you read me the
definition in the code what a
point places madam chair Madam
chair representative we just
said there isn't a.
The definition of a whole is not
okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator.
Okay so the polling place also
include Dropbox madam chair
Senator
madam chair and ideal to strive
Madam chair representative of
drop offs or I guess the
security containers I want to
make sure that we're we're clear
with our language secure
container is locations in an
election.
Thank you madam chair Senator
okay so then I cannot be within
a hundred feet of that secure
container madam chair Senator
with with a par for this bill
Madam chair representative yes.
Interesting.
All right.
So then you know the impetus for
this bill I heard what anecdotal
evidence about
more mean often sleepy affected
madam chair Senator give me a
specific examples of voter
intimidation or violence in the
firearm at specific polling
places across the country chair
so after I'm not prepared today
to give you a specific example
again as I mentioned this this
bill came to me from
specific products that you last
year in Santa Fe I also received
a number of.
Email since of other poll
workers who have
experienced the issue with but
again I don't I can give you
maybe Mr Langton.
Madam chair representative what
I can say is that before every
election a low ROE election
season so whether it's a primary
whether it's the general whether
it's the regular local election
special elections are county
clerk this is something on the
front of their lives and and and
guidance to.
Other Koether members lawyers
and a full workers regarding
governance in the following this
is something that comes up every
year and training.
Are mandated in the election
code to leave this question
always comes up how do we handle
this a safe environment for our
lecturers and also voters so
that's the general.
Concern that the that the most.
The services they are guidance
regarding there have been
incidents were funds that have
been brought to fully locations
of early County
most most recently and I know
that in the.
The last primary in the last
general twenty that that that
occurs in Denver Leo we work
with the attorney general's
office we just a sense.
Representative monitors AG
monitors around and they have
reported on complaints hearing
from dissenting judges of
firearms near the following
locations right hands so that
those are realities that you
face and also speaking to some
of the concerns of the
representatives brought we also
have issues recall workers
whatever guns and and to the
following location as we heard
some of the comments about
but good guys or or or the rules
we have to instruct F. over not
to bring also it is a little
cation so this is just in
general those are the issues
that we've faced in the last
three elections including.
The general concern of of how do
we instructors orders and our
collection workers about.
Making sure that voting
locations of the state is that
possibly can
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and experts so okay so
then let's just say I'm parked
outside of a polling location or
near a drop box or whatever
fancy term we're going to come
up with for Dropbox services
sanparks hundred feet away
exactly how many ninety ninety
madam chair Senator if I have a
firearm in my vehicle my
breaking this law masters and so
again madam chair I think with
the same set of rules would
apply to the staff of federal
you give now the following
places in the school.
So the answer is going to be
exactly the same if you're
ninety nine feet with the.
School I think the school issue
I I can't tell you exactly the
hundred feet rule applies to the
school or not as I sit here
maybe Mr line as answer but
again it's going to be the same
rule applies now if you know
it's charter school in a strip
mall we got all the same
hypothetical so we have to
navigate through and that's why
again we put put the one place
and then to the extent things
need to get tweak your correct
that's what will happen thank
you madam chair thank you
senator so is that a yes.
I would be a violation so in
front of a screen your products
will all help with the
hypothetical for you yet to be
in violation now under current
law thank you that's what I
wanted to know okay so thank you
madam chair thank you senator
so.
At have there been any groups
that are encouraging people to
bring firearms to these polling
places madam chair Senator in
the state and madam chair let me
go back to the last question you
just asked me I want to be clear
because I think the hundred foot
limitation is being put into
this bill I don't want to
definitively saying a hundred
foot limitation applies math
with one place in school again
I'm gonna be real clear I don't
know the answer to that I don't
want to be appears on misleading
us so again can you repeat that
of course of have there been any
specific groups in the state of
New Mexico that are encouraging
people to bring firearms to the
polling place.
Enter Mr chair I I don't have
the information to that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center so you would say there's
no threat currently as of groups
encouraging firearms apples
manager I would not say that I
would say I don't have
information myself is actually
here to that factor may well be
groups are doing that I just.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator so are the so how
are we gonna our system no the
representative did ask that
question but in practice.
If you look concealed firearm
how would you know for certain
that that person was not going
into the polls Madam chair the
answer is exactly the same as as
I said Representative it's the
same issue if you bring a
conceal carry into up one place
a school.
Same issue that that that faces
the for further bacon notice
they can the house policy for
security that they can alert
tends it affects those is going
to be the same.
Send process thank you madam
chair Senator so there wouldn't
be.
Metal detectors directed at
polling places mentors and Madam
that's not my intent on this
bill but again
I don't think that that's
certainly not in the in the
language of the bill is not my
intent to do that.
Okay thank you senator thank you
madam chair I just I'm wondering
how we would actually in
practice forces because how are
we gonna know we see something
let's just say they have a big
phone or something on the side
of their bills and that may look
like a fire so madam chair
Senator I I just want to see how
we're going to put the law
enforcement and security into
actually making sure that still
gets in our.
Madam chair the same way we
enforce conceal carrying in
parks now and restaurants that
are posted all the same issues
come up this is not this is not
gonna be any different it's
gonna require obviously judgment
calls and and again I don't
think it's going to be any
different than that and the
other places where in in a
courthouse you know courthouse
does have a metal detector but
also fuel noted the FY are.
Guns are currently prohibited
the university's concealed carry
but in the universities and so
all the same issues apply.
The things that I've always
appreciated and respect is that
those who have concealed carry
our they follow the law I mean
again there's there's not in the
Thames trying to do something
different I do think it's
important that there's an
education components and
certainly when we make changes
like this we've got to educate
of the intervention is got a
built in Senate judiciary office
and the bill of on guns and
restaurants and one of the
things that got changed because
the liquor law we passed that's
created some interesting
challenges so we are constantly
to have to figure this out and
set the rules and and help
educate so we don't have we we
don't want to create you know
unnecessary problems that
certainly that.
The focus with any with any type
of law that involves you care
okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator so you mentioned
college campuses I think that's
a great example Madam chair
Senator we see a lot of college
campuses were there been mass
shootings despite there being
gun free zones managers and so
if we're going to use the same
logic for college.
As to the point places look at
examples like that I need to
college in Oregon for twenty six
year old who was in the role of
the school fatally shot in the
system professor needs students
Madam chair Senator that was it
and so is a gun free zone and
people died after that
regardless of the law chair
Senator the COVID.
After my same response that
Representative right as
respectfully disagree that.
You know this is this is just
up.
Difference.
Expect your position I just
don't agree with it okay all
thank you madam chair Senator so
would you I grew the statistics
show that eighty seven percent
or higher of mass shootings
happen in gun free zones for the
FBI's to.
After we had the Senate floor
with all kinds of folks
following up their internets and
coming up with the percentages
are not gonna get into that
today I don't have those.
And what what study it is who
did the study which group did
a study on the stock at the end
of activity.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator so you having with
the data or you're just not
going to comment on the data
chair Senators madam chair I
think there's data all over the
place and that's not the purpose
of this bill for debate the data
and again we have some of that
happen on the floor of the
Senate
but again you certainly have the
right to cite statistics and and
I'm sure there will be some on
the floor of the house of the
statistics the other way but
again I'm not prepared today
without having studies from the
debate.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator well I think we
definitely need to be making
decisions based on facts data
statistics and that those
statistics are applicable to our
state I I would suggest chair
Senator that you we would look
at those data points because
they are very salient from both
sides of the aisle if you see a
I think every town gun safety
data Polis thirty percent of
mass shootings are in gun free
zones issues questions then we
see another from the rand
corporation this is that they
can provide conclusive evidence
showing that there were any.
Any benefits to countries Ms and
then we see John Fahey has very
good.
study here that says that about
ninety or higher our engine
presents the managers Center I
would certainly want to do this
data driven.
A debate here because we do want
to look at facts we cannot just
be making policy based on your
feelings and the evidence so
madam chair Senator would you
agree with the statement that
criminals do not follow us.
Matt this is a hypothetical I'm
not going to.
Debate this hypothetical I don't
think it's relevant to this bill
thank you madam chair thank you
senator well I would think that
was the.
Easy question since criminals
are there by violating a lot so
I appreciate it madam chair
Senator.
Representative on you or and
then representatives of our.
Chair of the past.
I have a motion for it to pass
second Representative Zamora
before we take the role thank
you madam chair thank you
Senator for bringing this bill
forward.
Hi to re.
With with Representative here
that block that made the
statements that.
I think in in my words I would
call a common sense.
And and I think that.
We've we've already seen.
The facts with the results our
schools are having problems.
being advertised as a gun gun
free zones.
I myself.
Would feel safer if we're
allowed to carry guns
if if we've taken classes.
The the concealed carry classes
and and we understand the law
and the safety behind these
guns.
In in the testimony Senator and
madam chair we heard.
Mass shootings and that's why we
want this bill.
Well.
To me I said on the opposite
side of that coin that's exactly
what I want to carry his because
if there's nobody there to
protect me and my family when we
go to vote.
I want that right to protect
myself.
And we heard testimony as to
active shooting training.
Well why why we have to ask
ourselves madam chair and
senator are we having active
shooting training.
For the people working at these
polls if we believe that they're
safe.
We live in a society and in an
environment.
For we.
Have these things going on.
And as long as we have act.
Shootings are massive shootings
or whatever you call it.
And we have.
Soft.
Targets gun free zones.
Those people are going to go
there we we had a shooting in
Clovis at the library.
And this guy goes in for no
reason at all to start shooting.
And the skills of people that
are injured others.
And.
If there would have been
somebody there with a gun that
to protect themselves.
Maybe maybe one to happen maybe
once on as far.
But I think we'll look at.
Look back in time.
And we'll see that that this can
be better instead of worse and
and I understand madam chair and
and and.
Senator my mother was standing
right.
And we we grow about the country
and I remember one time when I
got a gun to go shoot a rattle
snake.
And she wouldn't let me.
Sure that rattle snakes.
One repeating some rabbits and
stuff and my mother when let me
touch a gun.
And and I can I understand that
side of it.
But the reality is.
Madam chair and senator if if we
make these gun free zones and
nobody can protect themselves.
People are gonna look at that to
go target that please.
And the.
I really don't have any
questions for you Senator chair
Senator a lot of the questions
been asked you know and and and
then the second amendment rights
of I believe we ought to be
looking at those with.
I hope we don't have to have any
issues I hope we don't have any
shootings at at any of these and
let lection places but to me if
if.
The criminal is not or that are
the mentally unstable person is
not going to go over the Lara.
Or be afraid of serving eighteen
months in jail for breaking all.
We're going to proceed forward
with with their crime but they
feel they have to do and if if
we're left defenseless in those
places.
It will be good for for US that
abide by the law on madam chair
and senator I am more confident
thank you thank you we have a
motion on the table please take
role.
Representative on in order yes.
Representative block no Sir.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes.
Representative right of those.
Representative Zamora no.
By ship Figueroa this.
Madam chair Johnson yes.
For the three is.
Senator two thousand four thank.
I don't see.
Senator do
you like this House Bill three
four two.
Yeah I think the I believe
Representative.
Yeah.
To.
Yes.
The.
Thank you for visiting.
Yes.
This.
Good.
All right Representative Lane
house bill three were to.
I'm sure good morning Senator.
And the receipts are worth stand
for this important bill also
Madam chair what this bill does
when it comes to five twenty
nine accounts takes our state
statutes and makes them
consistent with federal changes
that question twenty seventeen.
And there's a there's a few
things that I'd like to note
about the federal changes of
things are important for the
committee to develop
one is currently if you have a
five twenty nine count.
We're very limited in terms of
how you can spend that money if
you considered allowable.
So I think this will change is
if you
after high school you want to go
to the commission program
currently you can't use five
point funds to pay for purpose
of this change to allow that to
become Spence.
The other thing is if you have
any student loan debt right now
it's kind of strange so you can
use money to pay for tuition
ahead of time if you and Kirsten
known that you can't use the
five twenty nine funds actually
paid for student loans after the
facts of this is correct that as
well the ability to pay down
student loans.
The other thing and I think this
is important for for us uniquely
as a state is
with the opportunity scholarship
students are going to stay here
in New Mexico hopefully they
will be incurring a lot of
student loan debt and so what
this change would allow is if
there's money left over to five
point nine account this would
allow you to roll over the
remaining balance into a Roth
IRA right in the budget through
so for example if if I'm a
grandparent I open up I wanna
John that's that's pretty common
in in my grandchild.
They have scholarship so they
don't have a lot of calls
expenses this would allow the
change to roll over from that I
wanna count into Iraq irate for
that that person was to graduate
from college soon encouraging
young people save for retirement
as well so that would be a much
needed changes well.
and then the last thing it does
is it creates this spans four of
private K. twelve tuition as
well which right now the federal
level is not enough the state
level so as a for changes in the
current
I I think I wanna Cancer of
tremendous risk for of people
being honestly these changes of
water or working class.
Senator Wirth will serve as
anything just miss madam chair
just really quick.
A number of years ago I actually
care will on five twenty ninths
doing so shaping and adjusting
and so when I was asked to sign
on to this bill and taking a
look at what we've done what's
happening to settle level into
the flexibility it made sense to
me so I think this is a good
piece of legislation happy to
the side of the system.
And with that manager of Stoke
and manager I'm sorry did have a
many saw as well as ensuring the
committee.
It has not.
To distribute the committee said
please okay.
It's actually just a technical
change on on one piece of.
I can just do a affirmative just
purely technical so I do
apologize that was distributed.
All right thank you
Representative moment we'll go
to public service there is no
Representative as those of you
just said yes.
We have no comment seven and he
doesn't want to wait
Representative okay.
All right.
Are you where do we stand for
questions thank Representative
will go to public comment in the
room are there folks who are
here in support.
Of the bill.
Okay and let me just take a
thank you tech other here people
here in opposition to the bill.
Unless you're from supports my
left please give your name.
Thank you madam chairman of the
committee Karluk who are
associated builders and
contractors we are a commercial
construction association and
have one of the largest multi
trade apprenticeship programs in
the state what I think this
monster for Reagan for we stand
strong support for twenty two
happy that the federal
government to allow these
changes and we're asking that
the state now follow suit with
these changes with us in regards
to the pressure programs
actually does not directly
benefit us but much like the G.
R. funding for veterans the
upright so tuition is actually
covered by the employer but this
funding that allows the personal
savings plans to fund tools of
the trade and personal
protective equipment and things
for students to be successful
things that will actually
directly benefit the students
again much like the jet funding
so we stated strong support and
ask thank you.
Thank you ma'am.
Any other comments for the state
have chair thank you so much hi
Stephanie or they get and then
we have the secretary of the New
Mexico higher education
department and the education
trust for is actually under the
purview of the higher education
department we stand in full
support of the spelling Water
insure that right federal
regulation is aligning the state
regulation over the opportunity
scholarship wanted to ensure
that there's more that students
can be receiving as far as
benefits when it comes to
education careers right here in
New Mexico thank you and thank
you to the sponsor surveillance
following.
Thank you Secretary.
One Madam chair my name is misty
career never the strategies
stand at the boys and girls club
the lancet American would like
to thank as the sponsors of
readings forwarded the
information consideration of the
stuff open access and finding
ways to get better educated he
students parents staff in ending
the brain drain would be very.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Any other comments in the room.
We'll go to the zoom are there
folks here to speak in
opposition to house bill three
forty two.
And saying not folks who would
like to speak in favor of the
house bill three forty.
Saying that the committee and
Representative on in order to
and then Representative Zamora
thank you madam as thanks to
as senator and representative
thanks for reading this bill
Ford and it's a really good idea
I know how restrictive I met him
in the and I love that it allows
for
spending those funds on
alternative education path I
think that's extremely helpful
My one question was since the
spill out five to nineteen for
of funds from five to nine to
about their ay with the funds
and the tax to that point and if
so at what percentage of
Manchester professionals so if
we don't pass this bill than the
answer yes they would be subject
to actually I think probably a
ten percent penalty and then
whatever income tax
Representative here and so this
would allow that will were to
take place without any negative
tax consequences to the to the
budget thanks that's all thank
you.
Thank you Representative
representatives are thank you
madam chair most of the past
session that.
We have a question for the past
years and with the more us than
violations lock is there any
opposition.
Have questions okay.
Get away thank.
Madam chair and representative
and senator there are so many
great things in this bill the
home expansion into
apprenticeship and vocational
the expansion into loan
repayment.
The use for materials that need
and the the rock roll over the
one thing that gives me
heartburn is the K. twelve
private education what do you
see madam chair and sponsors as
the benefits of the state to
give up that tax revenue for the
K. twelve education system.
madam chair so I think it's the
benefit is one one minute read
these are they're not tax
dollars are going to introduce
five when accounts of these are
personal monies that people
contributed I do understand that
there is a tax deduction that
happens right in the gross
account if you use it for a lot
of expense is not taxable either
so there's a tax benefit to
taxpayers.
so I think the benefit is just
making sure that parents serve
send their kids to whatever I
think they believe is best for
them I can tell you that the
national numbers have shown that
despite the changes that
actually not driven enrollment
out of public schools and all
of their the national study did
not show any any need for that
and so yeah I think it's just
again trying to take a whole
package considered the gold
protection is making sure that
our state statutes are lines
federal law.
Thank you madam chair thank you
there's a motion on the table
four do pass do we have any
opposition seeing please show
all present voting in the
affirmative Representative have
the tax.
Rob I was.
Hey we have Senator Duhigg.
I don't see so I'll just go back
to committee six percent of.
Sure right here next.
Three.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
before right.
The bill that we in our law you
are voters challenger launcher
and someone sees.
Intimidate you thanks of force
or violence or retaliation.
Hundreds of interfering with
your free exercise of franchise
for interfering with
impartial nutrition the election
code that is a fourth degree
felony under our law with this
bill seeks to expand okay
protections for people who are
actually we are options on our
secretary of state's office our
characters are reasonable for we
are since the twenty twenty
election there's been a
significant opted expressing
itself I knew the people
critical work on a project for
state so we are just seeking for
that they have the same sections
the voter challengers and walk
through and.
I have with me director of the
office states office with that
madam chair.
The questions thank you let's go
to the audience for public
comment those in support of the
bill please raise your hand.
Please.
Madam chair members the
committee leading state Mason
our election chair of governors.
New Mexico French to Alexion
workers have proposed and
present obstacles to voters
participation
Alexion workers a key to Alexion
process many of the members and
involved here if the election
were approved and they should be
praised and not friends so we
stand from support center.
Thank you any further supporting
comments from the audience the
land with go to the webcast.
This call will go ahead.
Thank you so much madam chair
and members of the committee we
want to thank the sponsor for
moving this legislation it will
expand protections against
threats of violence and
intimidation to include our poll
workers are county and municipal
clerks as well as agents for the
sos office.
This unique example as this
unique opportunity to be an
example for all states in
demonstrating that we simply
will not tolerate harassment of
election workers as the forty
three is a critical measure to
address the unfortunate risks
that now exists for these
essential workers who serve our
communities by administering
without than our democracy would
falter so we fully support SB
forty three and did you pass
thank you very much.
Thank you Shannon.
That go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Catholic Clark
on the Santa Fe county clerk I
would like to speak in support
of this bill it's important.
To expand the protections over
our poll workers in Santa Fe
County we unfortunately I've had
a couple of incidents where bad
judgment unfortunately rule the
day where someone followed up
full worker coming back from a
polling site within
three inches of her bumper is
what she said and she was
absolutely terrified this is
just unacceptable behavior while
I don't know if we can regulate
good judgment I do think it is
extremely important to make it
very clear to everyone a poll
workers are doing an essential
duty and we need to protect them
and so I would urge the
committee I do pass thank you so
much.
Thank you do we have any
comments in opposition to the
bill.
There.
This.
Gentleman Jim.
I just want to say that it seems
to me this is really early then
we will
opportunities restrict
conservative or workers or
Lujan taken from being able to
access information at at the
polling place I'm not aware of
anybody ever being arrested a
full as the situation the board
isn't there and then we need to
recognize that we need all sides
eight thank you very much thank
you for your comments from the
audience in opposition to the
bill.
To the webcast.
Well you know for opposition to
the bill.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Nina Sayers I
stand with my colleagues at the
American associ ation of
university women.
In support of SB forty three
along with the league of women
voters to just vote intimidation
of election officials the
integrity of the voting booth
and the ballot box are at the
very core of our democracy.
Protection of all election
officials from intimidation
allows for swift and accurate
processing of election results.
Join eighty W. and the league of
women voters in support of this
important addition.
Mexico New Mexico election laws.
Thank you thank you.
All right seeing no further
comments Committee members.
Representative
The.
Representative right thank you
senator so I'm reading the bill
here insist employees each into
and the secretary of state
employee or agent of the county
clerk Madam chair Senator could
you just give a definition of
what that agent could be.
Chair chair representative and
and I think it's important also
to understand how how agents
come into play here so often
times when I whether there
should be no elections there
hiring a whole lot of temporary
workers so all those those
folders that you see the strong
temporary workers they're not
legally be active question of
whether they were employees
because there's a very real
person that's why the agent
languages and.
To make sure that everyone who's
doing the work running our
elections yes the benefit of
this protection.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Senator so what is also
included any other individuals
that work in the office that do
not through elections such as
People who are caretakers of the
building for instance or
janitorial staff with this also
played in madam chair Senator so
madam chair representative to
the extent that they are
employees of that office it
would apply but you have to look
at the rest of the language in
that bill because it has to be
that this is being done to them
for the specific purpose of for
those employers interfering with
the impartial on time
administration of the election
so janitor probably is and.
Part of the administration of
the New Mexico.
So so to the extent that the
fact is that it's probably.
But let's say someone.
Order to use force or threat of
force against the janitor
because they were just thinking
that they were part of the
initiation of the election and
that was their intent was to
interfere with that that it
could come into play.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator so I'm reading the
definition of the thirty statute
I believe attempting to induce
fear by the use of threatened or
use of force violence infliction
of damage harm or loss or any
form of economic retaliation so
madam chair Senator could this
potentially like assistance and
was joking around.
For instance and was taken the
wrong way.
And it was benign but it could
have been interpreted long Madam
center could this person if they
joke about something like.
I found out for with that
following.
Madam chair representative if if
they joked in a way that is
threatening force are
threatening use of force or
threatened economic retaliation
then that.
Probably after.
To meet this those specific
intense that are listed out.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator Senator economic
valuation what could that mean
but let's just say I don't know
if the county at the county
clerk doesn't win election you
know see Sir gonna be broke or
something if if I said that
chair Senator would that be.
Would that be increased by this
bill with that being a violation
Madam chair representative I
would not think that that
hypothetical muted but let's say
if I
there's a deputy county clerk
and I'm sorry I'm gonna get you
fired if you if you run to you
do your partial action of the
administration found whenever
probably less formal language.
I'm gonna get you fired I'm
gonna make sure that that you
can can you can never get on the
county again something like that
that's where I think something
like that what what can okay
thank you madam chair thank you
senator will I mean I'm guessing
in your scenario what if that
person wasn't doing the job and
let's just say I was running for
county clerk I said if I win
your fire managers and with that
be.
You know in this bill that
manages so madam chair
representative I don't think
that would be.
Be intimidation for the purpose
of interfering with the
impartial administration of the
election.
Being sick because there's there
there's a whole Cup and number
of options that have to be
checked and this and that.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator I appreciate the
answer.
Representative right yeah madam
chair and senator.
And.
First of all and you don't want
to make it real clear I don't
see any poll worker intimidated
or anything I realize this is an
existing one.
But when we start looking at
this point redevelopment and so
we go to page one one twenty
induce are attempting to reduce
fear.
So and that is really
subjective.
You know it's going to be the
person who says well I was.
Whereas you know someone else
may say eight.
At the end of it all
and.
And I thought of an example
we've had individuals go into a
polling place and their deadline
being able to vote because it
shows that they've already
voted.
Well I mean I think someone's
gonna be upset.
And are you you know if it if
that person says Hey I felt in
fear because they restore points
you know on all this you now
have a simple San if you will
but the penalty is four degree
felony.
Madam chair representative it's
not just so so one and as far as
the kind of subjective are you
intending to induce fear not
that is incurring that happens
every single time there's ever
charge brought under any section
we have the require specific
intent which is the vast
majority of criminal
so so that would be a so that
amounts to be the same under
this is a this every other time
that that happens as far as.
As you know debate induce fear
in them but that but I was the
but.
It is your subjective experience
of that something that's going
to break come under this you
have to read the rest of it
because it's attempting to
reduce that fear
with you through the use or
threatened use of force by the
committee and former law for
economic retaliation and so
someone is a factor there they
voted already there's going to
get told they can't
Representative about that they
can get upset but if they are
using force violence on social
damage former lost draft when
this comes up so is it is a
higher standards this then be
upset that's going to make this
cake and they would have to
actually be so upset that they
are threatening force and
threatening violence and
threatening damage or threatened
economic retaliation for this to
come out to play.
Madam chair and senator so we
see some of the to get subset.
He doubles up his this was made
a big ma'am the man is a woman.
Okay a because he doubled this
fill us and he's raising his
voice tax now a simple assault
under our our current criminals
do we agree on that.
Madam chair representative I
think it certainly could be
found that way back by the
finder of fact right and madam
chair and senator but in this
setting it's now going to be
four three fellow.
And again I agree that's current
law I'm just I was shocked at
this want to read and then
chairs and I don't think that's
entirely accurate I think you're
right that potentially depending
on the circumstances so and and
then again so every time someone
gets charged something like
this.
The this is going to a fire.
This eventually this there's
million jobs jury who's looking
at this is look at the totality
of the circumstances and making
a judgment based on all of those
and so if the finder of fact
institutions like that looking
at the totality of circumstances
found that that reasonably
intuitive threatened use of
force then it could come into
play but I wouldn't I think it
is it was not your state every
time something every time that
happened that would
automatically result in a fourth
degree felony.
The spell.
And madam chair and and etcetera
we both know that the DA's
office has discretion but look
at this yeah we see that the
other part that I have a problem
with on this one little sentence
when we have an attempt to
commit a crime.
In yeah we go to work criminal
statutes attempt is one degree
lower.
Unfortunately the attempt this
put in here to make it the
fourteen grief felonies not go
ahead lower of which would be a
high point misdemeanor.
And and Mr Mr chair
representative right that's
existing language so this body
when when this was first put
into effect decided I think that
I it is so critical to protect
our our apps are free access I
had to participate in our
democracy that even if someone
is attempting as was actually
doing it that it's going to have
that same high level of a fourth
degree felony because this is
this these are unique situations
where we have someone
essentially interfering with
someone's inalienable and and
and secretary Schardin right to.
Four of madam chair and senator
I assume you're going on
Judiciary next what
Have a look at that little
phrase receive.
Make awards clear you don't and
you know I've willing to work
with you on that I've I don't
want anyone intimidated at a
polling place but yeah and I
agree is existing language but
IT I don't like what we
currently have the wall okay
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
little and then Representative
Chasey.
Thank you there Representative
Zamora.
Thank you madam chair hello
center good morning and
community of of
I have a question as I was
reviewing this and taking a look
at the FIR I notice that the.
Some language
relating to similar offenses
kind of having did I already
the public defender Department.
raised the question about.
That made a reference to double
Jeff K..
Might be created here have you
read are you familiar with this
please madam chair.
I'm not Madam chair of the
insured for I.
One thank you thank.
It's on page three the last full
paragraph from the bottom of
the.
The the those the last.
Full sentence because similar
officials are.
Similar offenses are already.
Madam chair representative so.
So again I think any time we're
in a situation where you could
potentially charge multiple
thanks to someone that that that
that's always been a sense
but in reality what happens is
that is that the dust are dust
know how to talk state they
generally if they have multiple
sectors under which they want to
move forward on they do that
announcement.
I guess some take all of them
and as we get to the state of
New Mexico land on those most of
the areas who are utilizing the
discretion pick which one to
proceed on this into the the
specific circumstances.
Thank you thank you senator and
that madam chair
my last question would be the so
is this bill and I heard it
described earlier it's elevating
their
The is it enhancing the
penalties right now for criminal
offenses is that.
Madam chair representative now
it's yes this forty exists for
voters watchers and challengers
all this is doing is saying the
pool universe of people that
this covers also because the
people actually running our.
So it doesn't enhance the
penalty it just widens the.
Thank you so much for that
information that that's that's
it thank you Representative
Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
and the senator did bring up the
point I wanted to make because
with Representative lost
scenarios it's going to be a
decision for the fact I.
That that is either the judge of
residential trial for the jury
so all of the
Scenarios that were raised
really come after there's a
charge and then there's that a
trial of some sort.
And
everyone no matter who he or she
is entitled to due process of
law.
It to be heard in court.
But I'm I would say that I
think.
When you consider that it's a
federal crime to be getting on.
Joking about.
Something dangerous getting on
an airplane.
People want to take that to
heart a little about the threats
to individuals who are
volunteering for the most part
their time now there are some
paid staff.
At elections but would.
Heard these.
Stories and and I think these
were probably for some people
they were
paid physicians but individuals
millions home addresses phone
numbers the public and subject
to really quite terrifying
harassment in other parts of the
country I think this is this is
part of protecting our democracy
and
valuing the individuals who
either work collections or
volunteer Alexion's not that the
volunteers are working that just
to clarify some are getting paid
in summer not so I I don't think
this is particularly
frightening.
And I would say with regard to
the loss of the public defender
they tend to do that would need.
when you're adding a fourth
degree felony they'll always say
we usually probably charge this
and raise lost and so that's a
pretty standard.
Concern that that they race it
is not I'm it's a legitimate
concern but it's not unusual
thank you thank you
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for years to Senator so.
Hello my all of my questions
been answered other than the one
you gave an example of this
young lady I believe poll worker
that was going home and another
person followed closely behind
within three inches or buffer
stuff.
How will this bill help that
situation in that poll worker
was off work already and then
the person had already voted.
So madam chairperson those I'd
be off in order to go to the I
don't think would change the
analysis at all those two that I
think in a situation like that I
I believe it was ask for help
from here who would distract
that.
I think there would be a.
I think worried by the finder of
fact as to if if that can
reasonably be interpreted as a
threat of force that falling
behind I think that would
probably be an example of other
close callers they really look
at the circumstances to figure
out if if this if this applied
in that situation but but just
just being off the past working
hours and and have already voted
with his I think enter into
that.
Skip and madam chair in the
Senator this is gonna be a COVID
but I hope we don't visit this
later and find out that we went
too far and it prevented all
workers from asking questions
that the the polls and making
sure the work is being done
right and thank you thank you
for your bill thank you for your
presentation thank you madam
Mr Representative mobile thank
you madam chair thank you
senator I just have another
question that popped into my
mind so.
Regarding people covered by this
with this also extends to
canvassing boards and
commissions the act can see
words to certify election chair
Senators.
Madam chair representative I
think I think it does already
does actually and the loss of
their this order just to
election for the lucky works so
it already hosts and
then.
Representative.
Gently to the Department.
For the past decade by
Representative a little do we
have any opposition to this
motion saying that we show
office building in the
affirmative Sen.
Past.
Office for thank you.
Have.
To use.
Share in the fourth.
Stop.
Thank you madam chair members of
the.
Senator Kernan.
For the
Senate tax business and
transportation.
Senate bill two very.
Do you listen to this morning.
So madam chair members.
Mexico Legislative Council for
twenty nineteen.
Of the tax bill it was basically
designed to capture in the yes.
Receipts tax
internet sales.
That will open into effect a
little later.
First twenty twenty one and
when the the bill is a report
from the legislation reviewing
past the focus was on internet
sales and we have since learned
that several communities in the
state of Mexico seven great harm
by the tax changes so what that
change did was go from taxing
using the tax rate solar or the
Provider of the service to where
if their service is delivered
and that the name we use for
that is destination sourcing or
arrived but fix association
taxation.
So that the two communities that
have been very Senator hard R.
Hobbs and Carlsbad these are
communities that are are very
much involved with the gas
industry activity and for them.
The the bill has actually
created a loss of about two
million dollars a month in gross
receipts tax for community so
nearly twenty four to twenty
five million dollars in losses
and that's particularly harmful
because most municipalities
their main source of revenue is
the gross receipts tax and so
this change went into effect it
began to cause some very serious
losses for those communities and
they are responsible chair
members providing all the
services that we expect
municipalities to do fire and
police protection
just everything that a city does
and with that this bill madam
chair.
And committee members it's
designed to give some
financial assistance one time
two phone calls in Carlsbad so
that they can try to find ways
to recover from these major
revenue losses.
And Sir Kernan and a little bit
about what the Senate's been
doing with this bill is a Senate
Bill.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair members of the
committee and
in Representative branded a
really good job explaining what
the issue this out we recognize
this about over year and a half
ago when this specific limited
in the department house bill six
in twenty nineteen was it
internet sales we've all
benefited from internet sales.
Taxi get into the city's that
was something that that bill did
the problem is in New Mexico not
only do the tests sales but we
tax services and that's where
the mining issue came into play
so if you look at what tax
Representative reports I.
Holding mining is one of the
areas that really just impacted
Carlsbad and Hobbs and so that
one piece is now reported to the
county and the revenue collected
by the county is really fairly
insignificant it's point three
eights and like having but it's
the municipal these that is no
longer being collected in house
in Prospect without one
particular line item so what
we've been doing for the last
couple years is trying to find a
permanent solution we have to
bills introduced this session
we don't know how far they're
going to go we believe over time
we're gonna be able to find a
permanent solution that
hopefully will not affect other
municipalities we want that to
happen but will affect return of
what we believe is the
sufficient income to both cross
and homes this bill is specific
to Carlstadt this is not a
hospital at this point of that
is Carlsbad
appropriation to help until we
get that permanent solution in
place
This is a one time appropriation
as we try to fund that permanent
solution of when it says
subsequent fiscal years all that
needs how did check on that it
that costs that would have over
time the ability to spend that
money it would not have to spend
it in a particular way so if
they.
Well short of the income on a
particular amount thank you are
some of those funds this does
affect our ability to to keep
and maintain police forces of
infrastructure problems that's
where the impact is going to be
so significant our communities
as we support the industry.
That supports the state and we
all are aware of the revenues
come in.
Over the last year or two that
has allowed.
Notice to do some things that we
support that industry and Hans
and Franz fanon this is we
refresh and just one time
appropriation.
This.
Thank you and let's go to the
audience.
The do we have any comments in
support of the jail.
Any comments in opposition to
the bill.
Seeing that let's go to the
webcast I still see in New
Mexico for comments committee
members Representative Chasey
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and Senator
you know I don't this is clearly
the unintended consequence right
so I I and I do hope you can
find the solution and maybe it
needs to be directed to that
interim committee.
to really look at because.
The whole purpose of our duty
was to protect our local
business our our local
communities actually so it's
really a shame that it has this
effect so best of luck can try
to find a permanent solution and
I would certainly try to help
you if I could not.
I will help still it's too bad
in this topic we've been.
Perfectly reasonable laws that
have missiles that are good
overall condition and.
Thank.
Representative one.
Terry moody pass.
Representative blocked for
motion passed I have a second do
we have any opposition to.
The question okay.
I was just curious
It is that was this with the
funds come.
Being on.
To your bill on the house side
or the income on the Senate
side.
So do you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so it's not
part of the junior bill this
would be from the general
appropriations bill probably at
this point added in the Senate
side
thank you for Senator
Representative public.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and Sanchez thank
you for reading this gonna ask
of a question adding in that
because the budgets already over
there the bill that we play in
it so what would be decreased in
order to.
Added in a statement that I.
Discussion about that.
The tax.
There is yes.
Madam chair representative my
understanding is that.
I see the one over this building
question for as part of the
overall capacity the houses over
to the to the Senate.
All right thank you madam chair
thank you back to the board to
pass in the second do we have
any opposition seeing now please
show all present voting in the
affirmative Representative and
senator.
Thank you very much thank you.
Hey we have.
Way a.
From
To get through a bill that
Representative the legislature.
As a whole I have no pride of
ownership of this
I do think forty five forty five
good.
Is a good health and I I I
introduce to this way on purpose
but I I I think one thing that
can happen is if you have to
forty five day sessions I can
introduction introduce a bill
now and it doesn't make it
always through the process I
have a bill that has been heard.
This legislature's current.
And.
There may have been changes to
that bill before it dies
sometimes it'll die because
you're out of time sometimes it
I because it it's there
something unpopular about it or
to sponsor some popular
but the other thing is it will
allow you them to pick up that
bill you don't have the urgency
have before because now you know
you can introduce next session.
And if you do it's been vetted a
little bit and it has received
criticism or praise or whatever
along the way control and then
you have a bill that you can
have ready to go to introduce on
a one or literally before day
one.
When when you're able to start
dropping bills so you have an
advantage now you have a bill
that you introduce right away
and you can get an early number
sort of the hearing and it's
still fresh on the minds of the
members of this legislature.
the discussion as have the
previous year otherwise.
You may not survive an election.
You may surviving shin but it's
been two years now we have new
people that you've got.
Representative all over into
brand new proof people
so the reality is I I can see
changes to this bill taking
place to the finish line I'm
okay with that.
the big is I want to make sure
something makes it to the finish
line that can be presented to
the voters so we the one thing
that we have to deal with is a
thirty day session for the
governor has full control.
It doesn't matter if it's the
governor of your party or
different parts.
Unless it's priority for the
governor you're not able to do
anything so that's what this is.
And that's why.
Representative has signed on to
this and she's gonna try to be
here
she signed on to this as above
the line up to make sure we have
the continue working its way
through but.
Representative Figueroa your
bill's one exit and you are able
to make alterations to the end.
Right but I I'm I'm afraid that
if you're if you're locked in on
the sixty sixty I I'm afraid it
will probably not make it past
the Senate and I want to make
sure there's something that can
make it to the end and without
insurance have questions thank
you let's go to the audience are
there members of the audience
who are supporting this bill.
Please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
had a director of public policy
of the New Mexico which is our
commerce our version was
speaking about what modernizing
the legislature before this
legislative session because of
all the great work you often
during and so we do support you
know thank you all for your work
we think that's really important
and the conversation came up
about days and where are
mentorship landed that we
thought would be reasonable with
the forty five states each year.
We really applaud Lujan
Representative much more
bringing this proposal forward
and we applaud all of you for
doing this parks you could be
responsive to her constituents
thank you thank you let's go to
the webcast.
Comments in support of the bill
on webcast.
How about comments in opposition
to the bill and the audience.
Seeing that on the webcast.
Okay committee members
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative Montoya so I
think we we have this before and
I'm not sure if we I know we
discussed Judiciary but I'm not
sure pretended up ever being
discussed on the floor.
I think maybe we didn't have to
it was just time frames so
I am completely supportive of
more time and the your point
particularly removing the
restrictions on bills and be
considered in in even numbered
years because it's just just one
more provision that dilutes our
power just moves with it.
Just make sure that we don't
have as much of state.
My concern about just forty five
just as else and I'm happy I'm
gonna vote for this because I
think you should go on we should
discuss.
The whole thing and if we don't
get it before the voters this is
a that doesn't get all this
session madam chair we have time
before the next election.
And if it resolution you don't
have to have the governor's
authority to do and and and
thirty day session.
so conceivably there could be
more work on the structure just
the the state structure in the
interim with the sixty sixty and
the for the forty five forty
five but when you remove the
restriction of the governor's
call you're actually inviting
for more bills to be introduced
so it seems to me that you could
end up with the real.
Time problems because we'd be
what would we be about five days
from the end of the session
right now so that's kind of
scary when you think.
We have to appropriations no
matter how much help we have and
how hard we work it'll be hard
to finish up.
And open ended bill introduction
session in forty five days
that's that is a concern that I
have and then you have money
and very happy to
Continue this discussion they do
think we probably have until the
spring of twenty twenty four to.
Good right.
With and I and I supported the
earlier resolution by chair and
I I think that.
Probably makes more sense but
there are also some issues some
logistics issues with filing
dates M. Hundred Days
so with that Mr Chairman I
waited I supported your your
bill this is the first.
I I really do appreciate the
discussion thank you so much
thank you Representative.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and madam chair representative I
so appreciate the fact that
you're following up with this
bill and you can talk to me
about it and work through some
of the issues with this between
the two proposals that are
moving in this legislative
session madam chair strongly
agree with with no restrictions
we have to be able to services.
Both parts of the legislative
session in both years that my
concern madam chair has been
mentioned by Representative
Chasey.
We had we have nearly a thousand
bills introduced so far the
session and we are five days
away from the.
A line.
so this proposal my fear madam
chair would be that both.
Sessions would not get very much
done that very few bills would
take you through a forty five
day time period and it wouldn't
and toward that end serve our
people it doesn't madam chair
give us more time to debate and
thoughtfully think through the
bill proposals that come before
us our committee time where we
looking into things deeply and
really share back and forth the
pros and cons the unintended
consequences and hear from
stakeholders and the agencies
all of that would be compressed
if we have no restrictions the
last time.
Rest and we're gonna lose
depending instead of paying.
Madam chair representative feel
free to respond if you look
thank you madam chair yes
There are two reasons for the
forty five day one one of them
being if we go with sixty during
that even here that is the year
we have to file to run for to to
file for primary election.
When I did this before I
accidentally found out something
about sixty sixty because of you
know around forty five I push
back fifteen days because I
thought we could get there
February it's not have snow and
a lot of weather and we wish to
forty five days out what I found
out I did which would have been
the end time sixty sixty.
What I found was it interfered
with our getting signatures to
go and run and in a primary
actually we depending on.
How the the day's work out there
is a possibility that half the
time.
We would be still in session
when we would be needing to turn
and.
Our signatures to run for office
if we chose to run again that's
that's a problem because as as
you guys know there you can run
into problems if other people
are telling that for you.
There's potential that they get
your name wrong that they get
address wrong with the papers
are different.
A court just to be able to get
on the ballot so there's some
problems with that second sixty
day session.
the other thing I found was by
my question later it made it
harder for appropriations they
have to get done by a certain
date and we have to get past a
certain date so that.
It is ready whenever the
governor signs on on to that
makes before all of the
municipalities everybody's are
for.
So there was a there was a
problem with the starting gate.
So so I moved it back to the to
this point but this is the real
reason grossing and fixing this
is that second year we would be
running.
Signature deadline
The second thing is I I
introduce a.
memorial to try and look at how
different.
because if if we don't become a
four year.
Year round legislature one thing
we could do is have more robust.
Interim and if we have a bill
that has been introduced and
that's a bill that I want to
have made through the process
next year that's a bill that I
want to make sure that gets
recurring.
That we want to get
It's already been vetted and a
lot of people in both chambers
have heard I think it would make
our interim more effective
especially that are in rural
prior to a budget here which it
doesn't matter if I got a bill
in interested in the governor's
on interested in the whole
interim misplaced as well so I
do think forty five forty five
to work and we have more feted
deals going into that second
session.
Madam chair representative the
filing dated signature process
is really good point and it's
something we would have to
address but there's three easy
ways and three hard ways to do
that and what is already in
statute.
Madam chair is filing proxy.
Signatures can be determined by
proxy estimated that to see how
hard it was to make someone a
proxy it's a form it has five
blanks on it it doesn't even
need to be notarized so it's
easy to do the other thing we
could do because all of this is
in statute it is up to us to
change it.
We can change and say I would
counselors for the second.
Like statewide officers to which
case we just run upstairs
internet cable.
And the third option is to move
the filing date back to February
the secretary of state's office
is that that could work that's
their data for.
Rational.
And they can put it combined
with powers then it would allow
that I basically says in the
sixty sixty bill so we have a
lot of options to deal with that
issue our collection of
signatures begins in October
that's when the secretary of
state has those forms ready so
we could easily have that done
before we even got here
Madam chair representative I
appreciate is that all but I
think sixty sixty addresses the
issue of more time.
Thank you madam chair thank you
I have Representative Freeman
and Representative
Representative three of madam
chair just came have risen and
second Representative little yes
I was just curious had been had
I see I recognize that the issue
this time so I
had you'll discuss as sixty
maybe forty five states I think
you're
you madam chair.
Representative that's I.
The amendment.
Last year.
Through so that was and was a
little bit more.
advertising to the center of an
Action.
As.
Sixty days they just could not
and and that's why I'm worried
about the sixty sixty I just
don't think it make its makes
the and that way because the
Senate side of the a lot of
this.
But yes it made it that way and
what I would hope to do is to
get this out its forty five
forty five and then if it if it
got changed on the Senate side.
I just wanna make sure it makes
it through the Senate side not
just not just change thank you
Representative and madam chair I
have.
Right thirty days if we're
talking about time and I totally
understand
the challenges that people are
facing.
Two can to thank you sixty day
session.
But if we're looking to.
Devote more time I just thought
that.
And and I'm sure you have that
discuss as you said you
mentioned this sort of.
Your develop that for years.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair already.
Or do pass and second we have an
office.
Please show off.
Senator.
Representative.
People have
manager I have before but I
think that's the first U. S.
and.
Health and concerns.
Members.
Now this.
State conferences read.
Of all.
