Lows we have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
Gentleman from.
Chavis eighty no dental
Representative Townsend.
If you would bang your head.
Nearly father we thank you for
this day for the moisture that
we have for the opportunities
that we have to enhance the
lives of our constituents all
across the state.
We just for your.
Your patience.
Your guidance.
And your insight as we do this
lord would assess the to less
H. family represented here today
and that we have act and operate
in a way that is pleasing to use
for to Christ and we pray
they've been.
Really wasn't wasn't Lujan
presented Lente with the pledge
of allegiance.
The gentleman from Chavis the
leaves and Mason with a person
Mexico flag.
Julie for years of chasing.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation see no objection it
is so ordered.
House memorial forty nine
introduced by Representative
Ortez memorial declaring
February fifteenth twenty twenty
three Kate Carson energy
independence day in the house of
representatives house memorial
forty nine introduced by
Representative Ortez.
House more of forty nine have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Chile from Bernalillo Mr speaker
I will go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business see no
objection it is so ordered.
The gentle lady from dollars
thank you Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial forty nine your move
from the speakers table of the
made the next order of business.
Junction it is so ordered your
would you give it to that point
the record reflect that election
is server placing House more
Fernando final passage has been
taken and that is specific to
debate amendment or substitution
the generators plan the
memorial.
Mr speaker today we are
celebrating to Carson electric
energy independence day I ask
the body to look at the look
inside the little black bags
actually the rather large black
bags.
On their desk and they'll see
and rangeman of goodies that
Kate Carson has provided us on
these are all made by companies
in the Kit Carson service area
you'll see a lot of amazing
things including a stable this
isn't made an in house but
you'll see a lovely a solar
charger.
It's so important that our
electric co op can can provide
the power to our people the
support for our constituents and
I am here today to to present on
that I also have some guests
here Mister speaker I'd like to
introduce them.
The lady go read.
That we have Mr crystallized
around who's the vice president
K. Carson electrical Hopf.
Thank you.
Mr Bernie Dardis trustee.
Mr Daniel Trujillo.
Trustee.
And Mr Lee hill yes maybe not
never mind.
Mr speaker will the clerk read
the memorial click to read.
House memorial forty nine
introduced by Representative
Ortez a memorial declaring
February fifteenth twenty twenty
three Carson energy independence
day in the house of
representatives whereas since
two thousand thirteen kicker
Senator cooperative members have
set out to create change and how
the cost of electrical power and
the source of that generated
power affects the lives of its
community members and rescue
cursing like to cooperative
members agreed to a first phase
of action as part of an energy
independence transition plan.
Anchored by a necessary change
in wholesale power suppliers
which restored local decision
making for kit cars and electric
cooperative members in matters
of electric power supply and
more as a person which required
members set a goal to lower in
stabilize the cost of power in
the cost of students school has
not been achieved with fixed
wholesale power rates and with
members realizing a reduction in
power rates of up to twenty five
percent and we just keep cursing
lecture cooperative members set
a goal to move away from the
existing costly I also have the
power mix served to its members
and to secure the ability to
self generate renewable power by
locally manage and maintain the
clean energy generation plants.
And whereas the clean local
power generation goal has not
been achieved with kit Carson
electric cooperatives forty one
megawatts of distributed solar
power generation sixteen
megawatts of accompanying
federal storage and whereas
decal has been achieved with one
hundred percent of its power
needs supplied in summer by
daytime of solar power
generation.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico the
February fifteenth twenty twenty
three be declared kit cars and
energy independence day in the
house of representatives be it
further resolved that kid Carson
electric cooperative peak
knowledge for cheating energy
independence for its members
through electricity prices
stability cost decreases thirty
to serve additional renewable
energy resources and restoring
local decision making ability to
better serve its members and be
it further resolved that a copy
of this memorial be transmitted
to the chief executive officer
of kit Carson Alectra
cooperative.
As the debate on the memorial
the gentle lady from earlier
Senator he'll.
Yes thank you Mr speaker will
the lady from tell sealed the
very young lady from tells you
Mr speaker I yield to the not
very much older if at all.
Lady from Bernalillo almost
twins Mr speaker Mr speaker I
rise to support this memorial
simply because I'm a thousand
yeah it and I've.
All the work all my life we've
had two cars electric they've
always produced the power that
we've needed to light our our
stoves and our homes and
everything else and I couldn't
let this opportunity pass me by
to give you a nice tribute
because you work very hard for
the community that tells and I
thank you from the bottom of my
heart thank you madam speaker.
On the memorial facility for
Bradley was on the west Santa Fe
and Taos Representative at a.
Thank you Mr speaker will have a
distinguished lady yield from
tasks Mr speaker I yield to the
more distinguished lady from all
those counties.
I rise today to really brag
about K. Carson electric they
were one of the they were the
first solar electrical coop to
go the full daytime solar and
they did that in the year twenty
twenty that's an amazing feat
there one of the leaders in the
nation if you don't know about
them Google them because they're
pretty amazing the goal was to
go full daytime solar in the
year twenty twenty five they
made that five years ahead of
schedule and now we really have
to compliment them on that they
have also contributed to many
communities throughout the north
they did a solar array project
at the at the northern cell
retail center allowing us to re
open the northern L. retail
campus and we did that with the
solar array because that bit
school was built in nineteen ten
and it was still using propane
there is no way they could run
that campus unless they had a
solar array so they have been
leaders in not only energy and
solar energy but also leaders
and being at great internet
provider throughout throughout
our state so I just I am deeply
appreciative of the work the
vision and the collaboration by
cars and electric thank you.
This gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia has
speaker and one of the young
lady from Dallas please yield
Mister speaker I yield thank
you.
Those of you in the state are
you you'll turn to the more
younger.
Slightly younger Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker generated
from the house you know as the
the most because only to have
the opportunity to visit with
Dave Torres you guys.
Probably no they thought as a I
don't know if you still with the
cooperative a the still hanging
in there yeah we were in Dallas
and by we I mean the the more
speaker the land run interim
committee for up and tells me
about eight years ago and and
then the cooperative sponsored
our evening meal after our our
on our land grant in rural
committee hearing on on the
first day and and I was
privileged to kind of engage in
the conversation with Mr Torres
in terms of the transition that
you guys are making.
In our into
meeting these solar initiative
solar generation type of goals
and and you know you will come
to is that in the short period
of time some of the speaker
generally from the house I think
what's important for the body
understand is the most bickered
that the only way that Carson
could have achieved these goals
and milestones in terms of rural
electric coop is that they have
to disengage themselves from the
coalition of coops that
basically
is the main entity within our
rural electric cooperatives is
that our rural electric
cooperatives for the most part
are under one coalition and it
took the investment is the most
Baker forget Carson to renting
of the money in the millions of
dollars to make that break away
but you can see is the most
bigger gentleman from the house
of that kind of basically
Gotten the refund from an
investment in and moving forward
in the best amounts because this
kid consulate to call up is a
model of of it of how the the
local electric cooperatives can
kind of achieve stellar goals
when it comes to we noble energy
and so I really applaud them in
the back to recognize them as
being the kind of a role model
and and the the pioneer and and
moving kind of electric
cooperative generation forward
in New Mexico and steps think is
the most Baker thank you
gentlemen for the house.
There's further debate the
gentleman from labor percent of
Scott.
Gentlelady from toast.
Mr speaker I do yield.
The course is for prolong
respect to renewable energy the
most if not all philosophical
currently operate in the state.
It's to be noted however to to
residential until it to rights
for coercion or almost fourteen
cents okay W. H. which is
substantially above.
Rates charged by many.
Perhaps the other utilities in
the state Mr speaker and gentle
lady as we move forward with
this transition renewable energy
which is the public policy of
this body would need to be
mindful to tease him to return
rates.
Most.
Is that can least afford to pay.
High electricity bills.
Mr speaker and madam chair for
bringing this forward and with
that are you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker before I close I have
to invite you all to a party
tonight at five thirty at love
fund us so please come and with
that Mr speaker I now move that
house memorial forty nine do not
pass.
To ask unanimous consent as well
Mr speaker I guess I could do
that and now ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
record show show that their role
has been called and all members
present voted in the affirmative
twenty motion show all members
of the house present voting in
the affirmative seeing no
objection it is so ordered we
are on final passage of house
memorial forty nine the board is
now open.
What is one of seven zero
negative house one forty Niners
only passes house.
The gentle lady from any we
Representative Brown.
Thank you so much Mr speaker of
members of the house we have
some guests on the rostrum today
and I believe it's
Representative Townsend will
yield to him shortly to
introduce them by name Mr
speaker we have for recognition
certificate for the Eddy County
four H. program and just to let
you know this is an extremely
accomplished FFA organization of
this group has won state and
national titles very proud of
them so we do have Mister
speaker a recognition
recognition certificate that I
believe will be read.
Cllr to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes Eddy County four H.
whereas the for each program is
an informal educational program
that provides opportunities for
young people to develop
leadership and management skills
positive self esteem effective
communication skills a solid
sense of personal responsibility
and the ability to make sound
decisions.
And whereas the life skills
learned in four H. the number of
young people to become
productive well informed self
reliant and responsible adults.
And we're as the four H. program
in New Mexico is a division of
New Mexico state university's
cooperative extension service
and local extension agents
coordinate the county four H.
programs.
And we're as four H. members
attend club meetings work on
projects participate in county
and state fairs attend camps and
workshops and engage in other
fun activities and more as some
of the projects that members of
the Eddy County four H. program
participated in this past year
include wildlife conservation
archery fitness baking gardening
scrapbooking rocketry and
community service and was the
Eddy County four H. program is
open to anyone ages five to
nineteen and adults are welcome
to join as volunteer leaders
were as all members of four H.
abide by the four H. pledge I
pledge my head to clearer
thinking my heart to greater
loyalty my hands to larger
service and my health to better
living for my club my community
my country and my world now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico the
recognition extended Eddy County
four H. members for their
community engagement signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe.
Mr speaker thank you so much for
that I don't know of turn with
your permission to
Representative Townsend to make
introductions gentleman from
Chavis sitting at the
Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady of.
Baker on the rostrum today we
have a a number of
For H. young men and women that
I would like to introduce Jack
chair of a.
Eighteen miles.
Peyton manning.
Kaylee Shockey.
And last but not least.
Morgan Townsend.
Also on the rostrum today we
have
when jockey his Eddy County four
H. agent.
I think the very brave chaperone
Kerry Putman is there some place
to.
If you would give them a warm
welcome to the house.
Also Mr speaker I have a
shattered today miss operate on.
she is with the state leadership
ambassador program and I look
forward to her help today as we
transition and go through the
round house thank you very much
Sir.
Thank you gentlemen and welcome
for H. I am the proud
representative of mine local
four H. it smack in the middle
of downtown Albuquerque believe
it or not a very happy to see
you all and and I hope we get to
visit after floor session today
thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker doesn't gentlelady
yields gentleman she will have
to yield but I can you'll the
floor to you the gentleman from
Colfax curry Harding quay some
Galen you Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I'd like to introduce this
morning my my shadow given
Morrow Gavin comes from an old
time raging family up the
northeastern corner of the state
she is a state for each song and
rec leader and heard great
granddaddy Mr John Morrow serve
many many years in the Senate
here in the in this round house
and just like to welcome our
today in the in the appreciate
her coming to see us welcome to
the house.
The gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell Mr speaker
thank you very much I have a
very special guests joining me
today this is not taxed bar to
from Sierra County she is nine
years old and she is a member of
the Winston Liggins four H. club
which has about twenty five
members in the club is growing
she has been in for age three
years now even though she's nine
years old she first started out
as a clover but and she also
showed steers whenever she was
that young.
steers include some tall crosses
she does raise her own heifers
she has Angus cross heifers she
has shorthorn cross with
Charlize.
And the she also has Maine on
Tuesday favorite one's name is
conical Burr.
She is home schooled and her
favorite subject is science.
And she is following that up
with becoming a veterinarian
hopefully in the state of New
Mexico hello and welcome ms
Jackson bar to welcome to the
House Jackson.
Gentlelady from can't consider
as part of it is here
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker I too would like
to introduce my shadow for the
day this is Addison facet
originally from the tumbleweed
for each club along with several
of my grand children that same
club issues here today
representing the state for H.
leaders team as the entomology
ambassador and I just want to
recognize her and have you all
welcome her to the house I also
would like to just say a few
words about forage Mister
speaker as a four H. as been a
premier youth leadership
organization in New Mexico for
over one hundred years Sanchez
and clubs are from rural and
urban New Mexico which we really
appreciate and there are more
than fifty thousand use between
the ages of five and eighteen
and four H. clubs today
ultimately Mr speaker they set
goals take responsibility for
their actions that they.
They can take pride in many
things and their lives have
purpose and meaning please help
me welcome Addison facet Mr
speaker welcome to the house.
The gentleman from Torrance and
some again a person in custody
in.
I like the body of the welcome
my shadow today according to
them good evening that are going
well as born and raised in Las
Vegas New Mexico he's a proud of
second generation college
students love spend time
outdoors hunting fishing and
hiking code is a sophomore New
Mexico highlands university
pursuing a bachelor's degree in
business administration with a
concentration in finance.
Despise to pursue a law degree
we on his bachelor's it serves
as a parliamentarian within
Mexico highlands university
students and it.
Already graduated as a cardinal
scholars from Roberts in high
school and was an active member
of the high country four H. club
as well Mr speaker and members
of the body.
Welcome to the house.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker that order of
business committee reports to no
objection it is so ordered.
Right.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill two and
three as amended has had it
under consideration reports of
his recommendation that.
They do not pass but that house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan
small chair.
Mr speaker I move approval we're
document Federal committed for
in house bill's two and three as
amended by the federal community
porterhouse appropriation of
finance committees of sting for
House Bills two and three as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was make the eyes have it
committee reported opted.
Jenny for years of chasing.
Mr speaker I move that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered the
gentleman from.
Believe Representative figure.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise
today this.
I wanted to put out a thank you
for the staff that takes care of
the capitol what's going on in
the last couple days with the
snow and we've had it several
times every time I come in
they're out working it doesn't
matter if I come in here at
three o'clock in the morning or
at six o'clock in the morning
they're out there working their
**** off and I appreciate all
the effort that they do the
trying to keep us safe thank you
thank you gentlemen and thank
you staff.
a guest Representative Madrid up
in the gallery we've got heather
flowing from valley telecom
group in the gallery please rise
to be recognized welcome to the
house of representatives.
The rostrum rostrum.
Gentleman from you
Representative Lara thank you Mr
speaker the house Democrats will
be having a caucus state
immediately after the floor
session room three seventeen
members take note the gentleman
from Chavis sitting at that are
percent Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker also on the
rostrum today we have
ambassadors and members of the
New Mexico exchange broadband
commission I think.
We would all rather them be
Outland fiber across the state
today because we desperately
need to but I want to take the
opportunity to.
Introduce a friend of mine it to
get Byrd.
With the nasco valley.
And also tab at the Davis.
Both are here Representative
broadband and and we desperately
need broadband across to Mexico
and we need small rural.
Companies that have been in
business with broadband for
years to be integrated into that
as we as we roll it out across
New Mexico so we really
appreciate what they did thank
you and would you help me
welcome them to the house.
Welcome to the house also want
to recognize every student from
forage in every four H. club in
New Mexico that may be in the
gallery we want to recognize you
and your hard work and we
appreciate you joining us today
welcome to house.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker in health committee
this morning somebody left a
purple water bottle that says
vein screening and this cop so
if it's yours come get it thank
you Mr speaker and I just caught
him again my claim that one
gentlelady delayed from the
university Ferrary thank you Mr
speaker hi you haven't received
it yet but they will be coming
to your desk and of delivering a
PGA sun country section of a
golf pass to several of the golf
courses around the state and
from the game of golf New Mexico
creates growth in many different
areas including tourism dollars
exposure economic impact job
growth except drug and they've
also posted some national
international golf tournaments
that bringing publicity and
tourism to our state and on
behalf of St country golf house
they invite you to visit the
variety of courses around the
state this is an opportunity to
help you learn about the
positive community economic and
environmental impacts the game
of golf makes in our region I
enjoy golf and I hope you're not
intimidated to try and take
lessons is really a great sport
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you to send country section of
the PGA members take note.
The lady from Katrin supporters
here in Billings are presented
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker I
just wanted to wish my grandson
happy twelfth birthday can in
turn.
The lady you're gonna have to
sing Happy Birthday and leaders
in the rendition.
Mr speaker he's not listening
they can look back and and watch
that.
The state you know I have twelve
grandkids so I have to say
everyone so you'll be hearing a
lot for me thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you deleted the delivery
from job as representatives ill.
Mr speaker with your permission
can we finish the other
announcements absolutely the
generated from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting fifteen minutes after
our caucus I will tax the
ranking member when we're done
so you'll all be informed thank
you very much Mr speaker thank
you to the Legislative from
Santa Fe Representative huh
thank you for your I I want to
wish my son high yes more not
Martinez thank you but he's your
guy
The EDD better known Lujan is
very happy twenty second
birthday this today the
political unity to sing Happy
Birthday.
I don't think he's listening
either but he can reflect on
this but if she if the body so
if you would like that would be
or if we do a collective Happy
Birthday I think that's a good
idea Mr speaker thank you get
asserted on three one two three
have bureau a to use of.
Happy birthday the thank thank
you Mr speaker the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
see a high dividend also
been as much because I think the
lady from Chavis was up before
me.
Single.
She's yelling the forties are
talking so much bigger estimates
speaker I rise to point of
personal privilege state your
point just a moment speaker I'd
like to offer some constructive
criticism to some of the members
if I may is the most eager
in the and this may need
constructive criticism I think
mainly goes out to a my
democratic colleagues as the
most because.
Mainly because I haven't walked
the hallways of a Republican
members have their offices.
But
To madam speaker what I notice
is that the same Valentine's day
is a is a day for giving.
day for giving the.
In a day for showing of and as
the most Baker
In the twenty six years that
I've been up here.
I've always given flowers to my
secretary.
And when I was a the chair of
the committee I would not only
give of of the begin range meant
to my secretary I would always
give smaller arrangements to the
committee secretaries in my pod
customer speaker.
Well as the more speakers that
are secretaries.
The wrong in kind of awful films
some of our goals and needs on a
daily basis and they're here at
eight in the morning.
And they leave at five at night
our committee secretary is the
most Baker sometimes going to
the midnight hour.
with committee hearings enters
the house because I was walking
the hallways of my democratic
colleagues offices in the
offices of our chairs.
I know it's very little flowers
for our secretaries is the most
speaker.
and that kind of a.
Tells me that my democratic
colleagues when it comes the
same valentines they are
budgeted needs speaker.
It and
But as the non speaker a.
And democratic colleagues you
can make amends.
You know theirs or their own
as a flower shop.
That still has a lot of access
arrangements you know and but if
you try going to as the must be
good to trader Joe's and and
whole foods and look at their
arrangements there are drying up
you know that.
A little bit and drawing up so
don't go to trader Joe's and and
and whole foods and.
And the make up for the flowers
in Gaynor secretary yesterday
but failed.
Well as a flower shop is still
open to close at three thirty in
the state not speak of a.
Next time then what does this
must be guarded my democratic
colleagues to show that love
and give that love to our
secretaries that for the key
role in the going ons of our of
our daily role as a legislator
access system speaker.
Thank you gentleman the
gentleman from a earlier Santo
Domingo thank you Mr speaker I
do have a proclamation that
today is community college state
so with fifty three percent of
our undergraduates enrolled in
community college and if the
weather wasn't so bad today we
would have had the college
community college all state
academic team here to be able to
recognize them but they're
probably home these are people
are probably watching virtually
so if we could acknowledge their
achievement appreciate that on
community college state thank
you Mr thank you gentlemen
please rival posture community
college day.
Rating is in the gallery
occupational therapy and
occupational therapy assistants
from eastern New Mexico
university and the university of
New Mexico these are students
who work with individuals who
experience health problems to
help them live more independent
and meaningful lives welcome to
the house representatives.
To leave this.
Mr speaker thank you very much a
rise on a per point of personal
privilege please state your
point.
Mr speaker ladies and gentleman
of the house here we go again.
Last year we drafted the letter
that the majority of the house
members signed on to over what
the United States for services
doing over the he left for is
the live National Forest and
that was that Ariel slaughter.
Of cattle over there.
Mr speaker.
Last year whenever this did take
place against the wishes of the
legislative body working through
the cattle growers association
working through of the state of.
Livestock office.
They slaughtered twenty nine
bulls.
Thirty two cal's.
In forecasts and this took place
during the week of February
thirteenth two thousand twenty
two.
Ladies and gentlemen it sickens
me that these cattle that were
shut not all of them were
killed.
They suffered they suffered
those carcasses were left to rot
in the floor of the forest.
Mister speaker whenever I
started out my statement saying
here we go again.
It is going to take place.
Later on this month.
Mr speaker we have drafted
another letter you have received
it and I will read the first
paragraph of that letter.
Do you need for more.
We refer you and in statically
reiterate our letter of February
the sixth two thousand and
twenty two.
Almost a year and one lawsuit
later we again find it necessary
to write you regarding the
Forest Service blatant disregard
for the laws of the state of New
Mexico.
As previously established the
laws governing as strays in New
Mexico are quite clear.
The actions they took in two
thousand twenty two resulted in
a lawsuit to prevent the Forest
Service from slaughtering cattle
in the heat of the wilderness by
shooting them from helicopters.
Mr speaker.
What they are doing is in direct
violation of the laws that are
set forth in our statutes these
cattle are as to raise.
The Forest Service did not want
to hold up to what their bargain
was that was made to remove
these kind of stories.
Kabal.
From the handle of forest.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman.
And ladies in the house.
There are photos out there of
what did take place last year
whenever they use did this Ariel
slaughtering.
I can't tell you how horrendous
these photographs were.
Animals have their legs shot out
from under them they were shut
in the eyes.
Baby can have since mothers have
been shut.
Or left is dead gays or left as
food for those predators that
are out there.
Mr speaker ladies and gentleman
of the house.
There's a huge difference
between fifty to a hundred a
hundred and fifty head of cattle
now considered by the U. S.
Forest Service and what happened
in the nineteen nineties when
there were seven hundred and
fifty six head.
During that time there was a non
lethal removal effort and those
efforts should be continued as
we speak.
Mr speaker.
New Mexico cattle growers
association working with the
livestock board met with the
United States Forest Service and
they agreed on a seventy five
notification seventy five day
notification.
On the settlement of trying to
remove those cattle from the he
left.
The United States Forest Service
did not come to the table and
they did not implement any of
the suggestions that were made.
The two people that were.
Sitting in on these discussions
were Anthony Madrid and Camille
house of the and they are the he
left forest management.
The December directive that was
set forth by the livestock board
that was in agreements with the
Forest Service management.
That there would be an annual
meeting.
These cattle could be gathered
off of that particular area.
And be purchased through the
livestock board instead of this
on slide.
Today the United States Forest
services going to render their
decision in regard to the cop
public comment in opposition to
this Mr speaker they have made
their decision they will start
to slaughter again in less than
two weeks.
It will happen.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
ladies of the house.
This is what's so ironic about
it right now.
The Forest Service has come.
To the cattle growers
association.
Stating that they are sixty
percent understaffed.
They have as the cattle growers
association.
Help them find employees.
Yet they're the ones that are
killing our cattle and those
cattle do belong to the state
because they are considered as
strays.
They claim this is the easiest
way to read a Kate does the
strays from the love forced.
Mr speaker if we continue in
this line of a reddit Kading
those unwanted animals from our
forest.
What does that do to other
allotment owners throughout the
state of New Mexico if their
cattle go through a fence that
is been torn down by the
wildlife in our state.
Does that give the Forest
Service afforded to go in there
and randomly shooting because Mr
speaker cannot read a brand.
From a helicopter.
Right now there is a meeting
there is about a hundred head of
cattle in the heat.
If you put an estimated wait on
those cattle of the thousand
pounds each with fifty percent
of those carcasses being gated
edible at five dollars a pound
four servings per pound Mr
speaker and ladies and gentleman
that is a lot of.
Those cattle can be brought out
of there they can be held by the
livestock board.
And in light of what
representative Garcia said the
the day pertaining to hungry
people throughout the state of
New Mexico instead of those
carcasses being allowed to rot
out on that on the floor of the
forest it could be help and.
Harvest ministries loaves and
fishes and so many other
community kitchens throughout
our state.
Mr speaker I am appalled by what
the U. S. for services doing.
They are not doing the service
after their name shouldn't even
be there because they are not
doing this in the service with
the forest fires that they have
created that burned through the
no.
Conscionable killing.
Of our cattle in the late.
The environmental impacted now
has had over there in that area
Mr speaker.
I can't.
Stress enough how upset I am
over this because it will not
stop there we have several
horses.
Better now and our force are
they going to start coming down
after those forces that are out
in force right now you better
hold on folks because this is
the way they operate Mr speaker.
I encourage this body.
To let their constituents back
home no.
But the US Forest Service is
doing in our state.
And it sickens me to no end Mr
speaker thank you very much for
allowing me this time thank you
gentle lady.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much Mr speaker I
stand on the point of personal
privilege state your point
gently Mr speaker just wanted to
reiterate the today Wednesday
February fifteenth is New Mexico
broadband day at the roundhouse
as someone who has been
interested in this issue for
quite a long time Mr speaker I
have seen the evolution of the
broadband issue over the last
couple years and I just wanted
to take some time to think some
very specific people who have
helped us get to where we are
today first I want to thank the
sponsors of house bill ten of
two years ago there are a lot I
know Representative head was one
Matthews Representative Chandler
Representative Figueroa many
others to give me if I did not
include you but because of these
women they call themselves the
broads bands which I thought was
pretty great we were able to
really get some work done on
this issue in addition to Senate
bill I believe it was ninety
three which was
Senator Michael Padilla and
between these two pieces of
legislation The New Mexico
broadband council was created
the office of broadband
advancement which is now house
with and do it we now have our
new broadband director Kelley
Slagle who has worked tirelessly
on this issue and I don't know
about anybody else but just the
improvements I've seen on
broadband in the last year so
have been nothing less than
stunning and I think that we're
finally going to get to where we
have needed to be on the issue
for quite some time because New
Mexico's children in New
Mexico's rural population is
counting on us to get this one
right so I am very excited to be
celebrating broadband day at the
roundhouse and thanks to
everybody for caring thanks Mr
speaker thank you the lady.
The gentleman from Chavis eighty
you know that are positive
Townsend.
The grant arrives on point of
personal privilege see your
point Sir thank you Sir
I think the body should take
heart of what representatives
they'll have was just speaking
to it's just another indication
of the disrespect that the US
government has in dealing with
state legislators and in
particular this fund for the
last the.
More than ten years
I have been involved in
negotiations with the US for
service on another issue but
it's constantly
a
A one sided conversation Mr
speaker I think the body should
Rise up and take it and send a
note of to the US for service
but because if you look at this
particular issue and he led the
day they have a biological
opinion that talks about the
undulates the hood down malls
are causing problems in the
repair and districts.
While that may be I point.
The cap all the cattle aren't
the only until late that is in
thank you there are LFC and deer
and hogs and everything else but
they have they have
specifically targeted one
species and they're doing it all
over New Mexico so Mister
speaker I think.
I think the body should take
note of the disrespect and Mr
speaker it would be wonderful if
that letter asking them to
address our concerns came from
do with your signature I'd be
happy to sign on to I'm sure
half the body where more than
half the body would to but this
is got a stop coming on one hand
we were spending a hundred
million dollars in northern New
Mexico back fill on the federal
government because a more
unhappy New Mexico down.
Of all.
And and now down south they're
just totally disrespecting an
industry and the will of the
people that's what we're here
for Mr speaker is to sometimes
hold the federal government
accountable I know you're up to
that and I would look for your
help to do that please Sir thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman the gentleman from
grant Katrine any those will
representative the process thank
you Mr speaker I also stand on a
point of personal privilege.
And want to reiterate what my
two colleagues just expressed
you know that's part of my
district that's that's part of
my district Mr speaker and last
year.
Hi I propose a memorial for this
particular situation and it drew
the attention of brought
everybody to the table and the
livestock board actually
came up with directives to
address this problem is and so
those directors have only been
enforced maybe about a month
month or so and and it's been
successful they are starting to
cattle and remove them from
there in a humane manner.
This is very inhumane for all of
us that care about animals
animal cruelty
to shoot from a helicopter
indiscriminately.
and and and sometimes injure
these animals and they're hiding
and they're they're trying to
find shelter they're scattering
all over there's a lot of ways
to to to kill an animal
my family comes for it was in
ranching you can literally.
Scatter the had heard and
literally exhausting to death.
And so that that they're
scattered all over and and
that's what's happening now it's
it's very disappointing seen
respite though Mr speaker that I
I have had this as cities with
the.
The four supervisor myself with
some of the cattle growers
addressing this problem and
everyone's trying to work on it
and they're they're they're
we're we sat at that table and
we were sure that we're going to
work for through this and as you
know Mister speaker I today
we're introducing ironically a
bill to address this this exact
situation is going to be it's
going to be HB for twenty three.
And as to address these issues I
don't wanna go on about all the
same things that they said
because I time is of the essence
but I'm going to add that this
the worst part about this is a
for services mandating for all
the allotments that are
surrounding the Hilo forest all
those ranchers all those
producers that are around the
forest to vacate their their
ranchers and their allotments so
that so that the Forest Service
can come and and and and and
kill these cattle worst in that
Mr speaker they are required to
vacate those allotments for one
year.
Total.
No compensation these people
that live in my district they
need this this is the way they
feed their families this is the
way they pay their bills the way
the service their debt and this
is
I can't even believe that that
were in the situation of
disrespect Mister speaker I also
ask you kindly Mister speaker
That you if you join us in in in
standing firm that the forest
service's disrespecting our
producers and our our laws are
statues and and this body in in
New Mexico thank you Mr speaker.
Gentleman Jim lady from earlier
I Chasey thank you Mr speaker I
wanted to take this opportunity
to endorse the request of the
lady from Chavis for this body
to send a letter again and
reminded the for service of our
previous letter and indicate are
strong opposition to this in who
inhumane and completely
unscientific method of dealing
with this
the issue thank you Mr speaker
provided the gentleman from
Katrin apologies Colfax curry
Harding Senegal and university
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
also rise to the point of
personal privilege state your
point.
Mr speaker you know wilderness
is not the only place in New
Mexico that have had feral
cattle of short while back we
had a lot of feral cattle on the
Canadian river up in
north eastern New Mexico there
was a gentleman there that the
Goshen eight in agreement
between the livestock board in
the US for service they let an
RFP found some good cowboys they
wrote down in their gather those
cattle brought amount sold at
the auction the price of the
cattle brought paid for all the
work to to remove those cattle
in with quickly smoothly
efficiently no harm was done hi
I think there are other options
and I fully stand behind this of
support for this letter from
this body requesting that we
just use a little bit more
common sense in the way we deal
with issues you thank you Mr
speaker thank you John and
Jennifer could about the weather
look there was a bill to Senator
percent of someone.
Mr speaker thank you also rise
on a point of personal privilege
to deport.
So Mister speaker there's
there's currently a bill come
working its way.
Here in the capital and that
bill states that you can't
harvest kill an animal and not
harvest the meat.
And the so I think it's a good
bill.
And and it shows some respect
for the animals and and our
wildlife and and what we do in
the state of New Mexico.
And I do want to reiterate the
words that have been said in
this.
Body here.
It is I believe that if we
gather.
Ourselves as a body and we all
sign on to this letter I believe
the national the forestry
service.
Ought to pay attention to us.
This is a chance for New Mexico
to come together on an issue
that needs.
To be tended to we've we've
tried through several methods a.
I know there's been people
contacted in Washington DC about
it and and it seems like we were
gonna get some kind of respect
out of all the stuff that's been
done but we haven't gotten there
so I would greatly appreciate if
this body would would send a
letter to the US forestry
service.
As a whole.
And announcing our concerns and
and trying to stop this nonsense
what's next the horses.
And then after that whatever
they decide will start we're
start shooting.
Roads and everything else and
and and and then that'll lead on
to the citizens of the state.
Then we would disrupt everything
in and disrupt our laws and and
how we take care of business
then the neighbors of starch in
the neighbor's cows.
We don't want to go down that
path we need to stop this we
need to stop it now and if we
gather as a body I believe we
can thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I believe we've agreed
as a body to get a letter going
that will circulate I would like
to take with with everyone's
indulgence one more comment and
we can come back to answers
later tonight so that we can do
a little bit of third reading
this morning legislative
committee in the.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise for
point of personal privilege to
pointedly Mr speaker I think
it's probably this to all of us
that the timing of this issue
being discussed today.
Is perhaps not a coincidence we
have four H. students with us
today is as good visitors and
foraged members are known for
their care and treat them good
treatment of animals and I hope
that we as the adults during the
Legislature consented example of
follow through with sending a
letter to the US for service
raising our objections thank you
Mr speaker thank you generated
generated from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey more.
Mr speaker I move a gun that
order business third reading of
legislation see no objection it
is so ordered.
The gentleman from someone we
can be ready and item number
fourteen.
Is generally from Cibola
McKinley right in item fourteen
Representative ago.
Julie you may an item number
fourteen.
Would you give me that the light
at the record reflect that
elections are for placing House
Bill one oh six on final passage
has been taking it is subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker and
members of the house house bill
one oh six is related to the
public pensions.
Our.
The increases the maximum amount
depends and that a member is
permitted to earn pursuant to
the public employees retirement
act Mr speaker and members of
the House remain working on the
engine built over and over and
over again Representative had a
bill that was almost like mine
but somehow or another we got
into wrestling matches and now a
not the super destroyer for more
recent novel on so my bill got
to go forward so with that Mr
speaker I will stand for
questions Senator the gentleman
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill one sixty now
passes the house we are final
passage of house bill one oh six
the vote is now open.
Lose.
The vote is now closed level of
fifty nine in the affirmative
six the negative house bill one
oh six as we passes house.
Gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa right in item number two
thank you Mr speaker can you get
me to the point that the record
reflect that election to serve
for placing House Bill one of
three a final passage doesn't
taken it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to provide the bill.
Mr speaker has to one of three
would provide the public with
better and more timely
information about campaign
finance by making our reporting
calendar more closely reflect
our political calendar Mr
speaker this bill passed the
house unanimously two years ago
and was on acted on by the
Senate and it's come back today
and with other stand for
questions there's debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Miss.
Mr speaker chairman I yield
speaker and gentleman.
This
time period between the end of
the reporting period and one of
the information has to be
reported thank you for.
Mr chairman no in some cases
actually extends that time some
cases the the the time of the
the period closes and you may
have three days or five days to
to father port in this bill some
of that remains the same and
some of those deadlines are
actually seven days so they're a
little bit longer Mr speaker
gentleman with the bill really
does is changes the date the
thing is that the reporting
periods and.
Thank you for that the speaker.
There is also provision in there
that reduces the reporting
requirements in terms of dollars
for in some circumstances is
that accurate.
Mr chairman that is accurate the
under the current rules there's
a supplemental report that's due
after the fourth general so
that's in the short time frame
between the fourth general in
the
in the actual election for you
have to file will depending on
what office you hold you have to
file supplemental report if you
get a large donation so it's
currently more than a thousand
dollars for members of the
legislature or people running
for legislature in more than
three to three thousand dollars
for statewide office and Mr
speaker chairman this bill takes
it just two thousand dollars a
thousand dollars or more for any
office.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentleman just one last
question there will never be a
circumstance for the reporting
period and the.
Deadline for the report is less
than seven days present.
Mr speaker and gentleman
the reporting period are not
changed by this bill so if they
currently have a shorter
deadline that would remain that
did not reporting periods for
the reporting periods that and
on either primary day or
election day the those are seven
days.
Thank you chairman that's all I
have is for the divisional from
Bernalillo Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
This bill and I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman the one
of things so we brought up in
committee is that after the
general election this requires
that you will fill out a report
within well it's due one week
after the the general election
is that correct Mr speaker
German yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
the reason why I can't support
it it's are you still receiving
checks on in through November
and December pass that and I
think for transparency when we
file at the end of the year of
the eight you know the public
could go ahead and see all those
checks that come in.
Likewise right after the
election it's kind of like
Running a horse race to come in
a little bit of time off to go
ahead and gather your thoughts
anyway thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentleman senior for
the debate the gentleman close.
Mr speaker
I've been thinking about some of
the debate we had in committee
on this bill on being tired
after election an acre to me it
was like doing the job like if
you can build something if you
fix something if you plant
something the job isn't over
when you drive the last nail or
screw the last crew or move the
last shoulder the job is over
when you clean up and put your
tools away.
And that's what this is this is
reporting to the public how we
financed our campaigns in and
then that's meaningful and
timely to the public Mr speaker
that I move that house bill one
of three to the past.
Final passage of house bill one
with three the vote is now open.
What's about to close.
One forty eight in the
affirmative twenty one the
negative house bill one with
three has duly passed this
house.
J. lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business Sen
objection it is so ordered
members we will come back this
evening for floor session we
will come back at five PM.
this evening to take up a little
bit of third reading the gentle
lady from Katrin set us a
equitable as a representative
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker
I'd like to announce that the
Republicans will be having a
caucus in room three eighteen
the media only following the
floor session members signal to.
A lady from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom thank
you Mr speaker I just like to
note on everyone's desk today
that you should have an
authentic southwest instant
picante salsa mix provided to us
from the main street the
coalition of main street
communities just wanted to make
sure that everyone saw this and
I'm sure it's very delicious
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jim lady enjoyed the other
announcements.
Reminder tomorrow the last date
for bill introduction tomorrow
is the last day for bill
introductions and get those
bills ready and drop on.
All right Julie from Bernalillo
Mr speaker I move house stand in
recess until five PM today to no
objection it is so ordered.
