at New Mexico school for the
arts.
In ninety.
What's.
Was extra Centura it's still
there's
does it.
The.
To.
Those.
Is really standing for the
pledge of allegiance.
I.
In the is the needs of the
generated from Santa Fe
Thank you Mr speaker.
Today I would just reside to the
I was raised S. C.
lord make me an instrument of
your peace where there is hatred
let me sow love where there is
injury pardon where there is
be consoled as to console to be
understood as to understand.
To be loved as to love for it is
it is in giving that we receive
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I got about order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business in
objection it is so ordered the
She goes to the Mexico school
for the arts and.
I can be more proud of my niece
she is a senior as you mentioned
at the school for the arts
The chair
they got the title of the state
championship this year and
because he was just a list in
the competition.
Arizona State University in the
fall and you'll be majoring in
social and behavioral health
sciences and she plans to seeing
in the treble choir there but I
healthy and welcoming my niece
cuts down on time.
Thank you Mr chair is agility
to Montoya president John Rankin
music chair Barbara hatch
theater chair the needs of
Harrison principal but it it
Thank you Mr speaker for
honoring our guests here from
New Mexico.
School for the arts today is the
and arts programs that we have
here and MSA they bring students
from across the state and give
them an opportunity to excel and
look into and MSA to get get
their students there thank you
Mr speaker I appreciate the time
thank you gentle lady of the
someone on the rostrum today
just a truly outstanding
individual from all of the
community of loving and so I'd
ask Mister Tyler finch please to
stand.
members Tyler is an exceptional
teacher and his work at loving
elementary school has truly been
the members will listen to the
words of this recognition
servitude certificate they will
understand why I'm so proud of
Mr Tyler finch so Mister speaker
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes Tyler finch Milken
education award honoree.
Whereas in the school wide
thousand dollars Milken educator
award presented by the Milken
family foundation and for us
Tyler was recognized for his
outstanding innovation and
foundation noted that Tyler's
expertise and creative use of
technology did reaches students
effectively examine data to
develop instructional practices
earned a bachelor's degree in
science in two thousand thirteen
and a master's degree in
curriculum and instruction in
two thousand eighteen from
eastern New Mexico university
living high school grateful that
he did and we're as Tyler chairs
that district science department
in loving and he has a unique
ability to reach and motivate
science technology engineering
and mathematics subjects
advanced placement chemistry
students host science nights for
loving's elementary school
students and we're as more than
science it is one hundred
percent.
And we're as Tyler consistently
examines student data to inform
his exceptional practices and
helps colleagues become data
school leadership team has led
district wide professional
development on student
engagement and data analysis and
recruits and mentors new
instruction learn Spanish so has
monolingual students could
participate in online
discussions and help colleagues
maximize their virtual
that spans both filled in
classroom and whereas football
players memorize his falcons
strong created at the start of
the season Representative my
the entire school now therefore
be it resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the recognition be
extended to Tyler finch loving
high school science teacher for
Mr speaker and members I I
suppose we're all kind of
wondering what Tyler did with
that twenty five thousand
dollars to one but we won't ask.
But Mr speaker of Tyler finch is
recognition is just a not only a
blessing but also a credit to
the school district and as good
as was mentioned Mr speaker
Tyler teaches at the high school
level but his influence has
Mr speaker we do have a
delegation of students and
advisors from loving elementary
school this is the student
council group they're seated up
we have seen Chavis Daniel
called the infant and is very
good one as we send a lot of
the wave down.
Very good.
Thank agility thank you Mr
speaker deleted from the you are
present a Ferrari thank you Mr
school and this is the Milken
educator awards or the Oscars of
teaching and the awards inspire
and uplift with the unique
Thank you and congratulations
you exemplify what it means to
be a teacher.
material and become lifelong
learners and The New Mexico this
was said by the New Mexico's
every child in his in your class
and it's evident in your high
performance of your students
which my grandson Zach Porter
lot of ways to get things that
you've done to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes Christopher Nunez
parents teach in the Los crucis
public school district and
whereas the family legacy of
education was honored on October
twenty first two thousand twenty
by the Milken family foundation
and we're as teaching is often a
family affair as children grow
up in homes that elevate the
profession honor the hard work
Christopher we're as Christopher
earned a bachelor's degree in
elementary education in two
thousand nine from New Mexico
State University.
And whereas in Christopher's
and pools in their backyards
during lessons on area and
printer and for as when cinema
elementary school adopted
technology initiatives
Christopher led the school's
instruction for all students
especially English language
learners and adult analyzes data
to identify areas where more
instruction is needed and
concepts and whereas in the
after school program Christopher
eight students conduct
interviews and write human
interest stories for the
school's broadcast channel and
students excel moving from
seventy percent to one hundred
percent proficiency on the I.
ready math assessment and ending
the year with a ninety two
into six houses to strengthen
connections among students in
different grades and for as
Christopher eight professional
development and technology and
enhancing mathematics according
his lessons and working with
coaches to refine his teaching
practice and.
justice practices working with
students to talk about and
provide resolutions for
conflicts now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
Milken educator award honoree
signed and sealed at the capitol
in City of Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker in chamber
Thank you Mr thank you for your
service.
I'm also honored to have the
opportunity to introduce one of
our best educators at in the
United States Gabrielle consul
mine Anthony Dennis Salazar
welcome in please remain
standing we have a wonderful
certificate on its way at for
search America for teachers that
demonstrated innovation and
excellence in their
instructional practices and
student outcomes and this call
very difficult time.
She kept her students engage to
help her colleges through heard
students through that tough
transition and kept the love of
home so that even over soon for
students knew they were in a
classroom environment.
She constantly goes above and
beyond for her students and
even help to launch a literary
fair and Gonzalez elementary
school or community school.
and I would also add that third
This call why has said that her
goal is to always make sure
students get the education they
deserve regardless of any
obstacles they face and that's
give to our children and I want
to ask all of you to join me in
recognizing the incredible
nonstop work of one of America's
Thank you Mr Y. a N. to your
father for joining us today and
for all of your service to our
community here in Santa Fe.
who is a business major and a
sophomore at UNM he's passionate
about election law and campaign
Mr speaker can we please welcome
him welcome to the house thank
you lady.
Thanks for the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
and his name is on the twenty of
us and he is a student at the
university of New Mexico and his
major action double majors in
psychology and philosophy with a
mental health accessibility and
political psychology she is
currently a member of the UNM
college Democrats and the former
New Mexico Mr speaker of if
you're in the members would help
me welcome I'm doing this.
that discussion Mr speaker and.
Indeed.
Thank you Jennifer Bailey is
gonna bring Kathy generators for
every member of the house next
week.
want to give the rebuttable
presumption update.
August sixth of last year of
Ramon obelus was murdered in
determined that although in
Anderson presented a danger to
the community that danger could
be mitigated through conditions
of release and that was a zero
services found that ankle
monitor that the at the edge of
a highway it it being cut off
last Friday he was arrested
again.
begs the question how many times
are we going with that one of
our citizens kill another
service and thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
freshman at Albuquerque high
school living and Representative
Garcia's district and what's
remarkable it's because of her
that we heard house memorial
letter to stand up for important
causes like this she competes at
the varsity level in cross
country track and swim she
serves in the student center as
understanding student
experiences that I have is time
to do all of this she loves to
ski and camp in New Mexico with
her parents Senator older
memorial fifty six and she wants
it to be a state where all
students can have the
opportunities to fulfill their
greatest potential Mr speaker if
if you could join me in
Before I go to June from Chavis
I do want to introduce a couple
of other guests here in the guy
on the rostrum we have folks
from the Public Education
Department high with Otis as
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker I could not
make this announcement on
Saturday because it was supposed
to be somewhat of a surprise but
And they had a great celebration
and Rossell on Saturday evening
for him recognizing his service
for those of you that do not
know the New Mexico mounted
patrol was established in
official.
Organization assisting police
throughout the state in in many
of them and so the madam patrol
the state with respect to police
actions and the organization
serves a great purpose they fill
what we ought all think of all
the men and women who serve in
the New Mexico mountain the
troll at this time and and I
appreciate the are recognizing
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Syriana.
give me a man he is a biology
major and history minor in.
And he may change political
science we'll see how the next
couple days how he feels he as a
a former he went on high school
I didn't have anybody to go to
my high school and he is one of
my constituents so welcome Jacob
thank you.
The house.
something very important about
the rules on Wednesday I started
so very very tired have a stuffy
nose at that I'm not sure from
getting sick or not but I
figured I'll be able to
positive can partake so I missed
three full days because I wasn't
sure actually felt okay but a
very stuffed up nose and didn't
want to go on the floor just in
think it would be more fair or
we do need to put COVID don't
get to participate period or
people that also I don't feel
well also have the same option
of those that are COVID positive
today it is my honor to present
a U. and M. Lobo who studying in
the college of arts and sciences
as my shadow today he is
majoring in political science
that you to make sure that we
were in agreement on a B. L. so
ladies and gentlemen Mr speaker
house and gas McKinley County
boys and girls basketball teams
wanted me to share with you some
Girls and the boys are the two
had to Crown Point and Gallup
teams thank you congratulations.
basketball season and we may
just have found an answer.
No pressure but we would we will
expect some updates between now
just want to congratulate again
all of the teachers when I first
graduated from college I taught
high school history in English
more I could say that thank you
so much for that if the work I
do and I've been to one of the
Millikin awards ceremonies and
there are surprise right you
It was just spectacular I mean
it was so amazing so it really
is lady from Bernalillo said
it's like it's like there are no
lady from turned out just like
political science department and
she is very passionate about
education she's Brandt of work
she's ever Ventura California
issues pretty law and plays
guitar and loves politics it is
with the college Democrats and
Other announcements the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative McInnis.
Mr speaker I rise today for
personal point privilege
centerpoint.
for generations he use the
rifle.
That rifle may soon be legal.
If we don't stop some of the
stop to think about some of the
bills that we're looking at.
Most directly to the west on it
and see the poor most US for me
yes thank you Mr speaker.
Good as well.
order of business committee
reports to objection it is so
ordered.
Committee too is been referred
house bill two seventy seven has
had it under consideration
reports a with recommendation
that it do not pass for that
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee subs
two seventy seven but a
favorable committee report on
house government elections and
ending Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy seven all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
had it under consideration point
in the recommendation that I do
pass as amended and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Sierra
signify by saying aye.
All the supposed may.
The board opted.
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption but we
are on adoption of the report
without a recommendation on
house bill four eighty six of
is been referred house bill five
twelve has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill five twelve to pass
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House before
twelve all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
recommendation that it to pass
and then search for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption we are
an adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate bill
serenity in a list of everything
that was in line.
Was me we just have a positive
productive.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee was
referred Senate bill seventy
optional Federal Committee put
on Senate bill seventy three of
those in favor say of us and I.
Those may be as seven point four
up to.
this referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're in
adoption of ever committed for
the Senate Judiciary Committee
substance percent of the one
referred Senate bill one fifty
three has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and then referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
Mr speaker Education Committee
was been referred house memorial
fifty six has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair.
Was me just have a committee
board up to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred Senate bill
three as amended has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendations to pass an
answer for to the provisions of
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Is a yes I would report opted.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill one thirty one as
adoption we're in an option
available to me put a Senate
bill one thirty one as amended
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Close in a test of the committee
reported up to.
and the chair.
Mr speaker move adoption were
adoption of a federal committee
report on house bill three fifty
three of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
with recommendation but it to
pass respectfully submitted
during the chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
production of federal committed
for the house solution I all
had it under consideration point
it was recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted directly
at the chair Mr speaker move
adoption where an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house or solutions six house
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business in
addition is so ordered a lady
of our distinguished guests from
the city which is our nation's
oldest capital a history that
spans centuries and and bodies
in champions our New Mexico
as legislators and for our staff
and for the members of the
public who traveled here from
across our state every year.
and so today I'd like to
for your work day in and day out
to make Santa Fe support of home
for our neighbors so please join
me in expressing gratitude to
our Santa Fe delegation and also
host for the legislature every
year so please join me in
welcoming our mayor Alan Webber.
Councillor Jamie Kasich.
let that my SS.
Thank you all for everything you
do to make our cities such a
special place we're we're happy
hospitality this session and
every session they were up here
every year thank you so much
welcome to house.
is so ordered.
Click to read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
clarifying and changing certain
requirements relating to
contributions and donations
amending certain reporting
requirements prohibiting using
campaign funds to repay loans
Committee substitute for Senate
bill forty two.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
two have amended twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house government
elections Indian Affairs
Duhigg hotmedia Representative
Chasey.
And act relating to elections
amending the election code
specifying when the inspection
signatures creating an elections
a security program requiring the
use of forms approved by the
secretary of state requiring
service of process on the
secretary of state for election
challengers and watchers
requiring voter contravening its
sensors providing for a program
to reconcile voter registration
locations prior to voting
providing zing procedures and
requirements for mailed ballots
absentee ballots and military
law revising requirements for
nominations and candidates
amending voting system
requirements addressing ballot
preparation addressing
maintenance of ballot boxes and
provisions related to the
certification of voting
machines.
Addressing provisional ballots
addressing the counting and
disposition of paper ballots
for referendum petitions
recompiling a section
authorizing legislative caucus
committees into the campaign
reporting act.
Revising election related crimes
for purposes of maintaining
voter registration records
amending the confidential
substitute address act making
technical and conforming changes
amending repealing and acting
do head Hotmail and
Representative Chasey.
As a committee three point four.
No.
introduced by senator how to
meal and representative Cadena.
And act relating to criminal
sentencing excluding personal
bill one eighty seven have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one eighty eight
introduced by senator cels and
Senate bill one eighty eight and
then returns by title is ordered
printed is ordered not printed
excuse me is are not printed and
referred to the house rural
ninety two and act making
general appropriations and
authorizing expenditures
providing an exception to
legislative confidentiality
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill two forty five
introduced by senators to
phonics and Ingle an act
licensure requirements Senate
bill two forty five introduced
by senators to phonics and
Ingle.
Senate bill two forty five have
been read twice by title is
Senate bill two fifty introduced
by Senator Burt and act relating
to firefighters survivors
supplemental benefits increasing
the amount of death benefits to
House bill two fifty sees me
Senate bill two fifty have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee that
is the house appropriations and
finance committee.
be referred house bill one
thirty nine it is on the third
reading calendar back to the
house Judiciary Committee I see
no objection it is so ordered.
house Judiciary Committee seeing
no objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey Gail.
Members we also have Agenor the
bill that I need to refer.
this is House Bill five fifty.
referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Things are objection.
I see none house bill five
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go that are
a business announcements and
miscellaneous business seeing no
thirty in room three zero seven
look for to seeing people there
thank you Mr speaker members
take note gentlelady from Los
Alamos thank you Mr speaker your
house Judiciary Committee then
thirty in room three seventeen
members signaled gentle lady
from going on a thank you Mr
speaker your house consumer and
public affairs committee will
meet tomorrow at one thirty room
This will conclude this
morning's floor session enjoy
committees enjoyed lunch we will
see you at five o'clock
gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
thousand and twenty three at
five PM thank you deleted the
house or Senate races until five
PM today.
