Senator Paypen.
Here.
Representative little here.
Representative right here.
Representative Zamora your.
By chair federal.
Madam chair Johnson here.
Representative Jeez.
We.
Levinson.
Okay we have a quorum.
And I have a little bit of at
ten being we are here to feel.
It's already on the agenda right
here house for seventy one
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee house bill four
seventy one creates that
outsiders disease and.
Advisory Council to be
administered administratively
attached to the aging from long
term services.
it directs the secretary of the
department of voting members to
terms that it's built up some of
those
key points and it's important
because actually many people
don't realize that there's over
forty three thousand C. five
years or older were diagnosed
with Alzheimer's and I think
it's really important that it's
both taking an outsider's and
dementia I am at when my
husband's grandmother's bed rat
poisoning to her husband of
sixty years because of the
outsiders that's an extreme
example and madam in my mother
who when I disappeared I found
chocolate malt interpreters
this and and there's a certain
age they know how to come across
good but when you're with them
you start discover there's
memory issues I said mom.
Market in your ears I was
driving through the Carl's
junior drive through and I went
the wrong way and she when she
came out the wrong direction.
Knocked down the wall of the car
still driving because when we
were living with her we were not
aware so this is a problem for
many thousands and thousands of
New Mexicans some of us in this
room mate confronted I address
for Mrs I have Tommy Hernandez
is a public policy director of
the Alzheimer's Mexico and I've
you for taking is the director
of the office of Alzheimer's and
dementia care implementation of
long term service department and
they'll share a few words before
you go to questions thank you
Representative the members of
the committee as mention names
Tommy Fernandez I proudly serve
the role of public all right
also.
Your New Mexico and the
Alzheimer's association staff
this disease on two fronts the
national award refers to brought
picture compressional
appropriations to ultimately end
the disease the support for the
committee members understand
where we ultimately want to be
without Alzheimer's disease but
we know that that is still a
very long time from now so what
we're doing is working with our
legislative bodies across the
country including here in New
Mexico where New Mexico ranks
among the top states nationally
that is going to have a
significant spike in Alzheimer's
disease and all other forms of
dementia in the years to come
Representative mention currently
see about forty three thousand
New Mexicans with Alzheimer's
disease we have nearly a hundred
thousand care givers who are
underpaid to those people are
living with this devastating
disease so that's why this piece
of legislation is a top
priority.
For the also so.
Simply put little things to do
it is really Grant County
buildings but it also needs to
bring something we've built a
very important tool to members
of the state legislature and
that is hearing from us what
strategies we are implementing
in the form of the state plans
and allowing us to offer
recommendations allow
legislative body to respond
adequately and appropriately
with the policies investments as
we continue to tackle this
disease so simply put this bill
is a top priority for us it's a
lot of the great work that is
already being done kind of it
just would have hoc basis with
the last many years to the great
work of Ortega's office but said
what we wanted would codify this
that we we insure accountability
maintained over the years thank
you for all of the state we have
a cure for this disease
Representative Kate what's
authors and professions and
care okay good morning of them
services
I get ready care technical
director for the office of all
services and madam chair with
consent agent on services as
Representative Garrett stated
that this forty two thousand
Mexicans sixty five will also
use that number is expected to
fifty three thousand or twenty
three for three percent by
twenty twenty five of cognitive
decline in New Mexico
information from of the
religious service risk
surveillance survey shows in New
Mexico that twelve point eight
percent or one the vigils age
forty five and over reportedly
experience confusion memory loss
that was happening more often or
getting worse this is also known
as landers check the positive
because
Approximately half of these
individuals fifty four four
percent have not from general
profession about this and for
those
problems with the process of
creating functional difficulties
for them that is a positive
updated the activities at work
interferes of work social
activities so if passed the
council will advise LCS later by
various trends for legislative
support states population Vigil
of Alzheimer's disease and
dementia the council also help
support the state's role in
providing this facility long
term care for family caregivers
support assistance to the early
stages as onset Alzheimer's
disease and other dementias also
for seventy one requires health.
After the initial meeting with
passport to sell retail city is
needed by Rick Council the
existing state we'll be working
on the system state class which
is not affected twenty twenty
two.
I at the beginning of the twenty
twenty six should have the
first.
Report about by this Advisory.
house bill thirty four seventy
one also the first and only
point of discuss with patients
requests into the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee the legislative
finance office of successive
meditations and prayer areas
child.
And
the religious devotion there's
no fiscal impact and questions
thank you go to the audience.
In support of the bill please
raise your hand.
Of please stand and make your
statement within one minute.
I live in Santa Fe New Mexico
many years I care for my mom.
In today's in the memory care.
She has a prevention and also
information fertility speed.
And I can say.
This is a horrific disease thank
you to support this we need
support this is the most
vulnerable members of our
community and they need your
support so please wear.
Morning madam chair members of
the eighty ninety was to road
previous on the ball.
All of the pieces with.
Chapter of the Alzheimer's
association I am one of the
my mom had.
Years.
She was extremely violent it is.
He is.
Considering our population is
only going to increase at.
It is painful these all of
us get harder than that is why
support.
This but
Hey Liz.
You because
just.
He's early reforming this and
you know see to my mom and right
My grandmother all she she has
Alzheimer's and and madam and
she had to spend hours and he's
here for those much younger than
I really think.
Industry news I think it's very
important.
Yes.
What is.
Thank you for your comments in
support of the bill.
Please.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
former governor Rick be here for
the public to suki.
As my previous position all of
the suki I was to health and
wellness division directors.
And many of our seniors have
gone to treatment madam.
And.
In our communities.
You know we don't have that
infrastructure for many of our
family members are taking care
of that.
And my own personal experience
with violate long she has
dementia.
And again my older sister was to
kill compare our of her.
And as a family we United
together to learn about the
elements.
And as governor of my own
community which I was
responsible for the program re
recognized closed parliament and
it's a real to some situation
for fans.
We have one elder that is now
living in the.
Because of the family not having
the right understand that the
onus I think that's what
properties in our tribal
communities as well we don't
want this place our elders the
like to be home to be careful so
in that regards committee
members wishing support the
bills and move on to make this
happen I agree committee to work
with the aging and long term.
entity to address these issues
thank you for your support thank
you ani.
Do you have any comments on the
webcast will.
Have any closing comments on
what tax back to the audience do
we have any opposition.
The nine committee members
Representative Zamora thank you
madam chair members of the
committee
Representative your expert
witness can go into a little bit
as to how.
Build hello what you're
currently doing hi I was going
to say.
Absolutely madam chair ranking
member of this bill I think I
mentioned earlier my more the
remarks accountability is really
at a stable at the forefront of
this bill as I mentioned the
aging alter Services Department
and working collaboration with
the Alzheimer's association A.
R. P. and many other
stakeholders have been doing
this for approximately a decade
we've been updating a state plan
when we look at the most
critical issues most read that
right is there is a need and
developing a plan to address
those areas.
So that's great work is been
done in the last ten years
however the legislative body has
not necessarily consistent we
heard about the strategies that
are being implemented nor have
they heard about the progress
that is being made or some areas
of the face of that so a lot of
this work done provided this and
we've been uninformed about
progress and that's why I like
to describe this bill just
really bringing accountability
to Alzheimer's association and
all the other stakeholders fall
so this legislative body is
aware fully aware of what is
being done what the barriers are
and one of us being wired from
the legislative body.
These so simply put
accountability is really what we
want to point place ourselves
and that's the purpose of the
bill.
And madam chair.
is is the legislature property.
Not have to use federal funds
are.
What.
Madam chair if member that's
that's an excellent question as
as we have heard the disease
continues to rise so we filled
were always behind.
what we want to do is make sure
that we are adequately funding
all of the necessary programs
that are keeping pace with all
the great needs so that your
question.
This administration past
administrations including the
legislative body always is very
favorable and and try to tax
policy development but we are
using data under better
understand what also is needed
and so I think in the years to
come as part of this bill we
will be presenting to committees
legislative finance as well as
health and Human Services
Committee on what exactly is the
our resources so I would go as
far as to say that there has
been a lack of funding but
rather we need to learn more
about what funding levels are
needed to put that request
provided.
Thank you madam chair and
presenter quite fiery what
numbers are you looking at what
sciences it's telling you that
we're going to have is a ten
percent increase that we're
talking about the the.
One three of twenty three point
three percent in twenty slide
twenty four of.
Members are science are you
looking at to cope with a lot of
this information because for
this for the special all the
also association of professional
level and behavioral risk factor
surveillance surveillance Sicko.
If I add of and madam chair
representative New Mexico is it
is facing a very harsh reality
in these estimates and the
reason being is that what we
know that our aging population
continues to grow compares and
other states but one thing we
are beginning to to know from
data collection is that ones
just take a composition also
please factors a Hispanic and
native Americans are one and a
half times more likely than
other ethnic groups to develop
the disease and we know here to
Mexico that is very.
Part of our state's full
population so it's kind of a
compounding effect here in New
Mexico we have a growing aging
population and we also have a
very large population of
American Indians and we also
have a very large population
legislation so when you add all
those as well as other pre
existing conditions diabetes
high blood pressure which we
also nor prevalent it makes for
a very
Very on pre fixture of the force
that's why would reduce the bill
for today thank you thank you
for those answers thank you.
Those are all my questions.
Right thank you Representative
little and Representative right
sure.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to do pass people second
thank you okay so we have a
motion and a second did you want
to make a comment yeah madam
chair and of the with aging are
you do this with thousand I'm
kind of wondering why we need
this.
As Mr what this is saying you
know if it is accountability the
centers for disease control
recommend that we have a
committee and state funding
every four years our existing
plants which myself and
approximately six other
individuals developed.
It wasn't just updating the
state.
The three row the state plan
this year with the last of the
six objectives the thirteen and
looking at the expense of the
Mrs Mexico so
it would be very difficult.
Together it has office and we
also indicated that we're
looking at data and better use.
The ones that are invested and
is.
Do a lot of work that we have
going on right now the the the
numbers projected.
Three thousand five point five
and with these numbers first
came out into that or
twenty twenty twenty twenty I
was just a long way away it's
not that far away.
I am one of the thing I think
might be helpful for COVID
resent madam chair.
In my role of five years serving
as role the Alzheimer's
association what I've learned in
the five years that strategies
are only as good as the county
buildings that are attached to
a.
So we've had some really great
strategies presented over the
course of my five years and even
five years prior to that however
without attached accountability
status is leisure and and and
taking hardball questions from
which is being done what can we
do to help some of the work that
is you know needs to be done to
better help all our constituents
statewide
without those that was
capabilities strategies
sometimes fall fall short.
Thank you Mr I would
have also additional requires
the council to in a report and
work with the health and Human
Services Committee during the
interim also there can be a
section between a lot of
policies.
Not just physical it's policy.
And what what are counties think
what our health agencies
former sister again governor
pointed out connecting all the
communities were impacted by a
more formal way.
Madam chair in the house how
large is see your agency your
division how many people the
employees just myself all.
Our
vision of that is been presented
and so I have an answer our
budget is a yes.
In aging but so far to schedule.
And madam chair this will bit
off of it but what I understand
is you're making some real
advancement on some medication
can kind of tell us about that
or even with you I guess most
certainly madam chair
representative thank you for
that question.
At the federal level contest
Congress for example we we are
now receiving we are asking
Congress to cooperate rather
over three billion dollars
annually congressional that goes
to the national institutes of
health to continue to study the
disease that's how we were that
Hispanics are more likely to
develop the disease that native
Americans are more likely to all
these women are also more likely
just generally speaking are more
likely than the minutes of any
ethnic group difficulties so
with regard to the treatments
that is our first and foremost
ask at the congressional level
and there are many drugs that
are coming down that are
receiving FDA approval however
these drugs that are that are
effective treatments there's a
very small segment of the
dementia diagnosis population
are eligible for early detection
is absolutely key because the
drugs are available today are
only available for those who
have what we call the early
stages of the disease which are
often very so subtle signs
that's what part of this council
of the established is that we
would promote early detection
early diagnosis rather than
us so far gone just as the more
photo story Representative
direction so we certainly feel a
lot of promise on the horizon.
Madam chair representative the
house passed the biomarker bill
because I working testing is
part of early detection.
And madam chair Representative
what is she what you NM hospital
do they have a center this
for going through with the chair
representative Freeman we are
currently working on the
existing state plan to one about
every disorder clinics hi
programs you work with us and on
every.
A public school programs were
University School of to where
people can get forget factor
that helps is to go back into
the communities with a series of
educators and.
That will help lead piece of the
sources of for services that.
So we do have those
K. to start with that and we
will be C. R. he was just trying
to
To review press through the
times.
For services both were funded
they will find point trance here
is one.
The lesson was that grant and
the other grant was for the
Services programs correct both
of those local but again I in
addition we have work to do that
to implement some pilot programs
we did regular population and
also see how you can reach out
to transfer students but again
those are start ups in.
Soundstage I.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative okay
Representative Zamora is.
Our system of representative
madam chair why is our model
fiscal impact where we made the
feet per diem for their meetings
and stuff.
They are very there is a of
a fire faster service.
It was not expected to me just.
Almost far as they are able to.
So currently insured by the
department.
Twelve served within the.
Okay so asking questions thank
you thank you madam chair.
Chair thank you Representative
and experts and I think this is
important I definitely support
legislation my one concern madam
chair is I believe you said
you're the only individual
working in this division
currently Madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
know that meetings and stuff you
have to have a lot of
logistical.
Things.
Why why are we putting more into
this to have like at least an
executive assistant or something
to start setting up these
meetings madam chair.
Of Madam chair representative
currently cares doing in the
administrators sort but she said
they requested additional
Staffing for their department
that's probably second morning
is finance yes Representative
was at the fifty.
House it's for the budget.
difficult surface happens that
hasn't.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and I sure
hope you get funding.
Ahlers thank you madam chair.
Okay we have a motion for it to
pass in the second do we have
any opposition seeing them
please show although
their and have these have.
Thank you thank you.
So we're going to you
do that.
Moving around.
That deal with the.
Senator Wirth next.
The committee
Senate bill fifty eight the bill
that's been around for a while I
in fact both chambers passed in
twenty nineteen and it was
pocket vetoed by the governor.
But I think we got it right this
time we actually have the
Interstate Stream Commission in
support we work with them what
the bill does it changes the
membership of the Interstate
Stream Commission
Why is this important the
important because we change the
mission of the Interstate Stream
Commission in two thousand three
to include more than just
management of our compacts
they're currently providing
Water policy guidelines in the
water planning for the future of
our state
and so what the bill does is it
keeps the commission at nine
members still chaired by the
state engineer
all eight members continue to be
appointed by the governor.
What with the advice and consent
that.
and it's got a couple of key
provisions that we we we
currently we just give you a
sense of the current statutes
current statutes which have been
in a folks.
Many many years basically as
eight members date engineers
there eight members all from
major irrigation districts or
sections and the only diversity
is that no two members of the
appointed in the same year Asian
district for section and then
required one member the from the
New Mexico Indian tribe or
pueblo.
So we're sure we're continuing
to have eight members appointed
by the governor of here's here's
the key changes we've added one
I.
A request of the Interstate
Stream Commission so we now have
two members from our tribal
communities one who represents a
nation for tried and another who
is from New Mexico in.
The reason that's important is
that we have cuff Water
settlements invited Water Rights
settlements with our web Los and
also our our Navajo Nation off
work representatives under the
bill will continue to be
appointed for variation of
concerts streets so instead of
all eight will still have for.
Now the other for will be as
follows one from the New Mexico
acequia community ditch of one
representative of the New Mexico
drinking water utility that
provides at least five hundred
acre feet of water annually for
domestic use one member of the
water resources research
institute or civil or
environmental engineering
faculty of New Mexico State
University or the university of
New Mexico and one hydrologist
with experience in New Mexico
groundwater resources who is a
faculty member of the New Mexico
City of mining and technology
for a professional here engineer
with the New Mexico consulting
engineering practice in water
resources or water utility
engineer
Basically the bill now requires
all members of the commission
have no less than ten years of
experience
it contains a provision of no
more than two members be
appointed from the same
irrigation Conservancy does that
similar to what was in the
original bill no more than three
membership be appointed from the
same congressional district and
finally members shall be
appointed from the reside at
least three different state
engineer Water Rights districts
these provisions about the
diversity of appointments and
the required ballots are things
that have been developed
literally sesuai for security
bill in twenty fifteen so it's
been eight years and try to stay
really true to the will of the
legislature as we move along
this is different from how I
started but these are the
compromise is built into the
bill another provision it's very
important on page three line
twenty one is that the appointed
member shall serve for staggered
terms for years and it has
language so that we get a
balanced for.
Provided of the initial members
to members will serve a one year
two for two years and and to
members for three years and two
members for four years the
reason being to get those
stature physicians I think we've
seen our state our Interstate
Stream Commission unfortunately.
At different times get very
political
and so what we're trying to do
is really FY that right balance
from each so much of Madam chair
of the final thing I would point
out at the request of the
current Interstate Stream
Commission is a temporary
provision on page four that
basically says those members of
the current commission serving
as of July first twenty twenty
three shall continue in their
positions and tell their terms
expire so in effect it's a
transition so it's not just a
hard on to stop here and again I
think this is a bill that's
taken a lot of work
did receive a unanimous do
hassle although representative
of moral wasn't in the water
committee but that was a big
step forward and I just think
we've again it's it's it's
something that is important as
we deal with the separation of
powers and trying to make sure
these boards and commissions
work I think we find the right
balance here so the governor
still has ointments but there's
some diversity here.
I'm sure that's what the bill to
us thank you let's go to the
audience of those in support of
the bill please raise your
hands.
Those in opposition.
Being an let's go to the
webcast.
We have any.
Comments in support or
opposition to the bill committee
members Representative Zamora
and a lot.
Madam chair members of the
committee I don't think I'll
offer of a down.
But that.
Senator some of these people
that are pointed when they serve
their time can they be
reelected.
Committee reappointed yes.
It's a good question I don't
think there's anything.
Madam chair and senator I don't
see anything that says they
can't.
Instances if you.
Question I've not been asked
before I begin I don't think
there's anything that says they
can't be.
Madam chair and senator that's
all the questions I.
Thank
chair representative so.
You know I I supported
Representative McQueen is bill
regarding the game commission
which is somewhat similar to
however Mr Madam chair
representative senator rather.
I I do have concerns about the
governor having all the power
still to appoint to this
commission Madam chair Senator
have previous bills in the past
given some eight council and
some to the governor like
can enter so Representative
again the bill has been
Representative different forms
and.
Regarding that specific question
I can't off the top of my head
remember back to twenty fifteen
whether we started trying to
balance it out I think we may
have I certainly believe that
balance is important but I also
have been around long enough to
know that it's incredibly
challenging to get these these
bills across and you're dealing
with again legislative power
versus executive power in this
particular case I think what
we're trying to do is I can
continue to allow the governor
to make the appointments but
provided up diversity space the
terms out have and of
Again all a not coming same kind
of.
The area being conservation
districts that will in effect.
Kind of build the swing that can
happen it'll mitigated there's
no question that that a
governor's certainly has the
right to make appointments and
if you have got different
parties as we've seen as I've
seen since I've served a
different members get appointed
water is one of those things
though that really shouldn't be
in the full swing of the
pendulum it needs to it needs to
be an undefined area at this
this Interstate Stream
Commission is so important given
our drought fires climate change
all those things were facing
that I think we come up with
something that I'm hopeful I can
get signed as I mentioned it was
the top four years ago so so
it's there's no guarantee but
again the Interstate Stream
Commission Mr our Rolf Schmidt
Petersen has been in the was in
the house ag committee this
stage is here in support I see
thank you madam chair and
senator so I know with the other
clean bill that we're talking
about.
The problem was getting a quorum
chair Senator is there currently
a quorum on this commission as
it stands today.
madam chair and and
Representative yes my
understanding is this commission
is working well today and that's
just that's why one of the key
things that that was requested I
believe this actually was
requested a couple years ago is
this temporary provisions so
that you don't have a hard swing
to the new approach but it's
working well now Representative
I'll tell you so I it.
A number of years ago it broke
down and you have the Interstate
Stream Commission and the state
engineer on different pages and
going different directions and
it was in learning of the same
issues that came commission.
Early as faced got it thank you
madam chair and senator my one
concern with that is it requires
Senate approval so madam chair
Senator plus they lose a quorum.
In June and July and madam chair
since we have to wait for the
next session to to get new
members confirmed that would be
my one concern so let me just
address that because I think
it's similar to the current for
example boards of regents other
positions the governor makes the
appointment they begin service
and then they come back and in
the next session are up for
confirmation so for example
today we're confirming someone
to the state investment council.
summer whose lawyer.
A lawyer appointed he's been
serving his confirmations today
said his confirmations will
confirm that so that we won't
have those kinds of gaps okay
thank you madam chair Senator
that's all I have I appreciate
thank you to Representative Rehm
is.
Thank you madam chair and
senator will be taking over to
page three one seven eight so
with our current map very with
the all three of those numbers.
Out of the office for two years
what I'm thinking maybe you
think about we've got a really
the Rio Grande border and then
we have to take those maybe we
should say a minimum of one of
those show the of a pay goes
water flow over some I just a
more of a suggestion as this
moves on to make sure we get of
spread out across the state.
So it's a good question I will
say this before the changes to
the map you could have the same
you have asked Rio Rancho
Albuquerque New Mexico eight yes
three different all three
districts
the key it's it's the other
requirements up above note no
more than two members of the
point in the same your
additional services district and
then you also have at least
three different Water Rights
districts or seven in the state
the Interstate Stream Commission
director the prior committee
testified that clearly because
of the compact issues and the
different basins that diversity
is something that's it's
critical and so they've got it
now and I think it will continue
but you're right coming under
stunner
If you talk to someone could try
and and do something but I I
again I think the key this this
commissions that you've got the
state you got brought tribal
representation and what I'm what
I'm excited about this bill is
that finally will also have
something to say give voice or
or a ditch voice.
The civil water voice and then
we'll have a groundwater and
water resources research
institute voice that forces that
New Mexico state Senator Paypen
was instrumental in getting
positions there funding so again
I just think you're gonna bring
in key forces and just one
filing chair I I wasn't sure I
was going to bring this bill
back but as a water policy
leaders of.
Yvette this fall at New Mexico
tech I sat next to one of the
Interstate Stream Commission as
anything I should bring this
back he said absolutely it just
will help us
Madam chair and senator the only
of the COVID is the have the
staggered terms of
three if we go over to the stage
for down the line seven so those
guys gonna serve out.
You need to have the Senator
term still or would you know
where they staggered when
they're going to go away.
In the fourth so so madam chair
and representative I think you
do because the next governor
basically is going to once once
the current members face off the
next governor's gonna make
appointments with different
terms so we really do get the
staggering so we don't end up in
that situation where.
You know governor comes in I
think we've seen that would
force of regents you can service
you got a letter of resignation
to keep in my file you know
that's that we're trying to
balance this out and and.
That's that's the reason yes
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative live yes like to
pass.
For the past required just thank
you senator especially for the
inclusion for native American
tribal representation and I
instantly see that diversity
equity access of your work in
this bill so with that we have
any opposition.
Seeing the show all
the permanent members of the
staff.
Okay keeping we will hear Senate
bill fifty three tomorrow
morning Mexico.
What happened we actually have
in the middle prepared last
several days ago but it wasn't
sent down services today because
one of Representative.
I was trying to negotiate is.
We remove the.
We have a limited it it just.
Okay.
The Senate bill six
morning.
At nine AM for now we're going
to go to the committee to house
bill two a five.
Natural those twelve Texas.
Sponsor.
This is.
He needs.
What.
Thompson.
Jennifer Sanches.
Purposes.
Yes
Representative I think part of
affects for resources we have of
the three main sponsor
representative Thompson that's a
Shelby joins us to Sears.
Yes please thank you.
I am the co sponsor of the
bill to the I and I think the
reason Representative Thomson
house because danser the
legislation.
Is that the only reason I ever
got involved in public policy
is because of what happened
instructional education at the
time that I first worked out of
any legislation this time was
the.
Director of community programs
for children birth to fight with
developmental disabilities and
there was no public education
for children because of the age
of six
that would and that's what are
some of the cause for this bill
and some happy to co sponsor it
but I'm going to let my experts
and the primary sponsor.
To the real presentation.
Thank you Sir I'm gonna call on
representative Thompson.
At this point Representative
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair and if I
have a coughing fit just hold on
for a second so madam chair and
members of the committee those
of you who've been around for
awhile know that I have been
the squeaky wheel regarding
special education since I got
here in two thousand thirteen I
I have almost forty years of
experience working in schools
with kids with disabilities and
my son Eric is now thirty two so
I have sat on both sides of the
table and the special education
world and I will say I if if
there are members there who have
not been contacted by
constituents with concerns about
special education I'd be very
surprised and get ready because
they're coming some of the
problems that I saw when I wrote
IT thirty nine years ago
continue to be the same problems
we're making some progress but
we are under the the gun
essentially because of the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit and
again for those of you who've
been around I made it my mission
after the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and just a reminder that
kids with disabilities are part
of that loss.
I made it my business to make
sure that the administration
paid attention to kids with
disabilities and I said at the
legislative education study
committee meetings I am going to
raise a stink every single time
until someone notices that we
are not paying attention enough
attention to our kids with
disabilities and I'm losing my
voice so I will let someone else
take over.
Thank you Representative.
It Jennifer said those are the
phones okay Sir thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is arsenal at all and
the secretary for pandemic.
Very very excited this is my
first committee presentation so
I'm excited I'll remember this
one for a.
We are here today to be talking
about hello being special
education school that's what
this is all about we're asking
for your support house bill two
eighty five all children the New
Mexico desert high quality
education including those with
disabilities by establishing
special education act including
the office of special education
or insure this is that something
that happens now and into the
future as a good reason why
you're able to do this and it
happens.
There are so many successes that
come out of special education I
have in this in in education for
twenty seven years I've been at
superintendent last ten years
and I can think of many
wonderful outcomes for students
and they've gone on to do some
amazing things but that's always
the case for everybody right now
sixteen and a half percent or
fifty thousand six hundred
students that are the public
education fall under a qualified
for special education in our FY
ninety P. to some of the
statistics behind that that
fifteen percent of special
education students were
proficient in order to receive
nine percent proficient language
arts and science only six
percent were proficient math and
nearly a third can graduate from
high school.
Now there are some things that
we can do to ensure that we can
get those numbers up and I think
we can do that very quickly.
So what is behind this we want
to be able to insure consistency
there are some examples across
our state where there are
wonderful amazing programs we
want to be able to provide
consistent training professional
development schools and
districts want to provide
technical assistance to speak to
those schools and districts
they're not in this alone we're
all in this together we're
conducting special education
workforce recruitment and
retention can it is very
difficult to hire.
special ed teachers is to retain
those special teachers and this
will allow us to be able to work
with issues to make make sure
that we can recruit and retain
it's also.
Courting across the departments
this is going to be an amazing
opportunity to do something that
really hasn't had that
opportunity in this area special
education to truly aligned early
childhood and K. twelve and
higher at the table storage.
And and all of course evaluation
factual educations that receive
the funding necessary so we can
effectively fund special
education for instance.
I talked a little bit about how
it how it is to be able to align
the resources are out there
there are a lot of resources I'm
gonna take off my secretary out
from in.
I have a daughter with autism
she's a beautiful little girl
she's a seventh grader now she's
amazing she's smart she is she's
artistic she can do some
wonderful things I think back to
myself as a parent when she was
two three years old and we were
recognizing some differences in
here and.
It was very difficult even for
my place of privilege right was
a superintendent I I think I
know what's going on to be able
to come in and not know how to
navigate that area.
And it took me a lot of time to
do that.
Try to get others to with the
this is like the like I started
getting the hang of support
somewhere out there in our area
she became king of our.
And now I had ordered all over
it forced me to the
superintendent I thought I had I
had the note but I didn't have
to be able to try to understand
trying to navigate it hope work
with other parents.
With autism and going from
elementary to intermediate to
middle school it's been a
challenge I would fail some
we've had a lot of successes and
I'm already thinking now she's a
seventh grader what is going to
look like for her to graduate
that's one vehicle she can but I
got to make sure that we have
supports in place to make that
happen I don't know it all
supports are even in my position
right now and to what is going
to be like for higher rate
because I want to have this
opportunity so with this is
going to do this allows doctors
in place now to be able to align
all that so we my daughter was
three years old again we would
have a plan for her all the way
through.
preschool elementary graduate
high school and I wanted to hire
at I would love this opportunity
I want to make this happen for
other families out there and so
with that I'm I I feel like I'm
speaking for all those families
out of these.
The last thing I want to say is
that this would not take effect
for a whole year this will allow
us to be able to have a year of
planning to get all the
constituents after bring
together because I'm on
extremity thing I want to bring
experts together to be able to
help us build this is gonna look
like along with the partnerships
and the other agencies to make
this happen this is something
that we can do well we're gonna
do it right now I'm gonna be
able to have positive changes
for thousands of families across
the state thank you that's what
was going to thank you
Representative.
Madam chair I think that the new
secretary didn't excellent job I
don't have anything to add at
this point but I'm available for
to answer questions okay the
Jews.
Madam chair my name is Allison
require of the executive
director of the developmental
disabilities council and we are
really happy here to be here
today to support built in
answering questions.
Senator let me just say
something because that are the
second secretary designate
brought back memories in in when
you talk about when in nineteen
eighty five we were able to get
the legislature to begin phase
in public education for three
and four year old children with
disabilities what we told the
legislature's.
Is what resonated with me about
what you said.
This is the fifth largest state
geographically some families we
the nineteen community programs
for children with disabilities
had waiting lists yeah that
doesn't happen now the Public
education concern title to
public education we have waiting
lists are only nineteen the
programs and there were eighty
eight school districts and
standards for this on that he
was working on at the LESC at
the time that you don't sure
families were having to drive
their children the distance from
Washington DC to Philadelphia to
get services like what the
Sanchez Liz Thomson physical
physical therapy.
So it's it's really a desperate
situation if you don't have
resources.
You Representative to introduce
our other co sponsor on sale
Senator okay.
Just.
Senator.
I just have madam chair members
of the committee little else hi
Representative Thomson I'm.
I have a jury very similar to
our secretary designate with my
son Lorenzo.
And I believe.
What we are proposing at this
point in time is truly going to
help many of our families across
the state of New Mexico but we
also have to make sure that
we're engaging.
All in our communities this is
not it's not this is what part
of the issue is that anything
about that it's about our
children and we have to make
sure that we're doing the right
thing covering all of our
communities rural urban tribal
it it needs to happen and I I
apologize and wait but this also
I think addresses the Martinez
versus the state of New Mexico
in so many ways that the
families who brought the lawsuit
forward they've all done their
older already that we cannot
wait another year chair members
of the committee this is
something that needs to happen
we try to move even just elevate
Special ed into a specific
really in the organizational
chart for have just to move it
up officially but this is even
more further far beyond that so
I just ask for your support
thank you.
Senator okay let's go to the
audience please showing here
your hands if you're in support
of the bill.
Okay so I'm going to.
Let's do.
Fifteen minute public comment
please make your comments within
one minute I'll start with my
right.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee elements
Representative this call is and
we do support this bill urge
your support of it all we
believe that this is going to
elevate Representative keeps
coming up as a special education
and give it the attention it
deserves and that it has
Four thank you this is.
And services agent Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico I'm
reminded by the sponsor that the
that's how I got my teeth in
this legislative process was on
the.
Working with.
This bill distracted.
Office of special education and.
And to make sure that it's
providing the training and
technical assistance policy
guidance sharing of best
practices collecting and
analyzing data and yes doing
some additional monitoring and
oversight to make sure that kids
are getting the services that
they need because the agency I
represent disability rights New
Mexico we deal with the families
from all and I'm sure also heard
a family struggling to get the
special education that their
children do this is not gonna
solve all the problems in
special education we need to
keep working as some of the
students for laws to get more
money through the funding
formula we need to do is
centralized people to stay to
get into our state of the field
special education but this bill
is going to address some of the
current issues that we're facing
in New Mexico strong office and
we support.
Next please.
I thank you my name is Jody
Myers and I actually work as a
consultant instate New Mexico
five of seventy teacher I got my
as.
My degree from from UNM in
special education in nineteen
ninety two and so I have a
unique perspective I spent many
years in the classroom doing the
hard things changing the divers
working with students with
behavior and I just with all the
districts that I'm in now is a
consultant I see the need for
training and for leadership and
for money special education is
probably one of the hardest jobs
next to be a parent that I've
ever done and we see our good
special ed teachers many times.
Because of lack of support and
and I think this bill will make
some changes and hopefully stop
that from happening thank you.
Bills madam chair members the
committee bills or with Mexico
horses for Children we also
stand and support the
legislation thank all the
sponsors appropriated for sure
some of our most vulnerable
school kids and we really need
to do better by even the point
have told us that and we think
this is one important step is
giving those kids of the greater
attention that they do so thank
you thank you.
Then.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am Senator
Rodriguez and the cabinet
secretaries The New Mexico
higher education department
yesterday I sent all members of
this committee a letter
detailing our agency support
special education averages in
house bill two eighty five but
it also disclosed in that letter
of personal story of my family
navigating the special education
system for my little brother
who's actually my nephew being
raised I am using parents his
grandparents I think we can all
do that need of story is not
unique and that the special
education practice critical
thinking multiple agencies
together to ensure special
education and services stand for
members to create now why am I
involved the higher education
department according to the US
department of education survey
in twenty nineteen in New Mexico
out of sixteen hundred use
survey who had I he's at the
time of the completed high
school only four hundred Raul
invitational education program
college or university within one
year baseball only four hundred
sixteen times.
If.
My worst fear and I and educator
for thirty five years I've
dedicated my life to teaching
children with disabilities.
F. as.
it's we we hear over and over
Thompson that for forty years
this is the same story we we
have to give these children
reforms they don't have a voice
it's time to hear the children
it's not about superintendents
it's not about administrators
it's about children and we need
to hear the thing all.
Thank you.
Please madam chair members of
the committee.
Well and the former chair of the
developmental disabilities
council
and with Liz Thomson which why
somehow was one of the first
children that she worked with
serviceable fair mystery nine
years ago.
I welcome the news that
secretary of education I want to
point out that the prior to
secretaries also act directs.
Areas with special education one
started his career as a teacher
whose classroom open the other
half brother.
I was a special education in New
Mexico both of them agreed that
we need fundamental change in
the special education system I
want to draw your attention to
two things one is the report
that the LFC S. C. issued two
days ago that is the best song
of special education in the
state that we've ever seen one
remarkable part of that is that
it makes clear that although
many people think that the staff
special education is a federal
program in fact federal funds
only account for fifteen percent
of the amount that should be
spent for special education
eighty five percent is money
that you appropriate.
PED tracks every penny of the
federal funds does not track any
of the state money here six
hundred billion dollars thank
you appropriate every year that
is posted twelve black hole
nobody knows how it speaks fact
thank you for your comments and
supported a bill.
Good morning my name is Michelle
to gamble on the special
education in the state of New
Mexico I've worked for
developmental disabilities
council I was an educator for
twenty five years seventeen of
those years were spent actually
little school teaching special
education science I was also an
administrator for seven years
responsible for special
education I will force the staff
process the students were
struggling I was all.
And I took that career and life
altering do.
And I don't want to see with
families all across the state
included forty districts and
holds a hundred times when
families and the story is
unfortunately the story is the
same that job range of shares
four years ago we need change at
the upper levels to ensure that
system changes happening in New
Mexico Martinez Yazzie has shown
us that we need to do more and
this bill house bill two eighty
five calls for that thank you.
Yes my name's not in Europe and
I've been a.
A child family and.
the advocate for fifteen years
primarily doing policy advocacy
groups on children survive for
child services at special
education advocacy and also been
assisting in the last two months
with the
Yes the but.
And what I see Mr the lack of
consistency my area is
particularly with children your
and and there are probably you
know the the loss of the
salafists requires there's
process is that are very well.
For children with disabilities
and I see sentencing consistency
of following through those
processes are there to support
children but also just the
teachers that are teaching our
children and our teachers don't
get enough support and training
and our districts don't.
Follow through and make sure
that they're getting the
training and the support that
they need and I feel like this
office could provide that for
the districts teachers and.
Thank you.
Hi morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
the sponsors Elizabeth Groginsky
are cabinet secretary for New
Mexico's early childhood
education and care department I
stand in strong support of house
bill two eighty five for three
reasons one we are the lead
agency for the federal
individuals with disabilities
Education Act for infants and
toddlers with developmental
delays and disabilities we work
closely with the public
education department at our
local education agencies to
transition children second we
are the this the head start
state collaboration office it is
a critical that head start is
required a certain ten percent
children with this have strong
collaboration coordination with
your local education agencies
that work with facilitate with
the New Mexico has Forces
ciation third and maybe most
importantly is we are the lead
agency in the state for pre K.
whether it's in schools or
whether it's in community based
sites we hear time and again the
children were in community based
programs that families
struggling to be able to get
their special education services
at the additional role in that
program and role in the school
and so I'm so excited for the
new secretary designate and to
work with secretary Rodriguez
cradle to career approach
to New Mexico on the map we are
number one in early intervention
for parts C. and finding
children and serving them want
to see that model throughout our
system thank you thank you for
comments in support of the bill.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee of former governor
Rick B. O. from the public to
suki on behalf of governor
Melton around the twenty twenty
three tribe's council we are in
support of this bill.
Yes Representative by many of
the members status before I just
personally here for the
community of public office to
keep in twenty eighteen we
started advocating a
conversation with Public
Education Department that's were
again the tribal education
ready frame more came to be
there were this is the
quarterback back to posts go
viral in a dialogue with the
Indian advisory committee with
inclusive of other tribal
leaders from various communities
and that's where it's very
important that also maybe if
there's any kind of language
that we also include the P. I.
E. schools because often times
children are transferring from
the bureau of Indian education
to the public schools.
And I have mentioned earlier as
to how important this division I
had education under my weight
and we had good collaborations
with walking dollars schools
Santa Fe public schools thank
you Sir almost public school so
a request here in North spent on
this bill thank you thank you.
TD thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Judy
Muller to the rest of this for
the Gallup county school
district want to thank the
sponsor for bring this
legislation for the graduations
to the new secretary will point
to working with you of the
galaxy only count school
districts point this legislation
I would like to see to changes
number one the first day we
don't think the the sauce.
First with the director of
special education.
Reporting directly to the
secretary and any corrective
action related to special
education be administered by by
the public education department
secretary and office that
director the other costs change
that we would like to see in
this bill is that the reporting
requirements.
Bill the secretary already as
winter is Ortiz there's
something required reporting and
this will create efficiency of
the eight redundancy and
reporting for school districts
thank you thank you thank you
madam.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Barbi Helen
cabinet secretaries children's
families department on behalf of
our foster children many of whom
are in special education we
strongly support at S. B. two
eighty five we ask that health
of the asset you support this
bill to enable us to coordinate
through the children youth and
families department what works
in one school district with
others districts of simple our
office of children's rights to
education unit is working with
S. on transportation issues with
respect to our foster children
we work out those issues yes we
like to be able to afford other
districts through a centralized
office how we might better serve
children in other areas in that
regard hi we support this
particular bill and ask for
yours thank you are there
further comments in support of
the bill in the audience seeing
now let's go to the webcast.
Sorry go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee many therapy I am the
mother of two children with
disabilities who receive special
education.
I mean supported this bill
because I have a fifth grader
this year that was put into a
general education class with a
brand new teacher yes
significant support in this I.
E. P. and he didn't get any
support in the classroom with
more than twenty students so I
feel that with this bill this
teacher would would have been
able to get the right training
that she needed and my son
wouldn't have to waste another
year school year without getting
the supports they need.
Thank you to of.
Katey stone go ahead.
I thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I hope
you can hear me okay I'm cadence
down I am the vice chair of the
developmental disabilities
council I am also a parent to it
had two children go through the
special education system I'm so
excited about many parts of this
bill especially the cross
community collaboration between
departments which is of reality
that we parents have to deal
with we have been the ones who
have done that collaboration
which is crazy we really need
your support to make sure that
we can have departmental
collaboration the other piece
which the committee before me
referenced is the lack of
training for all educators who
aren't special educators and you
have to work with our kids we
desperately tried to get our
daughter was terrible policy in
an inclusion classroom with
other teacher other kids that
were typical kids she's a gifted
education kid she's now at UNM
in honors however in second
grade her teacher with no
training and special education
that her in the far corner of
the room facing the wall and
ultimately through our hands up
and asked us to put our in and
add segregated classrooms
special education students I
really have worked for decades
you all know me on improving
special agent education in our
state the funding pieces been my
my main focus but honestly all
of that downs from bigger policy
decisions and having leadership
understand that especially
education does thanks so much
guys appreciate your support
appreciate it thank you.
We've also had.
I'm sorry.
What was the deal go ahead I
have you on this.
Good morning madam chair women
and members of the committee my
name is Lisa the all and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
St Onge on poverty and also a
member of the legal team
representing the the plaintiffs
in the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
we strongly support this bill
for all the reasons given here
today we'd like to thank the
sponsors for their tireless
efforts in this area we're also
very glad to see the executive
recognize the need to elevate
prioritize news the needs of
students with disabilities and
we urge you to pass this bill
thank you thank you just a.
Chris although heads.
Hello my name is Christina
RuPaul and I ate and then
director NMSC school grand
children and I did just want to
say that we are it's for as this
bill so that our families can
break so that we can reject gap
for all of our families her who
are experiencing
not being able to access
supports and services for their
children and and also to bridge
the gap that we're experiencing
for teachers to be able to have
those supports for the children
in all of our classroom.
Thank you Christine.
Gabrielle Wheeler go ahead.
Hi.
I'm I'm in support of the H. B.
two eighty five my name is
Gabrielle Wheeler I'm from east
gate kids I'm the director there
we are currently experiencing
many issues without getting
additional support and
additional funding our teachers
are overwhelmed we often are
told that it'll take three
months to get any kind of help
from child fine we do not want
to put your address or just and
all them but when we can't have
it an aide in the classroom that
can specifically work with that
child or a plan of action it
really hinders us.
We've had children that have had
asked burgers are autism often
it takes a almost up to a year
for them to get a diagnosis so
that they can attain additional
services.
And this is causing harm to
these young kids who can often
be distant rolled and have to go
from program to program to
program thank you thank you for
real.
PED ICD one go ahead.
I.
Good morning my name's Jamie
Taurus and I'm currently a talk
oriel student attending an
educational authorial and
education leadership with the
emphasis in special education.
Very close to the bending my
dissertation which is focused on
the influence of policy on
special educator retention and I
to speak in support of this bill
to help address the special
educator crisis can help retain
special educators in the
classroom with more
reinforcements to help elevate
the teaching profession as well.
Thank you.
Jennifer Sanchez go ahead with.
I think you are I'm a member of
the new disability organizations
how many titles the most
important that I have is mom.
I get to the monster the pretty
amazing to well as artistic
is going through this process.
What is starting early
interventions on a wait list for
lost valuation.
I've been in the special
education came over ten years
now and I called again that's
what it feels like.
There are rules that we have to
where we have to strategize and
we just got to roll the dice.
I am tired of cost we would like
and who's eight.
I I don't want to have changes
schools and we treating teachers
as.
Once we have don't give for
training or are under trains.
I just I really need you to
support this bill because we
could just.
As a special needs family the
COVID.
Thank you so much Jennifer.
Whitney hall and to go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee with
Holland president of the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico in a former life I
was also a special education
teacher every single day I
thought families students and
educators struggle to navigate a
system that felt like it was
designed to work against them I
stand in strong support of this
legislation because it is time
this building support I families
as they navigate overall they
can feel lonely it's part our
educators as they try to me
every students individual needs
and most importantly it ensures
that students in New Mexico
access to the public education
system that they desire thank
you.
Or.
Are we will be taking one more
public comment as per of madam
chairs which so Brittney that go
ahead.
I think.
Okay sorry need we can't hear
you very well.
We're gonna have to bring the
crystal go ahead.
Chris will go ahead.
Thank good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is crystal Banja I am the
president of the New Mexico has
sources ciation we are
definitely in support of house
bill two eighty five you heard
secretary Groginsky comments
that yes our requires ten
percent of our enrollment with
children who qualify for special
education there's definitely
inconsistency across the state
with different districts we also
districts that offer quality
quality services and
partnerships in the community
and then it's it's it's a
consistent throughout the
district and so we are in
support of the house bill two
eighty five thank you thank you
crystal thank you let's go ahead
and go to public comment for
opposition to the bill please
raise your hands okay I'll start
with my right.
Madam chair members of the
committee we agree with the
vision that has been laid out of
connecting special ed services
from from birth to career we
appreciate with just the intent
of this bill what we're
concerned about is that the
bills coming before we have the
information to make the best
legislation possible the card
before the horse you for the
secretary notes that we want to
get together work this year we
can do that this year without a
bill on the way to the it's
enhancing and elevating this
this work can be done outside of
statute and what we like to do
is sit down and work together to
create this vision to hammer out
a better piece of legislation in
the future and my name is Matt
Paul for public charter schools
of New Mexico thank you so we
have our thumbs.
Madam chairman and stuff that
was on the superintendents
schools an artesian
Madam I completely agree that
that we need to to elevate our
conversations and I think that
if you go to the I. P. level in
in the school district for the
people that are working with the
children are single day that
you'll see that that is is is
the goal and the objective of
persons in the room including
the parents anybody that is
there to help advocate for the
child to that are are
professionals are absolutely
working extremely hard for these
children and once in the
classroom that are in the
trenches are working every
single day to the best of their
ability to to do the very best
as they can for the for the
children and children our first
children are first we want to
make sure that we understand
that but the Mr secretary I
would I would say that to in
your experience reset it was a
very challenging to nose because
we make so complicated you know
the process has been so
complicated on how to access and
we need to do complicate things
not make it more complicated we
don't need more policy needs
policy more focus on the
children what can we do to help
and then do it welcome to help
and if you think that's what we
need to do thank you thank you
tax.
It's in opposition to that
please chairman the city says
are superintendent of sponsored
public schools for CENIC year in
education began my career as a
self contained cross categorical
teacher at forty two years ago I
have to send someone with you to
get to program one has a severe
learning disability very well
acquainted with special in New
Mexico Colorado and California
last twenty seven years in New
Mexico I agree we need to
elevate I serve the district six
percent of my students and
special teams too many our
teachers do need the support
what I'm asking is I don't even
other agency report to we have
that special education bureau of
public education department and
I would like to see is allocate
that department and how we've
been through policy.
Shin through budget.
To be able to be the agency that
supports our special education
students teachers and families
across the state not another
agency nine other policy let's
put it where the public goes
right now which is the public
education department thank you.
All rather charters.
That was our staff rounds of the
executive director for the
schools.
Levels for the New Mexico
coalition education leaders
Senator fact I'm talking to you
on behalf of all those darn
administrators I have to do the
job with one of more of the I
want to thank her publicly for
the work on this bill it's just
not there yet madam chair and I
appreciate reserve Casey's
recognition of our work
educations are of our work forty
years ago.
with Jen Jackson others make
this forest for a
developmentally delayed children
is the right thing to do but
we've got to do it right Madam
chair got problems with the fall
of the quick second center one
of the number one this this
renames the pop the division we
believe should be what it is
rather than the office of it is
unclear as to how that works
properly in who we report to and
how it developed also under
Indian Education madam chair we
moved it to a director Office we
suggest that's what we do here
is the same reporters in
Martinez Yazzie then we have a
problem still in sections five
six and seven figure Matt Paul
talk about we believe because
this is not been before your
education study committee we
need a comprehensive discussion
so final form would suggest this
move the effective date from
twenty twenty three to twenty
twenty four madam chair let's do
this right words matter thank
you thank you please.
Yes.
Representative chairman of the
committee my name is Chattfield
actually the state within the
maternity was practice in this
field for over thirty years I'm
here representing basically just
myself I'm not I'm here on
behalf of anyone else except for
the statements that I have in
the area of special education I
believe many of the parts of
this bill are excellent ideas I
think elevating the program is
absolutely necessary as I've
spent almost thirty years
working with school people who
are in the trenches of are doing
I think that the ability to
communicate between
organizations absolutely
important and necessary what I
don't believe is a pro rated
again created new offices that
require additional boxes for New
Mexico I would agree with the
charter school individual that
there needs to be more study
with regards to this in the
correct fashion whether that
means delaying it for two years
or that needs started looking
and elevated office that it is
it currently exists I don't see
any reason why could the
Secretary position which gives
it some additional powers in the
forties and allows us to
community association but I do
believe that they all have some
very good questions to it I do
not believe the act the creation
of a new office of special
education thank you further
comments in opposition.
K..
Welcome to the for sort of a
schools I to agree with maybe
the costumes and Asian of this
bill I do think that we can do
those elements within the probe
Department I think if you can
elevate and gauge use our region
services happened so for the
trade of course that.
Created in the office he will
only add another layer of
tension confusion if you if you
want a good example of that go
back to what.
At one point in time the branch
right to.
Hello the PED environmental
agency and other agencies which
are important in addressing this
but they can the each added
layers of bureaucracy time
consuming paperwork and issues
within our school districts
rather than creating yet another
bureaucracy that school
districts will have to navigate
to work with all with work with
the.
As you supposed to improve work
quality people you have if you
need to make changes to it
superintendents to make change
in the system thank you so much
thank you.
Webcast Cristo cool which go
ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members I am Chris to
Coolidge and the director of
exceptional programs for
pharmacy schools are also the
president of the New Mexico
council for administrators of
special education which I have
been in this role for about a
year and a half I'm a thirty
eight year special educator up
between two different states
twenty five years in the
classroom twelve years as a
director I will tell you that I
agree with the teacher who spoke
for the bill about this we are
about kids and making sure that
kids get what they need however
I was not even introduced to
this bill until after it was
already submitted and therefore
I really am concerned that the
voices of the people in the
trenches of not been heard we
need to have thoughtful and
intentional planning with all
the stakeholders involved in
this bill including our current
state director and making sure
that there is full transparency
in order to appropriately
elevate this department thank
you very much.
Thank you Krista Christina of us
just go ahead.
Christina.
Not here you just you are muted.
Area of health okay good morning
madam chair Johnson and members
of the committee my name is
Christina Velasquez and I
represent NM CEO and it's
eighteen affiliates as the
president one of the most
foundational tenants of the DEA
of meaningful participation this
idea is rooted in the concept
that great programs require all
stakeholders to participate in
the process.
Yes the repressed just insure
that all stakeholders have
meaningful participation and
that's what this bill is lacking
and I'm selling its affiliates
were not given the opportunity
to participate in the
development as well we ask that
you do not passed house bill to
wait five hours to go back to
the study process to work
together to bring forth to you
that represents the needs of all
New Mexicans.
Thank you Christina.
Alright let's go ahead.
Good morning my name is Carla
currently I am the special ed
director in Los Alamos and also
past president of New Mexico K.
this bill does not provide
productive change to do that it
is important to focus on the
root causes behind the current
concerns rather than adding more
levels of bureaucracy and rules
on to the already overburdened
districts who staff work every
day to meet the needs of
students with disabilities with
our available resource the
activities detail by this bill
are redundant as they are
already in place through state
and federal regulations numerous
technical assistance and
guidance documents extensive
data collection by of special ed
data through stars existing
programs such as MLSS
instruction letter C. a detailed
guide for determining a learning
disability characteristics of
dyslexia a multiple professional
development opportunities
provided several times a month
by the special education
division since I am involved in
implementing these requirements
every day I do not disagree with
the activities with our lives
thank you very much.
Casey Josh for go ahead.
Hi my name is Casey Josh land
and I'm official at the
solicitor and Farmington
municipal school district.
And I agree with we want to have
all the process and procedures
in place to support our students
assist with disabilities I'm
very passionate about this I
entered this career as a fourth
career out of high school I'm
United States Navy veteran and I
understand written in terms and
technologies and this bill is
not written well enough to do
what we wanted to do so that is
why I'm opposed to this we have
student assistance team in here
we're gonna manage that to we
have giftedness in here and
that's not under our spent
umbrella currently if that's a
change I'm not sure that's where
we want to go to elevate special
education services we have multi
years support here on page
twenty two
line sixteen and again like I
said we have this assistance
human hear online twenty four I
just don't know that this bill
written and ready to go today.
Thank you thank you Casey.
These are go ahead.
Oh sorry at Laura Laura who
should go ahead.
Hello my name is Laurie Hewish
I'm the assistant director of
exceptional programs for
Farmington schools and on the
current secretary of New Mexico
K. I think we can all agree that
we have a shortage of qualified
and quality education teachers
across the state including
special education however what
creating and funding another
division to oversee special
education is redundant to what
we're already doing why not
spend these funds to elevate the
need for the mental and
behavioral health needs of all
of our students both general and
special education students in
our current reality our schools
are in desperate need of this
behavioral and mental health
support more than anything else
our teachers are spending more
time dealing with behaviors they
are not trained in handling
which then takes away from what
they are current what they are
trained in doing teaching please
do not approve house bill two
eighty five as it currently
stands thank you thank you for
Lisa go ahead now.
Well ahead of you please okay
yes I'm here thank I'm here.
Okay yes I'm opposed to this
deal I know that many colleagues
the systems are in place need
support from you all and the
funds used to support.
Those things those individuals
that are dedicated individuals
such as myself I work with one
of the REC mistaking serve
smaller rural districts I'm a
forty plus year educator a level
three general educator all of
the.
Both in the but if that is very.
hello eight thank.
Thank you is this the us.
Thanks Charlie thank you.
Here we can't yes.
Sorry thank you Lisa I mean
opposition up thank you for your
time thank you.
Okay thank you let's go back to
Representative toss and she
wanted to find a COVID before we
go to committee members.
Thank you madam chair and
members committee I just have a
couple of things so if you
notice who was in support it was
families advocates at I did not
hear a single teacher or a
family member in opposition to
this bill this indeed there was
something called the special
education transformation team we
met at least monthly for three
years so the fact that that the
statement that Pete that there
was no thought that to this is
completely wrong and then just
finally madam chair we can't
wait anymore people are saying
well let's put it off for a year
we have lost two generations of
kids with disabilities including
my own son by waiting we can't
wait any more if things that
that people talked about were
working so well we would not be
under a court order to serve our
kids with disabilities so it's
time to put up and start taking
care of our kids with
disabilities and stop kicking
the can down the road thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chasey.
Isn't it okay so let's go to
representative will thank you
madam chair.
I thank you all for bringing
this bill for.
I have a grants and to at about
two between two old.
Was identified by his mom who
was a at.
A.
Let's see his mom was working at
the preschool of faith based in
the face by a child care
facility she had been to
training in the state that she
lived in they did find that for
those four children very young.
And when she saw the signs
she called to let me know what
happened that was the first and
last time I ever heard hi this
woman is picked up and moved on
like a lot of the families with
the needed to do to ensure that
their children had the had the
services that were needed it was
challenging the.
I do recall that it was really
challenging but fortunately it
does and on a more positive note
in between that time she
his parents
really had to be diligent about
the schools that they were
choosing that they were going to
placement because of the
services that he requires.
And he dares stuck with him they
had as plans and everything in
of all of this is I don't have
we're observing and going back
and forth so they eventually
moved from the state that we're
living into the Midwest and he
landed in a community school or
the all did and that was kind he
was priority so the school that
he landed in he made it through
he was in a.
Coming into high school when
they moved and I was so
impressed with the relationship
with the partnership that the
education system and the local
community hat the to help
children he was diagnosed with
autism and so
the special incredible child a
gifted and so many different
ways and so what the the
partnership that was able to
develop from this coordinated
effort to provide services was
at the it's the little town of
allied and approved their
library and the local gathering
area to develop a coffee shop
the coffee shop was set up so
that the students could get
experience at dealing in
interacting with people because
many times for real barrier for
them well this young man
did extremely well he was our
server he was so proud it to
serve asked what his
grandparents we came in we were
we went to visit and
I'm really glad to report that
he graduated from high school he
made it through high school on
time as well on time and along
the way he.
Comical middle from the Special
Olympics at the track and field
area in track and field.
And so I think.
This focus efforts on to guide
children to give children and
students these opportunities
whether they are special needs
or any other student is really
important we all right we have
programs to nurture our special
and gifted children other
children other students and I
think that that's really
important and this needs to
continue he is now working he
unfortunately graduated in
twenty two for.
and was it was the hat is a
graduation ceremony was very
quiet very small but we did want
to walk across the stage and
raises hands hot.
In New because of that
experience I think with
partnerships like this that our
focus that there's time for
people to focus for
administrators for teachers for
others to be able to focus on
the services that can expand
their opportunities and help
them to become the people the
student and the productive
citizens that they are the kids
really important.
You know and I look at this
The training that's required
training that would be provided
is so important
to the services that currently
exist I'm thankful for all
that's been done for him and for
the students in his class they
were of varying degrees of
autism from
on the on the spectrum so I
appreciate this bill coming
forward I've heard that this the
comments from all involved and
for my my just my perspective I
believe that this would as
someone was saying it complicate
things but I think it would do
complicate things and what would
allow and entities to focus on
the delivery and evaluation of
those services to the child and
ensure help to ensure that we do
have a a life that's ahead of
them are like Jacob I'm looking
forward to a suspect
I expect that there's going to
be other wonderful things that
are going to come for in his
life but I am truly appreciative
to the services that were
identified madam chair thank you
for allowing me to speak with
for to you my apologies.
Going through the but it's a it
is a very passionate discussion
for certain but I believe it to
those who are
This training whose experience
whose knowledge is going to move
this there there
needs forward so again thank you
very much I will be supporting
this bill thank you thank you
committee member thank you madam
chair and committee
representative thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative and this very
experts we have today I think
we're in a very good discussion
here I think this is good to
bring this issue to the
forefront because madam chair
and representative at least for
me I grew up with many friends
who has these developmental
disabilities and there are some
of these the greatest people
that I still have friends with
today and we need to give them
the tools that they need to be
successful so.
You know my my one concern with
this bill madam chair
Representative is I don't want
to be duplicating efforts with
what's already in place so can
we can you tell me how this
would.
Differ from what's already in
place to make sure we have these
requirements Madam chair.
to our Supertest intersection.
Madam chair representative
wonderful question there is some
wonderful work being done in
schools in classrooms and
schools and districts and that
the federal what this is going
to do is essentially allow this
team of people dedicate their
time to be able to support
special education but not only
in our world K. twelve and now
we're gonna be able to have a
binding between early childhood.
K. twelve and higher at that's
the big difference here that we
have and I absolutely agree that
this is going to much of very
much so.
Get rid of those years we
offices because we're gonna and
for their families are gonna
help just like me being a father
when my daughter was two years
old you know where to go and be
able to get all the support I
need from where she's two and
three years old all the way to
twenty plus.
Okay
and video but also like to
address differences Madam chair
representative black thank you
for your question I just want to
clarify that.
We're not creating more your
office this office will be at
PED.
the the responsibility is really
on our state agencies to
collaborate to streamline and to
make things easier
the whole intent of this is to
work collectively in partnership
with our schools with our
educators administrators on our
families and across the state
government to make sure that we
are focusing resources attention
policy and our program together
to make it more effective very
much what Representative little
described.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative in experts so.
So I believe from what I'm
hearing the oversight of this
new.
And you were creating with these
he the correct madam chair
representative and chair
representative yes that would be
correct hello fall under my
purview okay thank you madam
chair and and Representative so.
If it's under PED I'm just
concerned about the early
childhood and the higher as not
exactly.
If it's tied with PED how are
they going to work together
madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative block
that says yes making it into an
office of the special education
division currently at PED
becomes the office this office
that is directed to work across
not only early childhood and
higher ed but also with the DVR
and with CYFD and other other
agencies of the the legislation
directs the office to work
collaboratively across those
regions okay thank you madam
chair and representative and I
appreciate that answer I do want
to make sure all these
departments are collaborating
because we want to make sure
this is streamlined for all the
of the students so regarding the
reporting requirements I think
those start on page.
I'm concerned.
Well.
Section seven.
So.
Chair representative these for
talking about preschool
education.
In section seven though.
I believe there is a report due
from school sector twenty twenty
four.
Sir Senator or my question
rather to be do you think this
is enough I mean twenty four to
be able to get the reporting
requirements to the EDD have
time limits programs as it is
today.
Madam chair representative who
are that reporting requirements
are on page four at first
begins.
I believe that the.
Page twelve that transfer to six
nineteen ordinator.
are you specifically asking
about yes.
Thank you I appreciate that
answer so I I believe this is
act would go into effect July
first.
Many twenty four four okay so
madam chair Representative I
just wanna make sure that the
school districts have enough
time to implement the new
standards have we have we
reached out to the eighty nine
school districts to see if they.
Can actually get this done
because I don't want this to be
set up for failure as a start I
want to make sure we have enough
time to have a coordinated with
them regarding the timeline
Madam chair representative life
yes we feel that allowing a year
transition for this application
of the office allows us to do
all of the planning the
collaboration all the work that
needs to happen
of I health leads the
establishment of the early
childhood department in twenty
nineteen we had a years process
that really help to ensure that
we were doing outreach we were
collaborating we will work with
the legislative education study
committee all of that work will
be done over the course of this
year we have also had many
meetings with of the
superintendents obviously with
stands and sell and with with
other educational of partners in
the development of this bill we
do understand they want
additional time to collaborate
and we feel that this year with
the a year transition
will absolutely have the
opportunity to get that done and
we're committed to ensuring that
that it
there are currently forty so
these are just coming from.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative I I appreciate
that and so.
You know just speaking with some
superintendents in my area they
are still concerned that twenty
twenty four is just right around
the corner like we said twenty
twenty five is right around the
corner twenty twenty fourth next
year so Representative.
I would I guess I would just
encourage working closer with
superintendents in individual
districts to see if they made a
special commendation for certain
programs consent all call
districts to different and I
want to make sure that we've
equitable access to this program
to every single districts so
that is one thing and then
another point I was considering
was Madam chair representative
regarding teachers of special
education I want to make sure
that we can keep these great
educators in our districts.
Madam chair representative I
believe in previous races that
we get on the state level I
don't know if they specifically
included for special needs are
we also going to be addressing
that concern with this new
entity we're creating madam
chair.
And Madam chair representative
so so far special education
educators absolutely have
received the compensation
increases just like every other
school employee part of this
bill directs the office to look
at ways to recruit and retain
our special education educators
one of their among the largest
number of vacancies and types of
educators around the state so
this bill directs the office to
work collaboratively with our
school districts and our
partners to study what can we do
to support this work force to
look at possible salary
differentials to look at maybe
how their time is allocated to
school day
special training centers and
that sort of thing so that is
very much just call them in this
legislation and will be done
thank you madam chair and and
Representative because I didn't
want to comment on and if I may
madam chair.
The other thing I'm really
excited about to is we're gonna
have this wonderful opportunity
to be able to work.
Distributions and this is so
important because we're going to
be able to work with them to be
able to create programs from
high school into college more
numbers of students teachers one
because but I teachers but we're
also gonna be able to work
within the program could be able
to collaborate with update the
ball and make sure that we have
the latest training and
programs.
Prior to institutions to get the
best our undergraduates coming
out ready to go to questions
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and and Mr
secretary and I I think that's
great Alamogordo we have a very
good grow your own program and
I'm so excited to see these
young people excited to want to
be teachers and specially with
with disabilities we want to
make sure that these kids have
that access so you know Madam
chair representative we're
talking about I think it's on
page eleven to twelve I spoke
with special ed salary
differential so madam chair
representative from what I'm
reading here.
District would then put in the
report any recommendations to
the state.
To do that kind of.
Ships Madam chair representative
I'm wondering with this bill
would we be considering each
individual school districts
request.
On a statewide level two.
On board to increase salaries
for specifically people with
disabilities or with this just
be a flat line state kind of
approach madam chair Madam chair
representative of what's the
state would do the study and we
would get to put from districts.
Got it thank you madam chair and
Representative and you know I
think there's a lot of good
stuff in here is the need to.
Absorbent but I really
appreciate all of you for being
here and my dad used to be the
head of the developmental
disability Planning Council back
we were planning and I guess
we're actually doing as.
This thank you thank you
Representative I have
Representative on in your new
and then Representative reading
and then Representative day
Hochman Vigil and we are going
to get excused from the floor
I'd like to at least one more
bill after this bill so
Representative.
Thank you madam chair I'm
supposed to do.
Thank you.
Rady Representative ring for our
and then a do pass do pass on
the house education.
Okay.
Because it's already aside from
that.
I do pass the committee
substitute for House Bill five.
Thank you madam chair and
before eight PM I don't want the
the comments taken.
Not in support you know of this
our our children were in special
as well
my best friend his wife is a
special ed teacher and one of
our daughters was in the best
buddies of program
Listen to the pros on they all
have the same time.
And so you know I go through the
bill because I think there's I
think there's common ground but
I think you guys need to get
together here before he goes to
for.
And
Madam chair representative when
we go to the FIR under
significant issues on page two.
The public in the park has a
special education.
What twenty two year old FTEs
and to think it.
So I look at that and I know we
got a lot of person.
What are we trying to do here as
in when the us in relation to
this we get to go to page two of
the bill.
You know from the talk I see all
these positions we're gonna have
this new you know the office of
special education.
I'm trying to figure out what
we're trying to fix you know we
we have yes why can't you just
appoint someone what you already
have someone.
Special at why can't this point
he's gonna be the special the
office of special education.
Madam chair representative ring
says special education division
at PED will become the office of
all of those folks for moving to
an office that is elevated
within the department of public
education.
They will then have the support
of other agencies and will have
a direct connection to the
office of the secretary as
within the act.
Thank you madam chair.
I don't understand why you can't
do that already.
Why do we need legislation to do
that.
Madam chair representative
bring.
Right in the office allows the
division at PED to to work mark
collaboratively across state.
It allows the office to have
those direct connections this
legislation directs the office
to work in a very specific way
and to do specific things that
are not currently have.
Of madam chair just we're just
really missing that so we have
the director all these people
work for.
We have the governor who
everybody works for.
I mean to me we are be able so
you can shoot you're going to do
this.
Madam chair representative what
the what this does is this
happens now
that's the difference that we by
doing this bill supported.
This this is the expectations
are ever no matter who sits in
my seat.
Thank.
Madam chair and and
Representative Rehm if it was
working we wouldn't be under the
Yazzie Martinez so something
that has been going on there's
been a disconnect and we can't
just keep doing the same thing
again and expect a different
result because I for one have
been waiting thirty nine years
for different results.
Madam chair representative
Thompson my understanding and
please correct me if I'm wrong
the the LFC lawsuit isn't
dealing with just special at.
Miss madam chair and
representative ring that's
correct okay it's dealing with
with
English language learners kids
living in poverty
Kids with disabilities but I
will say from my own personal
standpoint through the years
since we've been in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit that that been
okay we're going to create the
Indian ads Fund we're going to
fund bilingual we're gonna do a
B. C. D. and support specialists
Madam chair representative Rehm.
What families dealing with kids
with disabilities are tired of
being patted on the head and
said
we will support you because that
has not happened.
Madam chair and representative
one of the comments was that
it's taking up to a year.
For the diagnosis can you
explain why.
Mr madam chair and
representative a year would be a
lucky thing I have been fighting
this battle as well four years
we get we don't have we don't
invest enough in getting people
trained and keeping people in
the state particularly.
Diagnose autism the
Center for development
disability at your amendment
which is kind of the statewide
clearinghouse on disability
issues have houses the autism
programs and at times I'm not
sure where it is right now the
waiting list can be up to three
years to get a diagnosis.
Madam chair representative
Thompson I'm glad the with our
children we were lucky here I
guess is a way to say it will be
more then chair and
Mr secretary page three line
twenty one of our so we're.
Part of the show for the offices
the bell of
the of the New York state
Williams so we don't currently
have a manual or point here.
And I'm sure Mr of
Representative yes we do have
plans in place the office
currently the special ed
department is working diligently
to work with all districts
across the state what this is
going to again I want to do is
one give additional support and
resources to this team but also
be able to work across agencies
and that's going to be the big
change here be able to make sure
that we can work with students
from early childhood all the way
to to hire at.
This.
Madam hi I was on licensed
certified whatever we called it
the state's diagnostician so I
do this do some of that were
right tested children there was
always a list everyone and I
I did within APS and then also
differ I agency why tested just
what they were in the I. A.
schools as in in rural areas
well there's but for the special
to Gallegos for complex
disabilities such as autism.
There just aren't enough people
in the state and people waiting
for that early Representative
children in foster care who are
on the waiting list and.
We would recommend
as guardians of light and to get
the children on the list really
are on the needed questions
rates because it was going to
take some long before the
Senator development.
Is to.
I think more tens of millions
the state
it is very.
Is.
It's not.
Thank you madam chair and
Mr secretary to paid for we go
to one once annual review.
And.
This is the
why this for me can only
counties this is redundant and
and my question is are we.
Madam chair representative from
up we are doing a recording now
and what this.
Legislation proposes is to use
all the existing mechanisms that
we have in place at PED in the
various departments to allow us
to pull together a comprehensive
data we need so we are not
asking folks to submit
repetitive data or to
participate in any other kind of
data collection system other
than what's already in place
what we are going to use this
office to identify as experts
what data needs to be collected
and from where.
I do madam chair I would say
that this would you could
currently do but I'll move on
because I know we need to go and
so let's say on page four point
twenty two monitors of state and
federal funds we don't do that
we just sort of money at it.
Don't ask for accountability.
Madam chair representative rings
we do report have money is being
spent and we're doing a better
job of making that information
available to the department has
created a financial transparency
website that is still being
populated with information it
hasn't always been there and we
don't always share that
information in a way that's
readily available to the public
this bill makes special
education specific data and
information available to the
public and to you as policy as
our lawmakers to know what's
happening on an annual basis to
the report that that office
itself develops there really
isn't a redundancy reporting the
report the information as
reported I I the schools
currently into PED star system
we're saying that we will
utilize that information to
develop annual reports and to
provide information to all of us
as we make decisions about
funding for special education.
Or training and other aspects of
special education in Madam chair
representative bring the reason
why we needed statute is PS I
works for a number of years in.
Disabilities rights advocacy and
network to the water colleague
support for decades in this and
and there's been ups and downs
in you know what data is
collected you know how it's
being done sometimes well
sometimes I believe that this
ministrations committed to doing
it really well we have to put in
statute to ensure that that
continues I'm in the future.
You madam chair I'd like to add
that essentially we the money
goes if the school districts and
we don't track it separately
from general from the general
fund and and I will tell you
some years ago I was contacted
by a school board member in a
small district in southwest New
Mexico who said our special ed
kids are not getting what they
want the money what they need
I'm the money is being used to
support the football team so we
just want to keep track of where
is that make sure that the money
that is intended for kids with
disabilities actually reaches
them and the programs they need.
Yeah madam chair and secretary I
hope that we do better County I
think we need to know where all
that money is going
it's.
And so we go to page five one
five of duties of the office to
oversee and enforce federal
individuals and do the education
improve act of two thousand and
four we don't have anyone doing
that for.
Mr chair representative right
yes the department is directed
federally it is the
responsibility of the public
education department as it is
for any state education agency
to to oversee I need a
implementation of IDA in all our
schools.
Yes ma'am chairs and of
Representative.
So on page five go down the
nineteen the office show the
stuff all policies and technical
guidance.
We don't do that currently.
Madam chair representative
brings against the public
education department does work
on the feeling and foreseen
ideate we are complying with all
of the federal of lost
requirements around IDA the
point of this is that we will
continue to do that but we will
also continue to do things that
are better to build a better
system to build a workforce that
we need to make sure that
services that a screenings and
evaluations are done in a timely
way in that work properly
funding this the point is we're
doing these things yes we need
to do a better and this
legislation will help us to do
that financial codified.
Madam chair and Representative
school age nine.
Money.
You're going to have
disabilities specific policies
practices an interventions.
And you know again I ask are we
not doing that.
Chair representative are you so
one of the reasons why we are
specifically elevating some
concepts is because they're not
always done consistently across
the board district.
Why and so we would ensure that
this office is tasked with the
responsibility of ensuring that
we all rise that Google are are
dealing with these things that
we know our records and the
reason why disability specific
policies is really important is
because I think there's a
tendency especially for folks
who don't work with people
disabilities to kind of see this
population live disabilities are
very diverse and so we have to
make sure that we are really
party
over at training policies
everything that we do.
Madam chair I'm I will as a
parent of a son with autism and
being part of the options and
community.
It's kind of the common wisdom
is if you get lucky and get a
teacher who understands autism
you want to hang there but
frequently you as a parent you
have to teach the staff.
What it is about ought to them
that is your child I we we got
lucky sometimes we got really
lucky sometimes so it's just
totally random whether you're
going to get people who know how
to deal with the special needs
of your own students or not and
we can't have that anymore we
need to have every student have
every person who working with
them understand what the
difficulty is how it displays
itself the what the best methods
are to teach that child.
Madam chair representative will
you go to page eleven we go on
to the the.
Report directly to the secretary
and the Sam from members.
I'm wondering why we do that and
I asset in relation to going
back to page four of our I'm
sorry page two where we have the
now twelve defer.
Of the divisions are they all
exempt as well.
On.
Madam chair and Representative
we go to page twelve one twelve.
Transfer the schools special.
So I don't see it on.
In the bill is that a house bill
two.
Madam chair what.
Madam chair representative green
that doesn't require no
appropriation we currently have
a six nineteen.
And that's being done.
Madam chair and.
Representative page fifteen
point six.
Of.
Thanks for removing local
control.
The server a recent page fifteen
fifty one five one six through
what what lines five six
through.
Twenty one.
Madam chair representative
reading of this is existing.
Making any changes except for.
By service level class.
Next call of the day have.
R. as in proposed the
Chair and representative twenty
one.
Want a.
Years of support.
Are we
currently Madam chair
representative bring have the
multi years support is the
updated version of the response
to intervention so we're just
replacing the response to
intervention in statute with
multilayer systems as part to
make sure we're staying current
with existing sentence.
So.
Share.
What the protocol now there your
comments the.
And
But you know I'm not suggesting.
Of a memorial but I think that
if you.
Maybe take a smaller step right
now.
That you might get everybody on
board.
And I I do you know if some of
those out get your director
position find word there's
commonality is here from pro and
con and move that forward we'll
see how it works anyway that's
my suggestion I'm looking at
this and I see a lot of
redundancy.
And I kind of wonder why.
The secretary doesn't have the
power and particularly when you
have the governor's everybody's
work for can't come in and say
you guys are going to do this
this is the way we're going.
Anyway that's fine costs thank
you madam chair Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you madam I'm madam chair
just wanna move you past okay
thank you Representative Lara
thank you.
Thank you for them from Brazil
forward
Second.
wide wide the the disconnect
with the.
The superintendents.
Madam chair representative.
We have a lot of support from
superintendents I've been able
to should have documentation on
the superintendents support for
multiple districts those would
include districts like Los
crucis as which is the second
largest in the state we have to
order part of the state you've
got the car third southeast part
of the state and to Gallup also
got some verbal confirmations
and support from other districts
like Roswell and charmed and so
there is a there is support out
there what this bill will do
with this issue I hope you will
allow for consistency across all
districts and support this
process.
Hi is Michael intent to be able
to work very closely with all
school districts superintendents
to be able to make sure that we
implement this and we we are
actually addressing their
specific concerns in their
specific areas and so as we
continue that collaboration this
will become a benefit for
superintendents but also for
classroom teachers and for
students and their families.
Madam chair and.
Secretary so.
I've had some calls for the
superintendents and the they
were involved in the process of
making the.
That there was some
communication but there were
told what to do instead of being
able to participate in some of
the.
Bills.
So to me those are some pretty
strong words coming from some
superintendents is our mix in
the in the support of what's the
deal there.
Madam chair representative I
believe that there is still some
understanding because you come
from service some some districts
but again we do have a whole
year to be able to implement
this listening well we're gonna
allow to be able to bring in all
the constituents superintendents
all along with other groups to
come in and help us make sure
that we implement this is done
with everybody's voice
everybody's understanding and
everybody's input so success.
And madam chair and.
Mr secretary thank you for
answers thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so we
have a motion by Representative
on the enormous for do pass in
the second by Representative
Chasey and then also the hopper
the hill made a motion of please
call role.
Representative Lara don't yes
Representative block no one is
like to explain that the.
Senator casing yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative little yes
Representative Rehm no ma'am and
I'd like to explain.
Representative Zamora no ma'am.
I share your all yes.
Madam chair Johnson yes.
Sixty three sixty three have
passed Representative lock is
here thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for
bringing this forward you know I
total support but I think
everyone for the goals I just
think there needs to be a little
tweaking with time.
And not duplicating but I
certainly support thank thank
you Representative chair
representative Thompson we
wanted to.
Of the and madam chair is.
you know I think.
Pointed out Water State.
That's in there I think that's
probably.
I think that if you were to take
the still short.
Yes you would get census from
both sides and that way you can
get you know
the other thing is is Mr
secretary will tell you I'm
impressed by your answers I look
forward to helping you can
straighten out the.
Thank you very.
Committee members we're gonna
start Senate bill six.
Chair.
There's a very.
This
and.
On the.
Because.
Once you.
Thank.
Is yes.
Senator the.
Maybe I can thank you madam
chair members of the committee
so we have.
Senate Bill.
Twenty
two to
twenty.
And if FOR Bob and.
Bill.
So we've made it.
Diversely including human
resources office.
This has been in the works for a
couple years.
Senator Lopez had introduced
welcome back.
And also one of the bills that I
that would direct.
State personnel office to have
that there should be training
for all our state person this
was supported by former Indian
Affairs secretary Lister hill
and also well he's still kind of
Secretary at the time he was a
state person secretary.
The actual operation this is
part of what has culminated
tonight to that are the
sponsors.
Thank you very much madam chair
because I
This is been I think a long time
coming for this bill has.
At the.
Of we started two years ago the
civil Morial.
And
in
New York last year we didn't
have a similar measure we were
able to put some money into the
junior funds into state
personnel office to begin the
process of organizing.
This particular.
What we're asking for with
regards to the offices that are
seeing inclusion and chairman
may we do also have our spoke
director status Office rector
yes who can answer questions or
if you'd like to say a few words
of where the the ball is
currently in this whole process
in this office.
Thank you.
Please.
I think chairman members of the
committee my name is S. as in
the state personnel director
as Senator Lopez was mentioning
the
there was a bill that was passed
last year we received from.
To start work on the diversity
after.
Initiatives.
we were able to.
I slides on the.
Creation and we hired a Vigil in
December was starting to look
very work on the
workaround Bill
we're tracking of five years.
Or diversity equity and
inclusion.
review of the are you doing the
state policies for best practice
and provide with state and
federal law including title one
title to the VA.
For working with the training.
We're working with our training
and development of the year do I
trade series including topics
on.
Implicit biases aviation black
history sexual harassment
awareness we're working with
data analytics to analyze equity
measures there's a statewide
workforce.
And we're working to by the H.
R. G. R. A. issues including a
head collar addition to the
comedy accommodating
transitioning and transient
transgender boys.
research has shown that the
diverse workforce.
Are more productive efficient
and innovative.
It's important to ensure that
the equity of the New Mexico
workforce because.
A majority minority state.
Senator.
Do with go to the audience do we
have the.
Comments in support of the bill
in the audience.
Do we have any opposition.
And on the webcast do we have
any.
Director could maybe just
members for that.
Since the.
And while you Senator that we
have senators in the room July
fifth offices.
These are these.
These are cosponsored.
Madam chair representative so I
I think it covered in the intro
but I I will sit here for
support thank you.
Chairman representative I have
not I have not compared the
language in the two in the two
bills and I'm not.
Sure it was the senators would
like to.
To.
With that just that I myself.
Thank you madam.
I just would make a suggestion
to look at language.
Different anyway we don't have
any lawsuits or anything.
Thank you madam chair and
senator so on page three J.
online line just talking about
institutional racism and gives a
definition so madam chair
Representative how would we
address.
There is concern within.
The office of institutional
racism it's kind of a.
Quite a vague definition on.
What we what we expect and gets
madam chair of the employees to
be able to be in compliance with
this provision Madam.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I think when it
aims to.
Really talk about H. but that.
Some of these definitions to
probably change from thank you
some of it was implemented to
now and some of these
definitions to have not really
been that are it's very broad
institute develops
but it does need to be yes.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator so so we're saying now
that there is currently
institutional racism happening
the state department says that
so we're trying to say mentor.
Madam chair representative if
there's there's different levels
of racism that exists not just
in our state but throughout many
different places in this country
and around the world what this
bill is
It is us is for us to have
training across the state within
state government that continues
that educates works with and
seeing what we can do to change
the process we currently have in
state government.
Of institutional racism there is
called you it is different
terminologies versus the
at what it
is to see how we are within our
systems of power and here in
state government we oversee
education which does have
Does having many many
differences differences of
your services that are provided
for students in of our health
department instances with
regards to complement the COVID
even shows we have some glaring
differences of health
I have when I was six the help.
Madam chair members of the
committee a few years back your
is a trend that was being done
and said in New Mexico and it
was being done in Spanish.
Yes the what the community's
first languages and that's how
best we can outreach with
regards to training issues.
And when the state percent the
state employee came forward that
simply said to stop do not
continue because trains are
supposed to be held in English
is an English only state of
which is incorrect I still have
the email that was forwarded to
me
streams.
But the problem is that we're
not in English of the State Farm
chair based on our constitution
but on the other part if you're
actually trying to outreach to
community should be approaching
and one of the languages that
they use which in that community
was Spanish
without I think our state
employees understanding of we're
hoping that this training will
continue to work with our state
employees to know
what we can do to be the
community at their level and
their need and that we should be
promoting bilingualism within
our state governments have to
Spanish V. like in southeast
types of Albuquerque many multi
lingual but again we do have
to continue to pay
with their communities also the
I think they're all around that
we have to be aware of it keep
in front of our state bodies
etcetera.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senators and I appreciate
the answer so in the definition
here says intentionally or
unintentionally madam chair
Senator.
How do these people to.
This whole.
Doing something wrong madam
chair and.
Madam chair representative think
simple I just state is
intentional.
Yes intentional CYFD stop the
training cause us to be.
The committee to Spanish
language Spanish of the field
unintentional is a virus that
many of us have is who we are as
humans.
With the training I'm going to
continue all that as as are so
director said this continue
across all states of state
government he keeps it up are
for friends these were aware of
it we can get them.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Centers so I appreciate that
answer going down on.
Nine sixteen.
We're starting protected
classes.
And under protected classes we
have a.
The forty years of age or older
Madam chair Senators I didn't
know that that was specific
protective class
Where we get that number.
Chair representative
it is a protected class through
the.
Serve the the federal government
is it is it is a protected class
forty.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Senator so under forty be
discriminated against that was a
horrible.
Please.
Going to the next page here on
page four we're talking about.
One nine religious minorities
Madam chair Senators you know
there's so many religions all
over the state how do we how do
we know what the warranty is
like let's just say if someone
is absolutely to the most people
in the state are that religion
could they fall into that
religious minority category
potentially or.
How do we define that madam
chair.
Madam chair representative.
I think that so in my part.
Area.
Some of the compensation
packages while the man.
Because we're not but yet we
still have those that choose to
practice cultural traditions.
Applicants Christian all these
other I'm in some places they
might not be the minority and
other areas of the state my
particular.
That something that is.
so that definition to it he gets
up that's brought to.
Okay thank you madam chair under
so it would be based on the
community that person's working
at not necessarily statewide
just making their okay and then
the next line here.
We have L. G. B. T. Q..
Persons and persons with
disabilities you know and at
least not when I went to school
that key word that's on that
line it was a slur madam chair
Senator I just don't.
Sulur in statute I guess so we
talked all the different
stakeholders to see if that.
You word is appropriate madam
chair.
The madam chair representative
that's where we also.
Identifications whether there
and that's that's a tough one to
answer because you do have those
that want to identify and still.
And those that still.
Well trying to take out some of
the words bars that are we're
retired right in some areas so
there's still a lot that a lot
of work and sensitivity that has
to occur okay thank you madam
chair and thank you Senator so
then also split over quickly
here to page seven talking about
historical perspective of New
Mexico and then above that on
the first line is talking about
ending institutional racism.
Racking up over in the
institutional racism so we
talked earlier about how it
could change based on what the
scenario is madam chair.
However we can be tracking this
with this be assessments with
the.
Course how how we tracking the
progress madam chair.
Chair representative the state
prison Office collects data from
from our place we are in office
right now on that.
The.
Additional.
areas for voice to be able to
identify and will be studying
that data and reporting on that
data.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative our senators
rather so we get that wrong.
So so it would be.
Thank you would have to report
this if you want to the the
people that are working it was
the self reported by the
department.
And making sure and then
historical perspective madam
chair representative on page
seven line I.
Spotlighting many racial ethnic
subpopulations that live and
work in New Mexico so I guess my
previous question was is this
based on region in the state or
the entire state how are we
ruling that madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
think what it thinks is that our
personnel are all throughout the
state and that's causing.
At the end of the having.
Training.
With what legislators you know
and what are we liable for as
far as getting some of these
initiatives for not just for our
employees and their interaction
with each other but also their
interaction with the public.
I see that as the liability
issue but in the whole store.
The historical perspective it is
depending where you are
it's kind of like you like you
state that staff conflict of
well we want to the battle no we
won the battle misperception but
in some areas of the state you
needs of your community.
So they don't have.
It we would for Medicare a
rental I think that's all the
questions I personally and to
thank you so much
Representative on the were you
in and Representative right
during the commotion.
Representative.
Yes.
Share the Representative are
Senator.
We try to work with the
Does we need to get this before
after Ms Senator Lopez thank you
for recognizing New Mexico in
itself is not a reduces state
you know we have individual
services but I'm seven
generations five of the six
months you know got budgeted
different cultures but the you
know our state is no one really
proud of that but anyway let's
go to pay for legal lines twenty
we're gonna have a because she
the first name of officer.
And I go.
The duty of the new year.
Officer.
Representative
Chair representative the the
designation of the two.
The officer will bring.
Each agency has a media officer
within their agency each state
to have some of their agency
who's designated as a neo
officers the chief.
the rest of the officers an
individual within the state
personnel office who brings
those individuals together
thankful outwards with them on
training so that we don't just
developed training with his
personal office that isn't seen
by.
Employees within the agencies so
somebody to collaborate with the
offices in the agency's of the
State.
And madam chair and in state
person expert when I was with
the sheriff's department I was
that person and so you know when
I was looking at and I'm gonna
go through several the year is
in here that's to do the of that
person and so I see this is
redundancy.
For that position you know all
right the you know I think you
can you say is one of your
partners.
Duty is to go ahead and make
sure twenty minutes.
but folks are going through and
I'm sure you.
Where I see that what are the.
Chair representative clarified
that will the state personal
office will not be asking for
additional FTE to this work what
we're doing is we're utilizing a
position within our agency that
will do it
R. we have an internet that we
hired two.
Responsibilities include for
their as well as our training
department will be involved in.
Initiative so it's it's it's not
that it will be one person who
is responsible for for the whole
state this person will work with
several different people to make
sure that it that it's the
training that we're developing
is developed in collaboration.
Throughout state government as
well as delivered in the state.
This is a it's a position within
our office that currently exists
that will it will be part of
their duties.
There will be designated as the
officer as part of their.
And madam chair state person I
you know on another bill that I
saw the we have five thousand
vacancies in the state you know
and so I I receive I see this.
I see you need to utilize people
here have and I just see those
continuing duty and I go over
the page seven line twenty two.
your agency show.
Diversity and inclusion officer
why is our and your you said
each one has Sydney DO see and I
think we just say no to do this
Of.
This is something that would be
interesting madam chair Senator
when you go to page eight of I
can't remember we just pass
bills out of House Judiciary
that dealt with political speech
and I'm wondering if one twenty
and twenty one.
Could fall into that.
I mean you need to do you need
to find that I think it's still
I remember.
Remember Gail madam chair
president House Appropriations
outside for fiscal aid you need
to find that bill is this money
fall into that.
protected political speech.
Bill that's out there and that
was okay so.
I would be one state believe
meditation class Representative
legend mention because with all
these jobs moving yeah.
Yeah yeah.
Yes that one could be
detrimental to do that with the.
In you know in the madam chair
and senator order you know in
time you'll get to pay stand I
would get all that and I go.
There are C. L. of the I mean
all that goes the EOC
Of the one that I'm really
surprised page of weapons flying
four through six
reasonable accommodation for
state employees with
disabilities we're not currently
doing any we've got the
Americans disability at.
Madam chair and representative
it's substance this is that
training for personnel costs to
also recognize that for the
people they work with that it
that disabilities.
Or do some combination that
could help with in some manner
or even being aware of it so
that if there's a bias there's
no unintentional
that that witnesses describe.
This.
To that.
Chair representative the the.
The bill is the the morning
bills that there will be an
assessment of the state's
obligation to deliver the the
employees with ADA and calm
wise are accommodated every game
for clarity disabilities so it's
just all of all of this bill all
of this act is to bring special
awareness to to this issue and
to make sure that we're
providing the right.
The right training even dates
are people some major people are
not physically we don't simply
they understand what reasonable
reasonable accommodations are so
if we can if we can take a bit
of a higher role and and be a
better resource to the this this
bill will help us to do that.
Madam chair from.
