Because because we.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil.
house bill three eighty four has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill three
on house government elections
and indifference Committee
substitute for House with three
eighty for all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
This was a test of a good report
up to.
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption we are in adoption
of a favorable committee report
on house bill five ten all those
in favor say if I was and I.
consideration reports say with
recommendation that do pass and
then referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are on
adoption referral committee
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee to
miss been referred Senate bill
one eighty as amended has had it
under consideration point seems
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
of a C. nine suppose may be as
seven point four opted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
says to for us bill one sixty
three to pass an answer for to
the taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted during my
guy who's chair.
I move adoption we are an
All those bills may be as of a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred Senate bill eighty
three has had it under
consideration forcing with
severity of us and I.
Well as opposed may be just have
a committee reported opted.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee team has
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're an adoption
referral committee report on
house bill eleven all the
severity of this and I.
Well as opposed may be as a
pass the house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for House Bill five forty five
two passed respectfully
submitted maybe that small chair
Mr speaker move adoption we're
The supposed AT the eyes of a
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker appropriations and
finance committee to Mr referred
Senate bill three as amended has
had it under consideration point
all those in favor say about
this and I.
The supposed innate yes CENIC
report up to.
order of Business messages.
In addition disorder click to
read.
The Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has passed Senate
bill sixteen.
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy three as amended Senate
bill three thirty four Senate
finance committee substitute for
four as amended with emergency
clause Senate bill four ninety
four as amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherrie
No objection it is so ordered.
Members are gonna continue doing
some third reading bring in we
we rolled some bills or from
this morning to this afternoon
from Santa Fe and Burnley you
Representative Cates are you
ready on item number seventeen.
I am Mr.
Speaker can you please give me
to the point that the record
Thank you Mr speaker and some
of.
We this bill is relating to the
behavioral health currently the
this bill is trying to offer the
structure it would be on a
volunteer basis for nis pallet
he's in counties throughout the
illness failure of usual coping
mechanisms the loss of the of
the of the job more or and
of the prayer the training will
The train volunteers to be
confidential so that when the
peer support are working with
Just
lot of distractions today I'm
sorry Mr speaker
I have a as a expert witness on
Thank you Mr speaker of the
gentle lady of.
I gladly yield to the
representative from Chavis and
terra.
emergency providers across the
state or is it is it is there a
particular area of the it's been
problematic can you tell me what
this first responders have a
much higher rate of
suicidal thoughts they are an
extraordinarily stressful
Only one to reach out to their
own and so this program allows
for behavioral health support
that is from their peers for
credentials that the.
Would cause it to be covered by
insurance and that type of
that type thing.
Representative so the current
data of the existing program
provides training from the.
it is a volunteer program it is
not paid for by insurance it is
a volunteer program to just
provide support for our people
Thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you very much
Representative we have a
structure in place and the data
of how it works from an existing
Image begin label that but be
flexible.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and and Representative.
Representative it is not above
but it is there will be a
confidentiality clause in it and
so
that is part of the training for
our the peer support group.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative said date is
know.
What kind of demand there is for
this treatment.
witnesses he's one of forty
commanders who gets about four
calls a week and that's just to
their but that is the current
program that's in operation
Mr speaker and and
Representative it is not
currently
and this bill is only
state and first responders could
include nurses as well.
You Mr speaker gentle lady will
this be for volunteers as well
as paid firefighters.
There's a gentleman from Lincoln
another representative Vincent.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Sandoval CO I gladly the yield
passing of this bill the the
will to select one curriculum so
that they have it standardized
across the state for all the
fire departments.
responders better than have in
multiple curriculums.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle person from a tear I yes
I do agree with that and that is
bringing standardized and you're
absolutely right will raise the
quality of the service.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle person for military there
be happening throughout the
state but also at the fire
academy as well.
responder does not go to their
supervisor and tell them they're
they're having a problem will
they know and be trained to look
Thank you Mr speaker the
training includes not only
complicated have to go through
their supervisors we want them
to feel very safe in this peer
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so you have a firefighter
that.
His supervisor sees him start to
Thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you the.
tell tale signs of they can
reach out themselves to the peer
support group who will help us
find them they will also have a
list of local referrals that if
are doing at this time.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I'm a supervisor and I
noticed that one of my
firefighters is not he's not
acting right.
contact them directly we would
have to refer back to the
policies of your local fire
department to find all the
will be a process in which
supervisors can contact the peer
support and they will contact
the firefighter directly and not
has gone through something
catastrophic and he's having a
problem or she's having a
problem and you notice there's a
change would you say that
health is key to be able to
address quickly before things
become dangerous.
And so Mister speaker gentle
confront this firefighter
implement for consultation.
thank you Mr speaker and the
representatives I.
the week system peer support
program if there is some
catastrophic events such as a
suicide within the department
trigger it they're reaching out.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so if I am a firefighter
and you see that I'm having an
off day.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle version of terror I I
agree that's why I could not
tell you how you specifically
supervises
most employments that there is a
process is in place in which
they are they're able to be able
to to have those communications
they have they consult with the
firefighter first responder and
how how does the process work in
and how long does that
definitely a process in place as
part of the training that with
there's no need to
situations alike obviously and
do you have eyes on that and
that's really what we want to do
for firefighters we want to make
sure that we're standing next to
them why they have stood next to
That.
stand in support of your bill it
is my hope that during
curriculum one curriculum put it
the state fire academy and
during like a fire officer one
course anyone that wants to be a
and we don't let anyone slip
through the cracks and and start
falling away and to where
they're getting on.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady from Senate
overly Health.
I yield to my friend from sent
of all thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady I raise briefly in
audience how this would help I
do have one question for you Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
I heard you mention your
opening of that this would
Representative this point only
it does apply to everyone within
that fire department which
includes EMTs yes Sir.
And dispatchers.
EMT in Rio Rancho New York with
the fire department there and
I'll tell you
is having a really hard time and
is in counseling which I'm I'm
And so I can see how this would
be really a hard thing and Mr
gently I I appreciate the
counseling but I think this
program where he can actually
involved in the farmer will
benefit from this and hope we
can expand this in future years
thank you misperception I'm from
San Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr just generally in
appropriations committee there
was an appropriation that was
removed so Mister speaker and
San Juan it is not needed this
first year we already have the
data on what and the structure
of how it works and so with the
passing of this bill they'll be
I believe you stated that there
is already one program that
stood up and in place is that
correct thank you Mr speaker is
thank you General.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady I I also I'm reading on
here that that.
It's not shell but may about the
Albuquerque is already they
already have something in place.
Are they are the other counties
also not able to participate if
Bernalillo and the city of Rio
Rancho as well the has the
spirit of peer support group.
it's of the of these this
palette he's took it upon
budget than other fire
departments across the state so
we want to be able to support
those fire departments that also
this bill will allow that.
Some speaker gently I guess
repeat the question yes speaker
gently what is the current cost
right now
to Albuquerque to run their peer
support program.
each of those municipalities
there they also have a cost
because the invites other fire
departments to come up some may
at it this way is.
Generally we do not like to pass
on funded mandates on to our
local communities Mr speaker and
Why that is and and Mr speaker
gentle lady if the other
municipalities or counties that
twenty twenty four twenty twenty
five.
If that's not just going to
cover the cost of the.
Of the.
Programs that are currently in
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
person from San Juan I am not
asking for an appropriation so I
do not have figures on probation
at this time.
would just be coming from future
budgets Mr speaker gentle person
for San Juan I'm not sure I know
that what I've been told is the
take it into areas that may not
be able to absorb it in their
budget I don't know any of that
yet.
Thank you Mr speaker gently I
do but it does appear we're kind
of doing the opposite here which
is communities are able to do
this there are requests that you
just suggested another funds
potentially available but
curious to me Mr speaker and
gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker.
The general from Sandoval
Representative Martinez.
Mr speaker kind lady did I
understand you correctly that.
There would be no concern with
follow as far as I know under
the hit the but they will have
be training on confidentiality
in this is key to build
Have the pleasure of either
working with or setting up there
was always have but training.
important that people lost still
be followed because you're
you're talking about some very.
Personal very private issues and
we don't touch.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle person you're absolutely
right and and all the
firefighters have training and
have a.
Line twenty three.
It sort of talks about this
Hebbe issue.
This is what I'm talking about
it but it is very important
protecting the privacy of that
individual if you're building a
These things happen.
Mr speaker kind lady I would
suggest that.
if.
you Mr speaker a gentleman from
Santa I am sorry that it's of
that was misunderstood the
individuals participating in
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
Previous to going to House
Appropriations you did have
appropriations requests.
how is that going to be done
now.
Mr speaker gentleman from Santa
it is currently being done
successfully in the cities of
or question from my colleague if
we're going to be asking other.
Departments across the state to
take this on.
has been taken on successfully
in the City of Albuquerque Rio
Rancho in the town of
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
so if it's already been been
done.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from a Santa we are
trying to standardize so that
this program can be offered in a
standard professional manner and
support all of firefighters
and it does satisfy the
curiosity that I had with that
Mr speaker I appreciate the
conversation listen to the rest
of the debate.
There's further debate
Bernalillo and Torrance counties
thank you very much Mr speaker
so I have some very serious
questions about the training
that maybe you can explain to
me.
hospital staff clergy educator
who works for a public fire
agency provides peer support can
you tell me what does that
training look like well they
many hours is that going to be
are they going to get certified
as are going to be a test and we
will be continuing education for
those finish training Mr speaker
curriculum for of the part of
the conversation to
create the single curriculum so
that is standard size throughout
a process after the bill is
passed.
You Mr speaker gentle lady so.
Okay so I get concerned we're
what I'm understanding Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady we
had three successful programs.
Mr speaker gently can you tell
through how many hours they take
a test and how many continual
at other hours they have every
year to make sure they're
updated on the most updated ways
one curriculum that will be
standardized throughout the
state and that curriculum has
been it will be based on three
suicidal thoughts and workplace
issues.
Mr speaker gentle lady so
there's do you keep referring to
these other public because I
want to support your bill but
training how many hours did they
take a test what what is the
curriculum that we're going to
fall back on because I'm having
a hard time with the support of
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
currently the basic training is
Types of curriculum out there
and this bill will allow all
stakeholders to gather and
select one side of curriculum
for standardization.
about to kill themself is vital
to this program so we need to
know if the people that are
going to do this have the
appropriate training to
someone is suicidal which I hope
they would have the right
training in that what would be
the next step Mr speaker gentle
lady.
to harm themselves or others
what would be the next step.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I am not running the purpose of
the bill is to provide a
Mr speaker gentle lady so.
Again I want to support this
bill on over firefighters all
over law enforcement they all
need this stuff because they see
Well what I'm struggling with is
I don't see that outline for
anything of like.
The training program that we use
there's numerous ones and we're
that's what I'm struggling is
what what exactly does this look
like and who is going to be the
committee men who.
I guess better question was
going to decide which one of
And that group will be making
the decision I will refer to on
page two it does list
of list items on from line nine
under B. it'll tell them how
they are providing those
supports.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so at the end of the day it's
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally so is the fire marshal
the concurrent teams that are
I'm so sorry the international
association for firefighters
will be the national standard.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
written is so incredibly vague
because here's another question
I have Mr speaker gentle lady it
is just going to be on a
telehealth over the phone could
to the local their ideas to go
to the local fire of the some
some training will be at their
place of service some training
Mr speaker delays lasting X. say
I I I do want to support this
but it would break my heart if I
voted for this and then it ends
up being something were people
see anything specifically carved
out in this to say this is a
very important issue as part of
the most important issue that we
have of our first line people
states have used this and we're
going to implement this because
this is the best data driven
way.
I don't see that and it's kind
of making me crazy I would
way and it's not going to get to
the people that need help I mean
I don't see anything lined out
for any type of suicide
awareness training which is
literally of the most important
was something anything in here
that said they're going to get
sixteen hours of training and
XMI to train has to do with
suicide if that bit was in there
I would have any questions but
intact that doesn't have
training to stop our men and
women who are on the front lines
from killing themselves so
Mister speaker gently it's a big
concern for me and it's one of
reminder I'm not going to make
it a practice to Colin members a
second time I think we did it
once for the gentleman from
Chavis sitting at that for a
quick question but I'm not going
Seeing no further debate the
related to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now ask
for.
Amended twice now pass where
final passage of house bill two
fifty seven as far as amended
the vote is now open.
yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Thomson.
Course of course we would have
sixty four the affirmative to in
ready on item number three.
Mr speaker will you give me to
that point that the record
reflect that election to serve a
place in Senator Judiciary
Committee subs to present a bill
house thank you very much it's
my pleasure to present to the
regional water at the regional
water system resiliency built
organization these this is a a
national water association that
Sir that works in the eleven
western states helping helping
can serve how we sustain most
importantly how we improve the
water systems we have in the
state of New Mexico for those of
you who don't know
households that means that
little mutual domestic water
system serves less than a
hundred households and what this
bill does it allows for the
they can create one regional
water system out of maybe four
and then have a have to have a
system that really really
represents an economy of scale
It's not a problem in rural New
Mexico I have sixty in my
district alone they have over
sixty small mutual domestic
water systems in my district
important you understand this
this is created at the local
level and it is a volunteer it
is a volunteer organizational
effort at the local level and
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady does agility yield.
Mr speaker kind gentleman yes I
yelled Mr speaker gentle lady
Paula Jones to the body for that
I do have the form and now and I
would like to move house floor
amendment one to.
point one read that is being
passed out we'll go to minute
will gets passed out and it's on
the website it is now on the
website for anyone webcasting.
To be in the amendment.
authorities of the authorities
and powers of the new thirty
there permissive and then page
six of the bill there are powers
of the a forty that remained as
up to the permissive authorities
so they with all under fall
under subsection be on page five
with that Mr speaker stand for
questions.
I see none and you have an
amended bill back to the
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
thank you jealous there's
further debate the gentleman
from Chavis it in a better
Mr speaker I yield to the
distinguished gentleman from
Chavis and the and a tad of.
The lady of.
Seems to me like it has some
really an inherent problems.
to utilize.
Of the efficiencies of one of
the two together is that what
you're trying to do Mr speaker
after World War two you know
when our guys came home and they
and the rebuilding
infrastructure in this in this
fifty people those are above the
highway the other two there's a
river that runs through the town
the other two server move about
a hundred and fifty and then two
most of these mutual domestic
systems in the state are run by
volunteers the offices in
somebody's back bedroom and you
know they really struggle to
water system so here's what we
we now now if you're at about
five hundred households figure
that with that with the bill of
director for an operator and for
an accountant or bookkeeper
that's what you really need full
time so what we're trying to do
is take a group of volunteers
good salary you know it's really
about economic development using
water infrastructure in the
north.
All I have Mister big delay I
And I've been.
Really involved in another but.
These cooperatives and
They have unique Water Rights.
That are assigned to that
specific unit.
Have you thought about how
incorporating.
The debt.
Or how you would.
In some some of them in our
area.
there have you thought through
that Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
yes we've thought about through
that for about the last five
if you are for water systems
that want to come together and
you have to bring in those water
rights and those you know all
the defining issues that you're
talking about you have to
depends on what the local
jurisdiction wants to do and if
they want to do that what we
have done kind gentleman is
we've created a template for
separate water systems together
that's how it works now so what
we've tried to do and this is
been a bipartisan movement to
the you should know that
a bipartisan effort it was
worked on by every single agency
that touched water in the state
and they really came up with the
plan and this was the number two
if you don't then we have then
we have all these different
water systems that really can't
sustain and support themselves
they won't conserve the water
and when you say why should
aquifer so it is in there be it
is in their best interests to.
Create a system that will
protect the water resources that
they have.
to introduce him and welcome him
to the house to.
Thank you gentlelady Mr speaker.
So.
correct that is correct Mr
speaker time gentleman.
And Mr speaker gentle lady.
That is what really I don't know
And.
They very much probably want to
to
Members of both cooperatives to
support that what mechanism
allows them to proceed.
assume debt or take on debt or
bring their debt to the table
and then and as as a unified
organization of then they then
they would put that together and
appreciate that Mr speaker so if
I had one cooperative that had
five hundred members.
And another cooperative that was
each would have to have a
majority of their members vote
in the affirmative in order for
them to.
Go together is that correct.
is a public entity so we're
talking about public entities
coming together and yes the
majority of their members would
have to agree to to come into
this partnership again at the
Mr speaker time gentleman yes.
Hey can lady
Addressing.
The debt the Water Rights.
the normally have reduction in
workforce and some people lose
jobs and so I those things of
the just think you're gonna have
to think through I I I
the more important they are so
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady bears from here
Representative Scott.
The the.
The.
Shortest ones.
The.
To assess fees.
With those assessments be.
in connecting to the regional
authority system.
Would be.
A mandatory for just mandatory.
Mr speaker and gentleman so as
that property line is located
within the boundaries of the
authority yes they could charge
a one time cook up the if those
people wanted to join.
Reads from committee at Lee Sen
option to join sometime in the
future is that we would for Mr
Assessment a requirement for
payment now.
that you know we people come in
and they laid the lines and they
tell everybody okay it'll cost
you this much to join but if you
decide not to sign up then you
don't sign up then it may cost
requirement to pay any kind of
assessment.
The formation of these.
Please.
Individual land owners wanted to
Mr speaker and gentleman if
they're within three hundred
feet they would be required to
pay yes.
The community that's a bit
The option to get in the
business of renewable energy.
Could you explain to me.
initial domestics that we're
combining and they were in a
rural community and they decided
that they wanted to do a
a solar array to you know pay
assessment process would work
the same way.
Could you repeat the question
and gentleman I'm sorry.
Mr speaker and gentleman if the
You Mr speaker thank you chan
looking for answers will be
arrested to listen to the rest
of the debate thank you kind
I Mr speaker and kind gentleman
I yield that I'm from task
recovery The Santa Fe and Santa
and all those counties and all
those counties Mr speaker gentle
but then I heard that each of.
Water Cooper whatever would have
the option of joining.
So my question is if you have a
Mr speaker in kind gentleman did
they just add Thomas and it's
to come together if they'd like
to and and form a larger system
so we're talking about region
Leising and that kind of sense
so Mister speaker gentle lady
but it's purely voluntary on the
part of each of the co op server
or water systems Mr speaker yes
worth it to them does it meet
their Kanemi of scale that they
need to provide better service
do they get better water access
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
I just wanted to clarify that
mile money because it seems like
there's a lot of advantages of
doing this but it seems like
maybe if this is a good way to
Thanks to my promoter
Representative blog kids out of
the room is going to generated
from Travis Representative as a
whole.
time lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker my question regarding
the renewable energy projects
has been answered so I'm not
going to go over that again.
connecting properties at the
we're the service future date
property line is within three
hundred feet of the the Ortiz
service lights does that also is
that thank you Mr speaker kind
lady thank you for that question
it's a great question because
really it is up to the by laws
of that of that local
Mr speaker I appreciate you say
in the gentle lady because of
dead on my neck of the woods in
my particular in my particular
district whenever the Interstate
Stream Commission went down
there to get that thing under
control the drilling mud C. and
it cut off water to thirteen
and for their house sells Mr
speaker.
What the Authority did for that
local.
Area down there.
They had to extend their water
Pretty strict unless the bylaws
of did allow for an emergency
situation right now those people
that did have their domestic
will sealed off by the drilling
page six line tean is talking
about the choir from a willing
seller.
Mr speaker.
split settlement and in the case
of the divorce decree or
something like that.
Can it be just from one willing
seller or does it have to be all
parties concerned.
Mr speaker gentle lady also on
page nine of your bill.
small.
The were the that we're talking
about here.
One one two year meeting would
Mr speaker kind lady it would be
have to be for quarterly
meetings I think at the call of
the chair was put in in in case
know the call of the chair goes
up.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
thank you very much for that on
page ten of your bill is talking
about just that starting online
executive director who may
employees staff so the staff pay
would be coming get out of the
proceeds from the water payments
so that is very clear to me.
and collect unemployment.
Mr speaker and kind lady I think
it would be like in a a
public body and they have board
of directors and they have the
director pay staff and yeah you
would set up good procedures
that would allow for a good pay
hopefully good benefits in the
other workers in in a in a the
public body sitting anywhere in
the state.
Okay thank you for the of.
missing.
Mr speaker and kind lady we
really didn't put any money and
probably did
forty colleges design requests
and you process it from there so
so this isn't going to happen
tomorrow you know if this bill
goes into effect then I think
this you know what the
consequences will be what the
opportunities are what the
challenges are so it's going to
take a lot of work from a lot of
people at the local level but
sixty five to do these jobs and
you know we need to
professionalizing it and get
some younger people and get more
professional services for water
systems in our state.
need to okay Mister speaker what
about what is the role of the
NMFA.
Mr speaker and committed those
now and they have redesigned
their rules to make it much more
to make the the the water at the
grant process much more
a separate bill I mean it was
nuts what you had to do to
regional as now we have
incentives built in at the NMFA
that will help water systems
the water transport we also have
legislation that's in house bill
two that creates two hundred
thousand more for cogs that can
hire grant writers and technical
understand that a suspect of it
but it also bothers me that
these smaller.
Some communities through in our
especially in our rural area and
Mr speaker and kind lady really
I I I don't think so I think
everybody's ready to give up all
the power they have in my humble
keeping clean drinking water.
Going through your pipes twenty
four hours a day if it breaks
down in the middle of the night
they have to have that fixed
within like a.
opening question why do do this
work I mean really it is
incredible it is incredible work
that these volunteers do in
rural in rural communities so so
Mister speaker I guess that
brings me to my I hope my last
question here.
Just very recently at the start
of the session I did recall
receive a call from one of my.
they were in dire straits the
only wanted they could find was
from a willing seller which is
identified in the and your bill.
to help.
And unfortunately the river the
response I got I was not very
pleased with the don't think the
community was very pleased with
the answer that we got because
what it boiled down to wait for
next year is unacceptable in my
opinion.
So whenever there is an
emergency status how was this
Does it have to be an emergency
status to be able to to hurry up
and get the funding or what does
it have to what is going to be
the risk in result.
another bill for an emergency
water systems this is in in this
one what what this bill is what
this bill is really doing is
building capacity for the long
from this is to offset these
problems for the future you know
it's a.
You know kind of how how do you
make an apple pie you know
gonna I'm gonna try to see if we
can't work for six regional
water authorities in my area
coming down from sixty but
that's going to take a lot of
Is this is the funding for all
of these.
Potential authorities is it
going to be evenly distributed
throughout the state is there
going to be priority given to.
to tell you it's on the merit of
the application but I think I
think it's incumbent on all of
us to to work with our
communities and if needed where
of us serving rural communities
to you know to kind of dig our
heels in and help people that's
that's kind of what we do that's
kind of what you do I know that.
Mr speaker Maloney is serious
the colonias the colony the
company is actually have their
own their own water funds they
are given four and a half
there's already a separate funds
set aside for you four and a
half percent I think that's like
forty million twenty five it's
either twenty five or forty
million a year I I can't
taken care of because their
water needs were so desperate.
Okay Mister speaker I appreciate
your answers gentle lady thank
Mister speaker I gladly yield to
the gentleman thank you Mr
speaker I applaud all of the
water so she sends out there
they work long and hard and as
okay Mister speaker and a time
to them and they've been working
on it for eight years I've been
working on this for five I think
five years they've been trying
to get this passed so the
question I have is are you aware
that you can do this without any
law.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady we fed to water
associations in San Juan County
that joined.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
because so many of these water
systems are just struggling and
there there is that.
There is there that they have
we're facing fires unless you
build water pipes that are six
inches wide you don't you don't
have enough water pressure to
even pull in a fire station so
we've really got to work
together so that we can serve
what little water we have and
protect the water resources that
we have that's why this bill is
without this bill Mr speaker
kind gentleman because there's
no incentive to do that it would
work together and yes you could
you could do it
we've built in in the set and
it's an incentive that's a hard
one an incentive through the
water trust board so that if you
Regionali so be some incentives
for bigger government and that's
why I'm wondering why the
associations or together ours of
work together very smoothly in
in our county and they've
accomplished great things as a
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
there's really no framework
right now for doing that you
know it do your current your
organization did it but probably
and did all that work but this
just makes it easier they can do
it at the local level they don't
have to come to the legislature
and to ask for a separate bill
that it's we're really building
perhaps neighbors to the south
would have done it would be more
than willing to give them the
paperwork needed.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I work
association I mean we have two
major statewide organizations
all they do is work to help
these water systems improve
their waste water systems and
drinking water systems is it
chairman of my local water board
and we accomplish some really
good things and we didn't need a
piece of legislation and that's
the point of contention I have
Thank you Mr speaker we on the
usual to me.
Mr speaker yes icon the yield to
the gentleman from all those
counties.
Thank you in lady I have one
authorizing the issuance of
bonds providing for the transfer
of assets liabilities and water
rights will concern me that last
water rights so if they join
together they have to join
together their water rights
that's what they do if you're if
you're putting a a regional
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady one of those
board falls apart whatever's in
the water rates after the.
together right and then you're
saying if they came together and
what would happen if they would
fall apart is that the question
then they would have to divide
up the water rights and they
would have to divide up all the
stronger in the process but
that's a good what if question
but they if you run a business
together and you put all that
you know and you put all the
liabilities and assets together
One of one of small water
utility has more water rights
and another one and it does fall
apart how do you divide what is
fair to one of the more or the
you'd probably do in that
situation issue to create a
bigger surface area to become
more sustainable but it really
depends on what they want to do
at the local level it's not it's
level that's not my decision is
not your decision.
No I understand them from
speaker gentle lady but you said
that they have to give up their
Combining to where Mr speaker
gentle lady.
I'm sorry I didn't hear the
question again combining where
so so you have one regional
water rights would set within
this new entity that they have
created.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
of the last question I have
absolutely correct and that is
the defining purpose of this
bill it has to be the local
decisions.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
But since you said the asked Mr
speaker stated that nobody has
to join the matter what region
they are their nose defender
both of not going to my correct.
don't like the idea of some
director board of directors
seeing uh you can lose your
water rights because of this
that should be doing thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and the.
Kind lady from.
So
Representative Garcia asked a
couple of questions that I had
that I was wondering about and
I'm trying to really understand
this I I don't disagree with the
idea of regional water systems I
just I just need clerk some
speaker and kind lady for small
water systems and I'm just
wondering what is the cubic feet
threshold for small water
users so it's fifteen households
or other or more or less I
guess.
of for I mean every individual
that maybe has a you know a well
or whatever they have a certain
amount of cubic feet of water
and so I'm just wondering what
Water System per cubic feet.
Mr speaker and kind lady is it's
huge amount of water for small
system are very small amount of
to be fit for another water
systems it really depends on
what their water rights are as
either a small system or frankly
like property rights thank you
can sell them and you can buy
them and of Mr speaker and
gentle lady he could have a farm
would have a different amount of
water rights and of the person
Mr speaker and gentle lady with
two hundred acres could sell
some of their water rights
and so that's why I asked the
question Mr speaker gentle lady
because
I'm thinking about parity and
what the thought process is for
that.
Mr speaker kind lady and how it
works is each water system the
usual domestic water system in
mutual domestic water systems to
both public utilities and
they'll bring them together they
know what their water rights are
and when if they choose again
together and and that's what
they will own collectively if
they decide to merge.
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
or I was a property owner and I
did want to join would there be
some kind of
I guess vote as to whether or
speaker and gentle lady if
you're part of a mutual domestic
water system you're already a
member of that water system you
already pay into that water
already a member of that water
system so and they're used to
paying your prices prices might
be different if they doing if
they voluntarily decide that for
different set of board of
directors a different set of by
laws a different set of
membership rules.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady
individuals that don't join if
that water system went through
much like a city or municipality
of we put the water lines in and
that already happens you can
have a neutral domestic system
in our region and it can go to
you know I can go down on a
royal and serve like ten
that those wells are drying up
those wells are drying up so it
is it is probably.
It would probably benefit them
water and you know I I build a
well in the north I can tell you
it's twenty seven thousand
dollars it is not cheap to build
a well and it takes a year to
Madam gentle lady and I am sorry
for college you madam do gentle
lady but gentle lady Mr speaker
another question that I have is
hundred miles or twenty five
miles or what do you what do you
think you were regarding these
regional water systems.
know what kind of formations you
have but you could be a state
you could be a water system that
only has twenty users in it
maybe I want to say I'm going to
the of the you know the
operating systems when well goes
down you don't want to be
responsible for that anymore if
you don't want to do all of the
regulations you know you have to
somebody really far away they
don't have to be continuous they
want to join with them because
they want them to take over
those responsibilities they're
tired of doing that is too small
that kind of makes sense in
terms of joining but I'm
thinking of of cost benefit and
I'm wondering if this is Mr
twenty users would not really be
economically feasible because
these water systems cost a lot
of money to build so it seems to
mile.
Ten miles or whatever the cost
the case may be can you comment
on that
Mr speaker kind lady yes that's
exactly what we're doing this
that only have I have a system
with ten users
it's just the way it depends how
spread out these communities are
and we have a little isolated
villages that built these little
we're trying to do is create a
template and a system so that
people can come together and and
create an economy of scale that
works both for the the users and
wondering has any because the
state engineer done any type of
analysis of maybe the whole
analysis Mr speaker kind lady we
haven't done that analysis the
yard by yard in the state at all
what you should know is this
this report and yeah I chairman
Lundstrom in the probation at
the time head of the LFC
assigned legislators to work
task force recommendations so
yes with the state engineer
involved in this yes was the
department of energy I mean
recommendation on what the best
planning would be for the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and the reason I ask that
curious I'd be curious to see
that study that was done the
second question I have and that
was my first question believe it
or not
regional water systems B.
combining the water system and
the waste water system.
Mr speaker kind lady good
question yes waste water systems
plants in small rural
communities so we're looking
forward to you know getting the
capital so that we can put these
systems together and make them
more yes so it's for water and
wastewater systems
Two men promoted a
Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating some reading your
bill here and I just want to
clarify some things so rural an
authority.
we're bringing two of these a
you know public institutions
together you'd call it an
authority.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you generating so these public
what happens at the local level
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
from Otero is a group of people
get together and they decide
they want to build
water systems so they they come
up with a plan they put it you
know they have a the EDD develop
a plan they usually go to the
water test board they present a
plan they get some funding and
like incorporated in any way or
could this be an informal kind
of water cooperation between.
Homeowners in a certain place Mr
speaker gentle lady.
talking about is creating a
template so if they wanted to
combine they could.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so I see here in the
yeah Mr speaker kind gentleman
yeah it there could be multiple
founding entities that could
combine.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
because they they are a
governmental entity.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so then who oversees
these governmental entities at
the state level would be the
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so.
If things are set up Mr speaker
with these entities able to
usage so you're charged
according to how much water you
use usually in a mutual domestic
water association.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so there is there any kind
only per person I know that's an
extreme example but is there any
framework already I don't see
that in the bill Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker in kind
that some say okay you can use
water for a household but you
can't water cattle with this you
know this is drinking water if
you we don't want you to water
cattle with this or that they
have different rules but again
lady so the when they come
together for this regulated
regulatory meetings or whatever.
Is there have to be unanimous
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Yeah I just I I've heard from
constituents that some
constituents right outside of my
district who have concerns about
this they just don't want people
let's just say like metering
If there are some kind of
parameters we can put in this
bill to make sure that every
single individual under that
water system.
Is getting the needs of that
water system Mr speaker it's a
cannot go in the extreme so
Mister speaker.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
state agencies have some
controlling factors but really
know sometimes they don't have
enough water so sometimes they
have to limited but they try to
limited equally to all members
but again that's all under local
Is there a volunteer work
involved with this or is this
are are we potentially paying
these people to set this up all
these men hours are women hours
volunteers now in the house what
they will do is when I'm going
to encourage people do if they
wanted to our regional you know
watcher entity I'm getting
put these proposals together
they usually get money to to
have an engineer they have
something called the P. R. a
preliminary engineering report
to the water transport they
approve it they might give them
a grant they might just go ahead
and approve the water the whole
water system it takes a couple
there's a lot of work that goes
into these those from the
testimony of our today Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
there there's a lot of work that
goes into just running and now
Dixon where the village of the
happy to R. L. retail or you
know I can name.
Fifteen knowledge is in my
district they could really use
benefits in rural New Mexico
School.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I I agree with you I
think the a good paying job with
benefits is is quite a lot of
Board or oversight entity Mr
speaker.
I'm guessing these costs would
then be translated to the
individuals that are within this
You know I think this is good I
think there are a lot of good
good things here Mr speaker
gentle lady.
I would want to worry about the
cost though because Mr speaker
there and I know that we said
there's seven entities at the
state level that regulate this.
Which one would regulate.
Maybe let's just say.
gentle lady so let's just say
their third jacking up the
prices on it at a certain it was
just say some mean people took
over a water resource and these
with there be any other remedy
administratively other than
let's just say going to the
Attorney General to remedy that
Mr speaker.
coming up and I think every
eight you know the taxation
without representation they be
there I'm just going to tell you
they would be at that meeting in
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady okay well that that makes
some sense for me to answers let
my question so then my last
question is regarding I'm
looking at the port here and
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady I just didn't know
if we need like a two thirds
vote for this with an emergency
clause Mr speaker gentle lady
I move that I just Jaycees the
the Senate bill one as twice
But those members of that are
recorded both.
yes representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
Members the bill does not have
an emergency clause the calendar
is misstates the emergency
clause so there is no emergency
Has duly passed this.
Julie from earlier reserve three
are you ready on item number
thank you Mr speaker house bill
one thirty four simply immense
the public school code to
requirements for drugs be
bill tool it is also including
drugs and installation
dispensers in school bathrooms
and I stand for questions
there's a big agility from Santa
Fe Representative role metal.
I'm just so grateful to be here
today to expand a program that I
got to work on back in twenty
nineteen my first term learning
create access across the board
and learned a lot about what was
going on with the fact that the
young girls young women.
tell us a little bit about how
this proposal changes what we
had tried to start pre pandemic
to create over a single access
I was approached this summer by
the young ladies to my right who
are also my expert witnesses
they are
been witnesses to students in
their own schools that have had
no access to menstrual products
or have suffered indignities
well to try to see if we could
find a way to rectify the
situation by providing free
menstrual products to the
students.
chamber Mr speaker gentle lady
have stories exactly about what
it was like growing up and not
having access to drugs one of
and Mister speaker gentle lady
that's sort of the point period
poverty is real Mr speaker
gentle lady and when we look at
this inability to really do the
very basic anymore when it comes
to basic hygiene you know we
give out toothbrushes we give
out to space we do a lot to look
on everyone's unique body that
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
creating this universal access
at any given point in time
across school grounds is really
accessing this expanded program
and and how that affects young
girls ability to to stay in
school yes Mr speaker and gentle
public schools and the
determination is based on the
fact that
The PED who would oversee the
process would
to those admin I'm sorry the PED
would disseminate the funding to
those administrative tors in
those schools and that we should
every single
girls bathroom and at least one
boy's bathroom in those schools
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I think as we
able to understand what
menstruation is that it's
shouldn't be a taboo topic Mr
speaker gentle lady regarding
what our bodies are doing having
and in our bodies Mr speaker
gentle lady I just I just want
to commend you for continuing
this fight and for working with
students
places of public access to
really understand that they
should be widely widely access
so I just I commend you and
And I am the representative
browned and there's been a
request remove colds requests.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
so house bill one thirty four I
had the opportunity to chat with
my my neighbor and House
Appropriations representative
school because they don't have
of feminine hygiene products at
home or another way to acquire
them and I thought that was
something I hadn't really ever
thought about Mr speaker gentle
I some of the bill that these
feminine hygiene dispensers our
products at least would have to
That a dispenser also would have
to be placed in one man's
bathroom in an elementary Pueblo
elementary school that I thought
I I don't think I can vote for
passed out which led to that
amendment Italy.
Mr speaker I move house floor
amendment number one to house
bill one thirty for the two oh
To go to roll call vote it is
the best out as we speak and it
is on the website.
Thank you Mr speaker all wait
till everybody gets a copy
before I explained in and I
think.
Is it is been passed out Julie
to explain amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker so what
this amendment does is on page
one line twenty three of the
bill.
including punctuation comma one
men's bathroom.
So Mister speaker and generally
this is a very simple bill and I
just like to.
Explain a little bit about why I
That females are and when they
get to a certain age will will
start having a monthly period.
And that's kind of a hard
adjustment for a lot of young
young ladies.
or boys bathroom will actually
make it harder on girls because
Mr speaker gentle lady it's
foreseeable that boys and I'm
talking junior high school boys
probably even maybe high school
Mr speaker and gentle lady I.
Used to be in a junior high
school in our member boys were
kind of immature and the.
using these products to mark
girls to play jokes on people I
think it will probably evenly to
the litter problem with the
schools.
bathrooms would also lead to
boys carrying these products off
campus and doing who knows what
with them later this is actually
creating even maybe a black
think if we took a poll of most
New Mexicans they would say that
tampon dispensers are not needed
it would be a mistake to have
these in the boys bathroom so I
stand for questions is your
debate on the amendments related
from Santa Fe Representative
Romero thank you Mr speaker does
the gentlelady yields.
no it's not a for the amendment
okay Julie from Santa Fe to
debate the amendment thank you
Mr speaker does the gentlelady
yields are you.
Thank you Mr speaker I just have
amount of men's bathroom first
being that you thought it would
be disrespectful Mr speaker
gentle lady are you
Mr speaker and gentle lady alive
raised three sons and they're
all very respectful of what when
I referred to this I met boys
will be playing jokes with these
now they have access to these
products Mr speaker gentle lady
do we make laws and create rules
based on the fact that we think
some people may not
to the benefit of more people
than those who may disrespect
that Lawler me violated.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
think that every time we make a
point it's not hard to imagine
how this would be abused or
misused Mr speaker thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady just on the
point of disrespect I I would
like to treat boys with respect
place there I just don't find
that that that would be a place
where you know boys would feel
that they could be anything else
but but respectful the second
point Mr speaker gentle lady
than to mistreat these products
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
don't want to of the surmise
what else they might do they
what they think might happen
but.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I just
think it's going to be a problem
it will be an expensive problem
as well since the taxpayers will
products that they could only
access because they had it in
their school and I could not but
being able to bring something
home to me to help me out or
have it available at a certain
needs these products Mr speaker
gentle lady I think taxpayers
and have have agreed on when
I've gone back to my district to
talk about this program that
aware that trans men men
straight.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so I
do not believe that men men
straight I look at the
looks but the DNA stays the same
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady in
bathrooms across the state
across this country in every
community in this state there
who are menstruating in those
bathrooms can have access to
this equally and fairly Mr
speaker gentle lady so it is
really critical that when we're
single dad and a single mom my
parents were divorced you know I
had to ask then often to
purchase these products as a kid
and not to mention the fact that
would be happy to be accessing
drugs that I would need Mr
speaker gentle lady so having
this fairness and equality and
being able to access these
products for different reasons
body to vote against this
amendment thank you reserve for
the debate on the amendment the
lady from Travis Representative
Ezzell Mr speaker thank you very
much for the gentle lady from
Because I have coached an awful
lot of boys.
They like to have fun they like
to play they like to experiment
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
to what they could possibly do
with these products that might
be in the boys bathroom.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Sometimes their period comes
unexpectedly at school yes these
girls are like scared.
It's hard enough for them.
To cope with what's happening
with their body.
But whenever these boys whether
humiliated by some of the antics
that these boys hello on the and
it's not fair.
That these girls are the ones.
their bodies changing and
everything and it's a it is an
extremely emotional time for
them Mr speaker and gentle lady
I.
dealing with the young girl that
is emotionally distraught
whenever she for starts appeared
to whenever she might access to
have an accident at school but
you very the very crude and I'm
not saying all boys Mr speaker
that we do not get me wrong do
not get me wrong on this.
unconscionable things with these
feminine products if they are in
the boys bathroom.
So that is further humiliation
to do just that Mr speaker.
And Mister speaker.
On behalf of all these young
girls.
earlier percent of on in our
new.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from I got a look at
the Lee County you'll gladly
The potential behavior of school
age boys if these products are
found in
men and boys bathrooms and the
those products are there in the
first place and I'm also my
concern with this amendment as
proposed Mr speaker gentle lady
is that we are excluding there
products who may not have access
to these products by traditional
means and so I'm worried that
we're putting those students in
a more dangerous position and
not otherwise have Mr speaker
Representative.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
that nothing about this
amendment would deny them access
to these products they can get
them on their own that's how
invoice bathrooms just doesn't
make sense Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm the
state that they can go get them
on their own they can go to the
cisgender females to have free
access to them because it's my
understanding Mr speaker gentle
lady is that you would not that
Representative Mr speaker and
gentle lady I I think the
question boils down to we do we
think the taxpayers of New
Mexico should be supplying
question regarding the
availability of the ability of
products Mr speaker gently I
don't want to presume that.
People generally can't find
these products are every
Pretty big leap for a state
legislature to say that every
public school in New Mexico
should supply for a permit the
feminine hygiene products but
What I'm hearing then.
And feel free to we don't do
correct me as that even if this
said at the beginning of my
remarks after speaking with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
hearing from some the student
lobbyists on this issue I began
amended it makes sense for New
Mexico that will be an
individual decision for each of
us Mr speaker.
Okay thank you thank you that.
Okay kind of clear the.
support this amendment because I
think it singles out excludes
and highlights the issues of
students who are probably
disadvantage and with that I
won't support the amendments but
I appreciate the discussion
thank you very much Mr speaker
Representative there's further
debate on the amendment is
Thank you Mr speaker delays some
I'm trying to figure out and
looking at your management
trying to figure out how we
survived all the years and
schools because we did not have
the biggest issue that I have
I'm sorry not gonna pick on you
boys but I kinda am.
Was a rambunctious boys are
But I know how boys are.
And I'm trying to look at the
cost I'm just totally break it
down from a financial
perspective for taxpayers.
leave them to the person that
needs them.
The problem that I have is how
much is it going to cost us and
I know you won't have an answer
for that because I'm thinking of
tampons there I don't understand
Mr speaker gentle lady.
How we were able to survive in
those machines in there in case
you guys don't know there's
machines and they got a quarter
waste of taxpayer dollars if we
go ahead and move forward with
this.
Because of the end up in the
trash how does that help the tax
payers and how does that help
more sense is to leave the
machine in there for twenty five
cents a could put the point in
there get the product that they
need instead of us having to
end up in the toilet and plug in
the toilet.
To me that seems like more of a
burden than it is to help our
trans gender you that would need
those in there so I completely
getting a hold of it messing
around with them thrown in the
trash put and toil whatever
because boys a little boys but
that's sometimes what they do
and I understand education for
are bullies and they just are
bullies and that's our nature.
Mr speaker and gentleman I met a
few.
Mr speaker delay so I met quite
a few of them and there is no
see is no matter what
transgenders are not going to
have the ability to get these
Mentzer products that they will
need in the boys bathroom
because are going to be disposed
I sense it doesn't matter you
can give the child the five
cents but it's a way that
they're not accessible to
somebody throwing them away and
hindering our transgender use
from you begin in the first
gentlelady from Eddy and Lea
healed I knew.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
as many folks know I do girls
did you know Mr speaker gentle
lady that Salt Lake City of puts
Mr speaker and gentle lady with
that is news to me.
Mr speaker gentle lady and
actually the university of Utah.
Puts Mentzer products in all of
few other places that also put
menstrual products in both male
and female men's and women's
this bill is trying to do and in
a consequently the amendment is
sort of novel and transiting
other locations that put free
menstrual products in both men's
and women's restrooms
would like to go back to.
A point that has been brought up
several times and that is the
behavior of young men.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have
three sons and two daughters
excellent thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady as a parent
I certainly.
the legislature should
legislate.
Based on whether or not boys are
going to be middle school
juvenile boys and Mr speaker
gentle lady I'm sure that there
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
think that for.
Policy makers to.
by teachers school
administrators are parents is
not a productive way to
legislate
conversation that has been going
on
And so with with that I will not
be able to support the amendment
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
delay from and the only yield.
I feel that.
Thank you very much gentle lady
anyway the fact the base
legislation from keeping the
school board from placing these
products in the men's bathroom
should my amendment be adopted
there's nothing in it that would
prevent local school boards from
doing what they want to within
in this this matter.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so as
dollars as soon House Bill to
with respect to that.
Mr speaker and gentleman so the
I believe the original request
was for three million dollars
question you're asking Mr
speaker if.
The school with the schools
could apply for funding is that
the question Mr speaker Mr
speaker and gentle lady I just
These products in men's
bathrooms and the elementary
junior high and high school
level would that keep them from
accessing that one million
of the bill at and whatever
stated passes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I've
read house bill two of part of
the process there's no over
ridge inside a house bill to the
appreciate the conversation
thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from.
If.
There's been a promise in this
debate over your over your
amendment.
bathrooms the designated boys
bathrooms.
That that would.
Refuse access to free products.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady.
Being a nurses station.
Mr speaker and gentle lady no
there's not.
Some speaker gentle lady.
Part of COVID there used to be
like a water fountain there.
But Mr speaker and and gentle
lady what would keep.
right near the bathrooms in the
hallway for these drugs to be
dispensed for free Mr speaker
and gentle lady south with your
amendment.
girls bathrooms are indeed in
the same area or what's down the
hallway one when was down the
other.
My initial reaction Mr speaker
is that having a dispenser in
the hallway in plain view of
everybody passing by would
a little bit different that way
but if Mr speaker and gentleman
of understand you to say that
they could be available perhaps
in a more discreet location the
main hallway for anybody to use
Female potentially but
potentially needing to access
these drugs in the boys
bathroom.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if if
whether it's the boys taking
and.
Doing something else with them
are flushing them or throwing
them away or or whatever Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
A biological female.
Transgender.
From then going into the women's
If necessary to get the free
products.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I now understand your question a
little bit better you know there
would be nothing preventing a
Speaker and and and gentle lady
a lot of the schools.
That this has been a a bigger
controversy for them.
appropriate place.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
guess where I'm going with this.
Discussion is.
This is inappropriate and
mentored men's and women's
bathrooms Mr speaker and gentle
lady I'm just gonna speak honest
because.
Not speaking honest.
And we have an honest discussion
but the reality is this is not
widely accepted Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
I'm less concerned frankly
about.
bigger issue for me as was
discussed.
Couple of days ago on this
floor.
Is allowing biological men to go
into women's bathrooms.
Is.
Feminine hygiene products.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we've
had a number of bills since I've
entire discussion.
Census started here is no longer
unfortunately about the sponsors
and the and the experts who are
here on the other side of the
room.
And afraid to do it in the
public because this has become a
greater discussion as to whether
or not we're we're we're we're.
about this.
I'm more concerned about what
has been discussed I have
granddaughters.
I have heard the stories.
And so Mister speaker gently the
underlying bill.
Is good.
The underlying discussion is
Can be well some far far we
buying some things and we're not
buying other things Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
The reality is I think this
To make us accept something that
is not accepted right now
widely.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it's
meant to make people who have
The more it's pushed the March
resisted.
And so Mister speaker gently I
think your your amendment.
To biological human beings who
need them.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we've
just not been talking honestly
about this and some speaker
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from eighty eight please thank
you.
superintendents in the building
to the.
This this question of them.
The school was in junior high
boys.
Was senator answer.
Personally.
The lady that is exactly correct
they describe to me some of
these drugs would be used his
arm bands some of them would be
Of of appropriate genesis for
these products that would be
potential in this circumstance
so.
about local control.
It looks to me like the very
least.
Should allow drugs place.
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from.
Those two counties the down
south you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
In the amendment is because I
don't believe and I believe most
people would agree with me if we
access that I am disagreeing
with in the main bill Mr speaker
thank you thank you the speaker
thank you gentle lady because I
keep hearing things about
Hear things about except at.
Being things being acceptable I
hear things about boys
behaviors.
Would would you then.
of a certain age or just as.
Able to make poor decisions and
and have misconduct as boys Mr
speaker gentle lady.
earlier than we would expect who
just never really do maturity to
be we've all we've all seen
examples of that so I would like
to think that everybody is
Mr speaker generally been around
some young folks and some of
them just
Don't think very well in terms
of how they should behave Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
boys being boys so to speak and
and and other
Other thing said about voice
behavior and I just like to say
Mr speaker gentle lady that
We already have these accessible
things and women's girls
bathrooms what we're asking what
your amendment is saying is that
you don't want these the access
tells us that tampons and
sanitary pads do not need to be
in boys or men's bathrooms Mr
speaker.
Speaker gentle lady would you
comfortable more comfortable
using.
A bathroom associated to the
gender that they they
identify as and then need access
parts Representative
Organs where they would need
access to this these products Mr
speaker gentle lady.
That would identify or feel more
comfortable using a men's
bathroom.
Because it's a men's bathroom
and they get they get five B. as
being male or a lawyer however
they want to identify themselves
once again just state the access
to these products is available
at any drug store most grocery
stores and so forth not a not
really a problem to to get some
and I'd be able to use your
example of
a female who now identifies as
male goes into
a mail ballot for men's bathroom
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
that.
I don't think that there's and
there's an issue right now with
the regards privacy because
restaurants of it it.
Waiting to a gender.
We are we are debating here some
some issues that I don't think
And we're want to do this in a
holistic way.
Mr speaker gentle lady and I
think that we have these types
of debates on on our for and
front of us and if we want to be
wholistic Mr speaker gentle lady
then we.
We don't.
everybody can go to a store or
have money to to buy these
products or you feel comfortable
asking for these products.
So we go and we look for place
around whether the female male
whatever however they want to
identify themselves.
All kids can can have.
something that we that is no
longer a holistic of.
At debate about access to
menstrual products than we are
doing a disservice to.
conversation Mr speaker gentle
lady we're all humans the end of
the day.
Whether we have a we want to
identify ourselves that's
between us and.
If you want to use a mail of.
I just read your amendment here
Mr speaker.
Or.
And needs to have access to
drugs that they should have it
that's really what this debate
is about.
It's about equality it's about
The lady from earlier said J.
C..
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment we're at a motion to
table house floor amendment
number one to house bill one
What about close.
But those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Castellano.
Yes to table.
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
It is a global to forty one of
the affirmative twenty five in
the negative house floor
amendment number one to house
bill one thirty four as amended
I
I I just believe when I got home
and I I'm visiting with
constituents after the session
that they may ask me the
I did not Mr speaker thank you.
There's further debate the
generated from dollars
Representative or tests.
Thank you raise over the gentle
lady from Berlin yield please
who also reached out to me over
the summer we started this
conversation and I'm just I'm
impressed by the work that they
did.
And the advocacy that they've
Period poverty and what we can
do to help alleviate the shame
and stigma that comes from not
being able to access.
gentle lady from PED house
period poverty is an issue that
isn't just
experienced here in New Mexico.
It's experienced all over the
have a lot of access in the
United States.
But there are many pockets of
poverty especially here in New
them a an opportunity to
To test to do with that.
In manage their periods as
schools and the need is is
definitely great.
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
I think it's really important
nor at home and that this is
That this is the right thing to
do this is the right this is the
way that we can normalized
have similar legislation can you
tell me it.
Mr speaker gentle lady are there
other states that have that have
actually support of the females
in their communities by
providing of.
Of these products.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
this instance were asking of
that.
The that the community in the
state of New Mexico.
Recognize that there's there's
them.
By the appropriating the money
that's necessary to do this
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally and and all all and
with this which is that when
who were so excited about this
school nurses
school directors and teachers
all you know for clamoring to
take some home and stock up on
that they wouldn't have to worry
about hygiene they wouldn't have
to worry about us us a school
nurse or asking someone you know
of to to give them these
products it would lower the
or June and have been pushing
through this long thank you
don't stop we need you we need
your voices here and probably
Mr speaker.
And I hope everybody can hear
because I was having trouble
south.
That County down south that
County the best County down
south okay.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
They came just got to the point.
The explained why the necessity
was there and I kid it girls you
being put in boys bathrooms in
some of the reasons you heard
here on the house floor to nine.
Mr speaker before we started
passionate and what they
believed in and she asked if I
was still going to support this
and I ask her was that
particular part of it taken out
For that reason I cannot support
the bill as it stands right now.
Mr speaker.
Gentle lady.
I have presented in two
committees prior to the floor Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
No ma'am what I'm asking have
you ever can read this bill
before the session.
Mr speaker house bill one
seventy nine in two thousand
nineteen the new material was
gross receipts and governmental
There was also one of the bill
one nineteen.
For feminine hygiene products by
a different sponsor and in that
products all in the same year.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
gives me the reason to believe
agree with that last statement I
just made yes I do Mr speaker
gentle lady.
So Mister speaker you agreeing
with me on the free female
support free menstrual products.
Mr speaker.
Biologically I have never known
of a man to have a period.
And so I guess so but I need to
know is.
If this was a necessity would
Mr speaker gentle lady there
were several men who were trans
gender that testified in support
of this.
That's a scientific fact in your
consent there and argue with me
all day biologically a man does
not have a period.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
have been surgically changed to
do so biologically no they
cannot Mr speaker and gentle
lady in the particular bill
bathroom gender neutral
bathrooms and at least once then
met men's bathrooms in every
every public elementary school
Mr speaker is that basically the
context of your bill yes it is
transaction person be able to
obtain feminine products for
their use in that particular
setting.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Common sense does prevail in its
to be inclusive.
would of for those people that
opportunity to be able to have
access to those drugs so
evidently common sense isn't as
common as I really thought it
Broader and voted down.
Yes girls complain ugly tricks
to but I don't see us offering
on their heads like I don't know
a face mask Mr speaker if we're
gonna get down in the dark about
this there's all sorts of things
that girls can do regarding boys
drugs inflation down the
comments just to plug them up Mr
speaker they can come out of
their we're an impressive for
his they can put him on their
elbows their knees they can come
saying that all boys are this
way because girls can be just
the same way Mr speaker.
But a lot of boys are not
educated to be gentleman like
most of our men here are in this
equally as honoree as the next
Mr speaker your bill's does
state that these products will
go when the women's bathrooms.
There's further debate the
The.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield yes Mr speaker
I'll yield to the gentle lady on
my right from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
A person is over the lifetime of
having a period for
menstruating.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it's
about ten thousand dollars over
here.
I could go on chocolate it's
more like twenty thousand.
Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentle lady
absolutely there are many many
young women still using rags and
sanitary napkin or a tampon
unfortunately the tuition to go
to school they they miss a lot
of school which is another
reason that I brought this bill
able to attend school because of
this shame that they have.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
are there also health concerns
associated with not having
had toxic shock syndrome because
of the fact that they've worn a
tampon for too long there are a
variety of other issues that
Tampon and pad dispensers have a
credit card.
Payment option.
Mr speaker gentle lady I suppose
in time the containers that we
are advocating for would be
simply be
making those products
accessible.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
You know we ought we had carried
cash or wrote checks back in the
day but now
Mr speaker gentle lady very few
that you can put in the tampon
dispenser so.
I'm just wondering Mr speaker
gentle lady if that sort of
limits accessibility if you have
to pay for.
cash it probably by the product
the dilemma is they don't have
that access.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
I just want to.
women and girls and I think you
know thinking about the
elementary school
and that we are making sure that
menstrual products are available
menstrual cycles earlier you
know some girls seven eight nine
so having them accessible in
elementary school middle school
and high school is critically
important.
legislation and your expert
witnesses for their diligence
and hard work advocating for
this piece of legislation thank
you.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from violence
Representative me about more
you.
are you an educator or were you.
I taught school for twenty four
years Mr speaker gentle lady.
Excellent Mr Mister speaker
maybe high school.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
assume that there are at least
four or five.
already puts a feminine products
in our bathrooms which is
wonderful
well I I I am one that has great
is coming down the pike and I've
seen it and and money but
but I also have seen the need
my worry about what these boys
might do.
One more question Mr speaker or
there is also you you what you
were saying you would like the
ones that are free but there are
some that are token based that
could possibly be put in these
enters yes Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady there's what I've seen I'm
just going to go in and and
maybe I'll indulge me in this
these girls go through I
personally have probably a
handful of female students that
are homeless.
they don't come to school.
Because they don't have access
to it.
They don't they and and maybe
they're embarrassed.
where it's at and if they need
it they don't have to come and
ask me they go get it period.
Because I also understand that I
have several students that are
mortified.
believe me I hear all the
comments of we all had to deal
with it yeah but if we have the
means why not.
These are kids these are kids.
Well I'm not with the I think
this bill really is not asking
me and bless high school there
is a lot that don't come from a
sport of household.
So.
My question.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr speaker.
of thought this and
And so I'm gonna I'm gonna talk
about a couple things here.
As an old school as about four
foot tall until I went into the
ninth grade.
And I was about a shy is a come.
And if a woman walked into my
restroom a boy's restroom as the
mid school or I would have.
there like me growing up.
All I can tell you Mr speaker
and gentleman we all have to
have compassion try to be a lot
But I also know there's young
men out there that are just like
me every day.
And and my question is what do
we do for them.
Using it as a way to demeanor
her women young boys as many of
the speaker stated don't know
compassionate less shallow less
impulsive.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
talking about young men young
men being shallow on for this.
When this individual comes into
the boy's restroom to get a
tampon.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
could tell them all we can do is
ask our parents to try to
of tier kids not to be gender
shaming.
woman that's one and that's what
I'm saying here
I'll go on Mister speaker.
I come from a part of the state
that needs this desperately
and that's how we talk our
daughters and that's what we
taught our daughters how
important this is
Senator a little bit about you
and I think it's great thing is
generally two bathrooms in the
women's bathroom.
Speaker gentle lady to let
funding comes to close July
The school district takes over
at that point in time does this
funding ever and and and do our
school districts to take over
this funding at some point in
time.
are school districts will never
have to absorb this this is what
you're telling me.
Is speaker and gentleman based
on the information and the F. I.
thank you so we're gonna start
this program and we should have
enough to finish it what if we
don't have enough to finish it
was going to fund this Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Okay the same thing the cars
with with
Toilet paper and then the other
products we we have to supply
notification that we're asking
them to do this I'm all for it
but let's don't give an unfunded
mandate.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
Should be more than we
anticipated which we don't think
it will be.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I don't know what school
district you guys come from my
Conditionally thank you I that I
have
hold it is my sincere hope that
we never have to come back to
this body in state guess what we
Bernalillo towards our percent
of lord thank you with the Mr
speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo county sorry yes
thank you.
Okay I'm gonna be really serious
being left out in the boys
bathroom.
I'm sincerely ward from the
bottom of my heart.
That a transgender Gen
education but I'm looking I just
went through a list of kids that
are bullied to death and there
are hundreds of them the ability
to death.
We were able to get Mentzer
drugs for minors our friend or
other resources.
I'm trying to think in this with
how do we go back to square one
with this issue of Mr products
being in a boy's bathroom and I
I look at a nurse our counselor
or somebody because when I'm
looking at if all those products
are on.
And this use is a transgender
Kids I'm discussing general will
be kids.
They're going to do stupid
things with these things they're
going to take a Kotex appeal and
often the kids going to sit down
is gonna be stuck to the by
give them access what I'm saying
is give them a safe way to get
them.
Because just leaving them out
and into the trash from the
toilet or stuff to someone's
Does not solve the problem if
the trans gender use going there
and they're not there.
And Furthermore my generation we
were able to get them.
they're not being thrown away so
that's the first issue I have in
all honesty that somebody can
not that needs and cannot have
access because they're being
thrown away I'm not saying
and gentle lady if let's just
say boys are throwing them away
everyday how much exercise going
to talk cost taxpayers to pay
Mr speaker deli and all honesty
and from my heart what I'm
saying is don't leave those out
for boys to play with stick it
to get it from a nursing get it
took a whatever it is instead of
just handing them out and not
costing the taxpayers money and
not further humiliating our our
Gentle lady to close yes Mr
speaker thank you for the debate
and see and what I'd like to do
is say that
Four I mean what it might for a
tooth one thirty four I have my
new numbers backward as amended
Mr chair we are on final passage
of house bill one thirty four as
Yes Representative Castellano
votes yes Representative Ferrary
yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
are you ready and item number
thirty seven.
Given to that point that the
record reflect that elections
Thank you Mr.
House Bill four four nine of
just a quick title on it is
revising eligibility for
transition act which was passed
in twenty nineteen and
communities throughout funds to
help communities after power
plant closes.
Westmoreland money improvement
in Mexico was the first close
are covered by the act.
Workforce motion department is
in charge of the displace
that limits it to workers who
have been laid off in the past
year.
This is important because there
were layoffs as early as twenty
has been before term committees.
US commerce and economic
development and also the house
appropriations and finance
mark Pocan and also my other of
colleagues from San Juan County
are also my co sponsors.
For questions and if you don't
have any hard questions yes
Michael Sanchez.
With that we stand for questions
you.
Gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman
I think it's important for the
transition act is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker in the gentleman yes
that's correct.
And the speaker and gentleman
the money is that's sitting
there currently.
management was because of the
people wanted a portion of it
and it went to medication for a
few years.
that coal mine and that power
plant and these funds were
supposed to be from the very
beginning set aside for the
Mr speaker and gentleman that
there have been.
Layoffs I think you mentioned
you say as far back as twenty
twenty.
the the first layoffs was thirty
two people due to the announced
shutdown of San Juan generating
station on November the second
Much my friends that work there
I had to to provide for their
family have had to travel and
take jobs other places and
the speaker and gentleman
The I think the remaining number
I think there's quite maybe
thirty or forty.
Mr speaker and gentleman yester.
The
people at the power plant or the
ones that are doing the
reclamation work and the some of
Learn different things some of
those were.
Workers who receive the
severance or were.
From significant financial
hire or they could pay for
expenses like childcare so that
was a big blow to a lot of our
exact purposes fund was created
Mr speaker and gentleman I
notice you have an emergency
clause on there
maybe you could explain to the
Our isn't of.
Emergency clause is as I
mentioned some of the workers
These folks have little access
to technology so file a bunch of
people were to get assistance is
and relatives is asked to come
when we fall there unemployment
insurance would be like seventy
five eighty miles one way.
speaker and gentleman there have
been people who have been a
potentially unemployed since
twenty twenty already and if we
don't get the emergency clause
on this benefit is that correct
Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman just
have emergency clause we would
funds up to the people that are
rightfully do them.
Mr speaker and gentleman essere
expert is is there she looks
refreshed
Mr speaker gentle on the
workforce solution Department is
planning on being able to
disperse these funds in a way
the future who will be in need
of these benefits when their
employment comes to an end.
Okay Mister speaker and
gentleman as required by the ETA
workforce solutions developed a
conducting multiple rapid
response sessions for their
staff one on one with workers at
the end of the shift to talk
through benefits and training
unemployment insurance claims
that were
made up
unemployment insurance more
accessible they also created the
using the internet funds the
target amount for the first
round is twenty thousand dollars
per worker but we don't know the
I there was a a kind of a range
of the number of employees that
we think will that that this
that would be able to qualify
for this or take advantage of
this
Mr chairman of.
According to the interviews of
workman's of unemployment
insurance.
Thank you Mr speaker and and and
gentleman I just like to say
thank you to the secretary I've
been very very good to work with
in the hands of the of the
workers who quite frankly need
them desperately thank you Mr
speaker.
As the debate the gentleman from
Chavis and he noted a
German Mr speaker I rise only
the support your bill.
I
am a firm believer that what we
did in.
Thousand over a thousand New
Mexicans our work.
The burden and
and we have caused our grid to
be unstable and require probably
hundreds of million dollars of
you're having trouble getting
emergency clause and well for me
and the I think we ought to
belly up and help them so thank
you gentleman thank you Mr
speaker is for the debate the
Thank you Mr speaker
Gentleman I'm gonna vote for
this for two reasons number one
I'm a state representative and I
here if I could the field of in
those me Mr speaker I call this
the thirty thousand foot vote.
What we do here.
where the rubber meets the road
is when you're the mayor of the
I am all in on this one I am
ashamed of it is taken is three
years to get the money to.
California working now and if we
can get them back and get their
talents back in our community
and our state will be better for
thank you Mr speaker thank you
seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close.
forty nine we had an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
Was about to close.
But those members without a
recorded vote.
Castellano.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
The vote is not closed yet we
can allow one more member to
cast your vote.
Okay we have one of their one of
the Vona to.
It is now so.
He
zero in the negative house bill
four forty nine it with members
across as we because this house
should lady from McKinley are
you ready and item number thirty
six I am Mr speaker can you get
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentle lady
to explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker and and good evening
everyone basically what this
bill does is creates the
you may know The New Mexico DOT
has a five year planning process
for all major projects and we
just heard in the transportation
at this time with that Mr
speaker I would stand for
questions see no debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker thank you for that
riveting debate members I now
house transportation public
works and government permits
Committee substitute for House
Bill for twenty eight the vote
The rules about to close.
The clerk to call those members
of the recorded vote
yes representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson votes yes
vote is now closed level of
sixty four in the affirmative
zero in the negative house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
substitute for house bill four
Yes Mr speaker can you give me
to the point that the record
reflect that election is there
for placing House Bill three
seventy seven asked twice
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
from the New Mexico broadcasters
and I have the secretary just
try or from the department of
tourism.
So House Bill three seventy
leads individual agencies with
the task of planning executing
and measuring the success of
necessary marketing initiatives
without the expertise or
infrastructure to make them
successful.
As a non mandatory for other
departments within the state to
support the program goals of
executive branch agencies to
provide guidance and support and
strategy.
amendment so I move Amendment
house floor amendment number one
to house bill three seventy
seven.
Gentleman what is a two to five
number at the bottom two two
explain the amendment.
Exactly one minute and thirty
five seconds Mr speaker Sir I'm
timing it.
Of course is going to be me Mr
speaker.
Everybody in the amendment.
Mr speaker this ammendment on
page two line thirteen after
programs inserts has requested
to just further show that this
Yes Sir this is a friendly
amendment well hazard debate on
the amendment.
Is there objection to adopting
the amendment.
I do want to know one thing in
the original bill there was a
giant appropriation of fifty
million dollars and that was
removed in commerce.
I now move house bill three
seventy seven as three times
amended do now pass.
Was about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
The vote is now closed with a
vote of sixty three in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house bill three seventy seven
is thrice amended has duly
that election is Sir for placing
House before eleven of final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
and in some of take a little
more time.
There was seem to be some
concern about the longevity of
the amendment so I'm going to
spend a little time on the bill
explain is the legislative
sunset review committee.
Are the ones that put the point
of these changes together.
Certainly over terms out of here
that you've seen in other
legislation in other words we
is at the very end of the bill.
On the last.
One we change the.
On page twenty seven.
to use force support all of that
money Mr speaker comes from the
fund itself.
Mr speaker a.
information this amendment was
passed out on Saturday it was
quite lengthy
the amendment is online and get
the two to five number here in
front of me and matches the one
you if you need to
Gilman do you want to formally
move your amendment.
matches what our chief clerk us
and it is on the website for all
the members to see and for
members of the public to to look
professional engineers and
surveyors Act.
one thing that's never been
addressed is from a business
corporation standpoint with
the company here to pull
surveyor and engineer from one
of their other subsidiaries and
work and what.
The subsidiary here in New
McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentleman this gentleman yield.
Gladly you
Mr speaker German yes it.
So we were doing surveyors we're
dealing with the engineers in
both of them are allowed to
operate.
And could you just service going
to be what that means focusing
probably unlawfully operated.
Is as a corporate entity and
we're doing work within the
property limits you do not have
to have a license either from an
engineering or from a survey and
To to allow cross subsidiary
work within a corporation.
Mr speaker gentleman what this
what is a lawfully operated
property.
its affiliates for a leased
property.
Mr speaker gentleman we have
owned we have leased and we have
a third term offered costly
Mr speaker gentleman I the
business license in the state of
New Mexico and I don't lawfully
operate the property.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
These are the words of the board
chose to put on there lawfully
operated by the business entity
or the affiliate because that is
The business.
Could be the path business it
could be one of the subsidiary
businesses.
definition for affiliated
business entity.
No
would be in our statutes for
more else's not within the terms
of the bill.
Mr speaker gentleman could you
that would be happy to use that
information but
unless we want to pause debate
and you and I go down and start
looking to read books I'm not
So Mister speaker dumbing you
don't know what an affiliate
business entity means in this
bill.
Gentleman I cannot give you.
No I can tell you one affiliated
businesses.
As a parent company you can have
several different businesses
doing business as.
You can have you can create
Mr speaker German is a
to will seize it have some
common owners are they
affiliated businesses.
own they'll see maybe all that.
Some of those.
Ten percent one LC maybe they
own twenty percent of another or
those affiliated businesses.
If they are not Mr speaker and
gentleman tied to the secretary
of state in their business that
way that I would say no.
Mr speaker gentleman can you
point me to the language.
Mr speaker gentleman to provide
me with.
Within off premises easements
with that language refers to.
On multiple occasions you may
have a pipeline and power line
streambed whatever it is that
connects or leave a property
Mr speaker gentleman does that
the State Land Office seasons.
Well then no it could be through
a private landowners well.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
this be
Hi Whizzer roads.
Gentleman that would require the
Mr speaker gentleman is the
Business owns the highway.
this would be an easement that
was purchased either from a
private owner from a business
from a public entity that gives
that a corporation that business
Mr speaker gentleman it it says
the.
Engaging in work in these are
purposes easements
Gentleman talking about the line
under section eleven point as
work with in a public space.
The first partial paragraph on
page two of your amendment.
the the engineer when the
engineers working within an off
premises easement.
That does constitute engineering
The section that you're reading
from says performance of I'm
reading the one on serving we
can read the ones on engineering
as well.
within offsite easements
constitutes engineering services
to the to the public and is not
subject to the engineering and
survey practice that is up to is
Gentleman I'm of the.
Section six item be.
Last.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
know what's online that.
Gentleman for the record as you
were reading yourself Hey did
not match what so what I'm
reading directly from it or
maybe paraphrasing but whatever
you paraphrasing did not match
what what we were reading.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
reading process.
performance of engineering
public works projects pursuant
to section sixty one dash twenty
three to twenty six and M. S. A.
for with an off premises
easements.
I said offsite yes current off
premise of these months
constitute engineering services
Mr speaker and gentleman are you
at can you please repeat your
question one more time so I know
exactly what you're asking.
So Mister speaker Jim I believe
You read words to construct
my my question is isn't isn't
all of this practice in fact
subject to that act which is
subject to different
to that is no.
Mr speaker and gentleman
corporations have the ability to
bring surveyors and engineers
that were are within their
for by the by this ammendment.
Offsite easements.
practices and is subject to the
act.
So Mister speaker down so trying
to understand the different
interests in land and it would
This is the chairman thank you
for that but we still know with
lawfully upper it is and we
don't know what in the Philly to
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
so much is there for the debate
on the amendment the gentleman
from Colfax whatever any of us
and we can and does
work with the professional
engineering and professional
surveyors to to put this
together.
Willing can you repeat your
question did you work with
I've been a PED for a twenty
plus years and work done under
this law and if you work with
them and they give you this
that's what I think this is a
good bill and I will be
supporting thank you Mr speaker.
Back to the builder is debate
the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
The June from you.
questions the difference between
the requirement for a license
is that all of that work remains
public is engineering services.
Most.
A licensed engineer is that your
understanding of this language.
any work held out his injury
work to the public.
Yes in the end of the language
Mr speaker thank you Jim there's
a gentleman from of the
representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman please yield.
The gentleman from Otero thank
bill extends the period of
licensure for professional
engineers and surveyors Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman the if
for these professional engineers
and surveyors for that period be
extended with your bill Mister
speaker gentleman from Lee.
that time frame whatsoever Mr
speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen and so the one
other question I had was
requirements for engineer
in terms of Mr speaker gentlemen
have you spoken to the folks at
Mexico state about their
concerns regarding this bill.
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman that that's all I had
for questions I appreciate you
for bringing this forward thank
you to you know for the debate
gentleman close.
to preserve button before we
close debate.
At this point we were to close
the bait for future reference
prior to the debate he said
that.
I just wanted to support the
bill Mr speaker.
That's great thank you.
The gentleman to close.
next time with that said Mr
speaker and body I do now.
requests that house bill four
eleven as amended do now pass
we're on final passage of house
Representative Castellano votes
yes Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes of course of course we would
have fifty six in the
from violence are you ready and
item number thirty.
Thank you Mr speaker given to
the point that the record
reflect that all action is there
for placing House Bill one
ninety nine as amended on final
supported also want to introduce
my thanks for witness Dr Gwen
Perea Warniment.
One ninety nine as amended is
the at risk which is going to
help production news units and
money to support our students
both academic and social
emotional needs.
very important and that one is
increases.
In more opportunity and funding
to support those programs
throughout the state.
And the final
some compaction issues this bill
is going to help to work and
responsibility factor forward
for instance in our school
leaders and basically to address
some of these we have as far as
that this is endorsed this
legislation and that come out
through the NM committees with
that Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
pass final passage of house bill
one ninety nine as amended the
vote is now open.
Those.
The clerk to call those members
with a recorded vote
Representative Castellano yes
The available please we have one
person the students record their
vote.
duly passed this house related
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker we go to that order
this is announcements and
Garcia was presented with the
lifetime achievement award at
the grants chamber of commerce
awards banquet this past weekend
congratulations gentlemen.
That means we get extra red is
actually trips.
Announcements committees.
Gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa.
The House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee will
announcements.
house bill three eighty four
I'm is unanimous consent that we
re refer that bill back to house
government it's house bill three
eighty four in conversations
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Thank you members thank you
gentle lady the house or Senate
races until ten thirty tomorrow
morning.
