Because close we have a quorum.
Father.
Thank you for your grace thank
you for your compassion thank
you for a chamber filled with
you've been through the as
And recognize good intent we
pray this in your name AUMENT.
Representative Joe as leaders in
the pledge of allegiance.
Still Representative said not to
Please on
the job lady from belly
Representative Chasey Mr speaker
I move about about order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
Thank you Mr speaker I'm honored
to to introduce a round of
guests here in just a minute but
Welcome to the house.
Mr speaker and to honor guess I
have to also share that might
a net but all of her siblings
were boxers.
That's amazing.
And last a little bit that bit
of background on myself and why
and I was so appreciative that I
did that but also Mr speaker
after I got out of you and then
I need to do something else and
through as part of their careers
and and their hobbies so Mister
speaker today let me introduce
first the chair of the athletic
spinosa.
No on this one whose
We will have the number of
certificates one for for Mr some
mon and others but we will only
Also we have members.
The representative for the
governor and secretary I believe
Fund correct of boards and
Mr speaker someone that I
consider it a dear friend and
Mr speaker can we have the
certificate for Johnny Tapia
read please absolutely totally
then click to read.
The house of representatives of
Whereas Johnny media loca Tapia
was an American professional
boxer who is known for his
incredible speed power and
tenacity in the rings and
whereas Johnny was born on
tragedy and we're as despite
these hardships Johnny found
solace in boxing and quickly
became one of the top prospects
in the sport and whereas as an
professional in nineteen eighty
eight and quickly established
himself as one of the best
fighters in the world winning
his first World Championship in
super bantamweight and
featherweight.
And whereas although Johnny was
known for his impressive skills
in the ring he was also known
for his wild and unpredictable
challenges defeat him and
whereas Johnny remained active
in boxing until his retirement
in twenty eleven and was
inducted to the into the
international boxing hall of
inspire and influence countless
fighters today.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico the
recognition be extended to the
generations to come signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe.
Mr speaker all of this dialogue
around boxing all the
certificates as a cause members
of the body today is boxers day
you'll indulge me another minute
I knew Johnny Tapia when he was
a very young boy I mentioned
earlier that I was the a kick
boxer and at the time that I was
an amateur kickboxer all the
trouble maker a kid who loved
basketball and that was Johnny
Tapia if you didn't know that
Tracy do now thank you Mr
speaker and Mr speaker we do
be recognized.
with USA boxing and also one of
my best friends in a sum up
there is it would you of the get
down here let's get to
recognize.
on the ward a recognition a gift
for the governor Mr Thomas if
you could show the body and and
everyone attendance what to have
for the governor.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for your kindness today thank
you and and gentleman Johnny
Tapia born and raised in wells
in trying the the success in the
struggle of our people in and
ultimately the resilience to to
to get ahead thank you gentlemen
sessions every day was boxing
days appreciate you.
This chamber gentleman we've at
least made within the minorities
Yankees of the late nineties and
I'll always remember that top
you Romero fight very iconic
member watching that with my
father and I know many many New
Mexicans it's one of those
Mr speaker I do have a couple of
guests in the gallery if you'd
be so kind as recognize them
certainly we have leader lanes
why if Nicole in the sun Kalau
sharing your dad with with
things legislature he is a stand
up guy and we really enjoy
working with them and I know
you'll make a big sacrifice for
him to be able to do what he
living proof because this ten is
an extractive mineral the sticky
portion is a petroleum product
this is living proof that you
can be serious about climate
Announcements again lady from
southern the federal census The.
Good morning Mr speaker I am so
pleased to introduce my shadows
a senior she is the student body
vice president for the class of
twenty twenty three welcome
reckless.
trees grow heritage academy she
is a Jack or gold dancer whose
goal is to take state with our
team this year and she strives
to be the top ten in her class
Many from the general prison
from Bernalillo Sandoval
Representative kits thank you Mr
speaker I would like to
recognize today in the audience
and also on the floor is of the
and recognize them for you.
Welcome to the house please rise
to be recognized.
Gentlelady did you find a list
to us.
Mr speaker we could indulge you
just want to let you know that
the Rio Rancho high school's
student council the just
finished organizing last fall
five hundred student volunteers
and they did the towards and
grounds keeping services for the
elderly and the disabled to over
seventy families they do this
The gentleman from.
Leave a Santa and the.
Thank you Mr speaker good
morning good morning members I I
with me the first is the leanest
Amala she is the student body
president for Rio Rancho high
school has been part of
associated students for four
years she's also the president
All this morning Mr speaker and
members we have Orlando Cargill
Orlando is currently a senior
that both seniors.
Class of two thousand twenty
three he's a part of the Rio
activities at the Rio Rancho
high schools you would please
help me welcome both of the
students thank you.
How's the gentleman from
invaluable can't training
from Calvary Christian academy
the civics class and of course
we have their their teachers
pastor and their chaperones I
Aster DM higher is on this side
over here from across point.
You know let's just started
yesterday Mr speaker and every
those Fridays service class is
Katie cannon actual stand.
The difference E.
Lacy blue.
And chaperones were also my
neighbors here on the wall JD
and Cindy Donovan.
civics class I mean your hands
on today but anytime we see I
see the youth in our in our
chamber Mr speaker I think it's
a wonderful thing thank you Mr
to the.
For the ground floor and
residents it's gonna generation
is a public state institution
located a Las Vegas New Mexico
approximately three thousand
students.
The mission in Mexico and
university is a public
comprehensive university serving
our local and global communities
our mission is to provide
profession professions within
diverse communities Mr speaker
and we got some guests on the
rostrum Mr speaker like to
This law.
so we can welcome is almost
figure yeah I'll staff faculty
students from New Mexico
highlands university place
resident recognize and welcome
house representatives.
the bottle openers and.
See the phones economic checking
Senator self.
Thank you Mr speaker will save
those for third reading
gentleman.
Bernalillo Representative
Garcia.
Speaker of the house because I
have two outstanding shadows for
them with beer and because a.
As the most because it is the
senior attending at the school
did you can I mean high school
level for the Jaguars my second.
Of the shadow of Senator.
she hopes estimates speaker to
study environmental law.
At the university of Arizona
where a lot of family members
that attended and graduated from
at these go ahead as we welcome
these two outstanding meetings.
Welcome to the house.
The deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
the onus is quite a second that
is must follow I would eat those
then at the school heritage high
school the mid amended Amanda
that the school heritage in me
they speak the I am very happy
today Mr speaker to.
rate and college right in the
state so I'm very proud of that
the school heritage with me
today I have I was a little bit
and I just.
and a younger sister she is a
member of the at the school
heritage student council and the
treasure for the class of twenty
twenty five and also co
president of the school's
And when I go to college I want
to study business management.
Whether Lopez interested in
soccer and in starting a
pursuing
applications to UNM UCLA.
NMSC you and Penn state please
me today and I love it because
they're women I have money's not
and this was a junior at the
school heritage she is vice
At this point in and I asked him
to write down what they planned
and what their goals were they
could be short term or long term
and but he says says at this
I might suggest you could do
both.
And
She will be there ceiling this
also at UNM she wants to pursue
please welcome money suffered
non this.
Welcome to the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Italy you'll see
one of McKinley supporters on
next to me today the first one
of the
old agency chooses to the
crystal heritage high school
school shoes also we got the
member dance team jaguar gold
one of the two top teams in the
state Mr speaker first of class
to going to college at UNM.
Discussion current events Mr
speaker.
What was.
The gentleman speakers do
juniors CDC bilingual seal she
passed would indicators of New
Mexico and major in biology
under pre med thank you Mr
in the houses but here it is the
best high school in the state as
I have evidence as I teach a lot
of the students are now
engineering I need a little bias
volunteerism of the National
Honor Society and always looks
for a way to help an impact for
community so welcome Caitlyn we
have not seen the film then this
from a club member of matcha.
Also a member of the math club
peer tutoring and National Honor
Society she plans to attend the
university of Chicago on a full
ride scholarship and will major
then down here to to Santa Fe
into the capital and they are up
in the gallery we have the
activities team from at this go
head to check out of me Jessica
McInnis anybody I come that idea
The gentleman from the rules and
Lincoln representative Vincent.
You Mr speaker I miss my
opportunity while ago and I hope
she's listen Johnny tabi was
train and some of us would go in
hell and train with them and as
of as a former boxer myself in
high school of the really Walker
his wife.
And the statement that I wanted
to make is behind every great
man is a way better woman and
Mrs Tapia is a great woman and
the right to work across and
work with my colleagues over
here on the left and now that I
know the gentleman from
Bernalillo and I have something
The folks from Bernalillo in
this chamber who are Hugh well
maybe three if I kill myself or
huge boxing fan so we'll have to
two shadows with me today both
juniors from another amazing
high school Rio Rancho high
school here in New Mexico.
Representative and a member of
the revenants dance team.
Welcome to the house.
Society and in the this spans
she's also the president of
Asian student union and and and
and and A. as C. E. state
We have I have with me today
three outstanding saddles the
first is coming.
community she also serves as
secretary of the Spanish
National Honor Society and Mr
speaker we are growing our own
nursing.
Individuals and professions in
our state of New.
class secretary and she is the
president of the black student
alliance see is involved in many
sports including chair track and
university of New Mexico and
she's going to carry out her
medical duties as an officer in
my third shadow is jade Chavis
she is a senior at a disco
heritage soon is the senior
class treasurer and she enjoys
wrestling and like my daughter
Enjoy is been engaged in
employment losses as senior and
and keeping her grades high wind
saying graduates from high
school see is going into the Air
To the familiar Representative
Thomas thank you Mr speaker I
also have the honor of having
two shadows from a three school
heritage academy
Brooklyn's strives to graduate
and attend college please
welcome Brooklyn's long.
week member of the Spanish
National Honor Society and avid
student for six years he's
currently working towards is
bilingual CEO and plans to head
Representative corona.
Thank you Mr speaker one is yes
the manager was to present that
is at three space on us me as
is Garcia junior in our
these great dishes that she's a
glass secretary she's also
including the Spanish National
I I attendance.
That is right yes
Compare please.
the class of twenty twenty five
I'm like and I each is also
pursuing care bilingual seal and
she wants to become a
psychologist.
I hope you're coming limit us to
and and greeted us with an
estimate of these great this
shock I mean she's a freshman
Four point zero she has taking
advanced classes for math for
you adding this useful for
working her way up to her
better dancer in very that
that's team brought home the
title of our limit please for
last but back to the group will
come here.
Thank you Mr speaker I have to
find.
Finally dressed I will also add
young man from Rio Rancho high
go rams and I just say that it's
appropriate because political is
Site per se print is a member of
the associated students of Rio
Rancho high school he is a
member of key club and Asian
students you.
He is also on the National Honor
What was in my second year and
then here is Jacob Cummings
Jacob is a member of the
As B. and does he corrected me.
Properly for college Jacob is
going to the American musical
and dramatic academy in Los
Garrett thank you Mr speaker I
would like to introduce my two
shadows today the first one
please stand up it's it's only
mollis she comes to us all the
council she does chair she plays
tennis for Rio Rancho high
school she still exploring your
future but she's wary New
is autumn Cruz she's a senior at
Rio Rancho high school who's
been a member of the associated
students of governing group for
four years she is an American
the American Sign Language club
president her future plans are
to pursue emergency services and
paramedicine and before she sits
down I'm going to have her greet
The lady from those
Representative were to this
thank you Mr speaker at today is
climate justice state and you
global warming express use
climate advocates are all will
be speaking to you about climate
action our state is on is that
as on the front lines of the
climate crisis with fires
decarbonise and do it in a way
that protects our communities
and our workers we can be that
state that is leading the way on
your desk you will see some
and there they they want you to
understand all the ways in which
climate change impacts New
Mexico products including green
Chiles and these cans will be
rally and there's lunch you'll
also see an awesome insulation
by Daniel Richman the last green
chili on earth circa twenty
fifty so please go out there and
get a free lunch and bring your
rise in would like to introduce
my guest shadows for the day I
have today Madison fought tech
dance team the dance team
recently went to nationals and
took home the title of Levin in
the nation for hip hop.
She is ranked number one in her
class and she strives to be the
Mr speaker today also have Paris
stated she is a senior editor
school heritage academy she's a
senior class sergeant at arms
health therapists specialist she
also wants to travel the world
and she wants to make it all the
Mr speaker finally we have with
us from atrisk heritage academy
our activities director
extraordinaire Jessica Martinez
students here today and look
forward to doing more with them
and and the engagement that she
has brought to
high school has been incredible
students our future of New
Mexico so I want to thank her
for everything that she
contributed to all of our
educators who contribute to our
future thank you Mr speaker
was committee wonderful gifts I
have Nicole labels of all of
New Britain make Donald who is
heard it can cause Mexico.
ladies and gentleman this.
We'll see all of the calls dogs
and anybody that wants to go
visit is welcome to visit and
tour the facility and the this
that the animals they love
some day thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen local.
In the world wondering red chili
chips.
Mr chairman.
Mr speaker I rise point of
personal privilege please state
your point gentle lady Mr
speaker in the past couple of
letters I do appreciate this
body standing in opposition to
this.
Negligent use of firearms in
that particular area and the
Mexico cattle growers
association.
Tried.
To no avail.
They put in an application for a
by judge James Browning denied
that application.
So starting.
I think today and tomorrow the
US Forest Service.
his memorandum opinion and order
judge Browning found that
preventing the operation would
be of first of public interest.
Coming their nose that is to get
this done.
Judge brown and also dean diss
strays which our cattle that are
This is open the door for the US
Forest Service openly start
killing feral horses.
I am outraged that this is
happening there are more humane
means of being able to move
these strays from that
Report themselves to be special
interest group some animal
protection where they are
standing on this issues will
cause Mister speaker whenever
you are shooting something from
there and suffer until they are
dead and then consumed by the
scavengers in the area Mr
speaker thank you very much
back to work and inning their
session happily my husband I
were welcoming and my youngest
for welcoming our little C.
amount of money was a doctor at
to our lives and today is her
leave facility that is you know
one of the ECECD programs we
have our state other having
little birthday party for her
and I can happy to show anybody
photos that wants to see photos
because they're very adorable
someone right behind her and two
buckets you heard her orders are
because she sold close to words
she doors my husband and I'm
very lucky to be heard on the
thank you the gentle lady does.
Happy birthday to you.
The tune you.
Thank you Mr speaker I was a
little more so early so quickly
let me just announce that there
will be professional fights at
the Santa Ana star center
speaker here the roundhouse they
are in room three eighteen the
started a few minutes at twelve
thirty Mr speaker thank you the
house was in recess of co chair
just.
Serrato reminded me that today
is my son's birthday my son with
autism that I talk about all the
time that Robbins Robbins cousin
was a music therapist for his
Have the bird the two do you.
little while ago that one of his
guests came out that Neil great
great great grandfather and I
don't know if she's still in the
chamber but her great great
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
amended has been taking it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentle lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house bill one ninety one is a
childhood trust fund
and with that Mr speaker I will
stand for questions there is
debate the gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
funding for early childhood
recent years and I'm just
wondering for the agency has the
capability to effectively and
fact as the house appropriations
and finance committee and
legislative finance committee
thoroughly discussed throughout
the interim and
An amount that can be utilized
effectively for expanding early
childhood education here in New
Mexico.
Speaker gentle lady can you
one ninety one increases the
disbursement for fiscal year
twenty four to one hundred and
twenty five million dollars for
this coming fiscal year and the
introduce my expert witnesses.
I have with me Kelly client and
John Courtney both us staff
members with LFC.
you gentlemen so to continue
with what this one hundred and
twenty five million dollars will
fund it will provide funding for
school based
childhood services infant mental
health home visiting
marketing.
family success lab early
Speaker gentle lady to have an
estimate of the number of
children that are participating
in these programs.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen my expert provides
me with
My expert provides me with the
K..
Thank.
And about three to four thousand
in home visiting.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen those numbers are
actually not unduplicated.
previously cited some of the
children maybe in multiple
programs so that those numbers
are not unduplicated.
of the funding per participant
in these programs over the last
five years.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
sorry could you repeat that
starting with five years ago and
working up toward we are now.
Mr speaker and gentleman in the
number of participants.
nineteen we had three hundred
and twelve million of the next
year which is fiscal year twenty
Fiscal year twenty two is five
hundred and four point two
million fiscal year twenty three
is five hundred and eighty two
point three million.
Legislation or since prince of
legislation in addition to.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
this one hundred twenty five
twenty five million dollars from
the general fund for those
amounts that I decided we will
be using a hundred and twenty
five million dollars from the
total dollar volume being
directed toward to CENIC to the
to stand including this one
hundred and twenty five million.
Jan language in terms of math
for me seven hundred forty
million divided by forty
thousand participants please.
that's actually not a good
calculation to make because
there are other pieces of the
puzzle that go into that seven
hundred and thirty million
dollars it's just it's.
Madam.
The lady with those other
factors encourage the dollars to
gentleman could you rephrase the
question for me.
The speaker.
Senator number of other factors
What those other factors Benny
with that increase the number of
dollars to increase the number
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen so the numbers
that I cited earlier the
children in childcare pre K. and
Mr speaker and gentleman did you
want me to elaborate on other
programs offered so that there's
a more comprehensive picture of
All of the children
participating in all of the
programs.
And
I'm not sure that we can get the
towards each child and hi.
Concerns local concerns would
per program.
And even within the programs.
So if the speaker gentle lady
can you give me an average.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
My expert has advised me that
And the average cost of a three
year old in pre K. could be
about eight thousand.
Mr speaker for tech seven
child.
And stretch very very important
above the numbers that you just
gentlemen in the case of one
child for instance.
that child could be going to pre
K. during the day but before and
after pre K. they could be
a home visiting program.
Speaker gentle.
brown.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo please
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I will
Thank you I will yield to the
gentle lady from Eddy and Lea I
appreciate that so much thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady so
better and so Mr speaker and ask
I move house floor amendment
number one to house the one
ninety one as amended.
two two five six two eight point
one thank you deleted as would
have it is being passed out by
the sergeant at arms it is in
the process of getting online.
finished passing amendment what
are you explain it.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I am looking at a chart
of produced by the on
legislative finance committee
ago the New Mexico legislature
appropriated three hundred
million dollars to establish a
funding for this trust fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
hundred million dollar starter
Fund will now go because of some
of the way this is structured
will have almost five point four
nine point two billion and then
just skip over to twenty twenty
seven the part of the forecast
is that fund will be worth ten
billion dollars.
balances in the early childhood
Trust Fund.
And what would happen is we
would Task the legislative
finance committee with taking a
finance committee and also to
the Senate finance committee and
Mr speaker gentle lady part of
what I mean I'm delighted this
trending and we we know that
the.
the trust fund balance is
actually going to be almost
double what our state reserves
produce to the committees and
then Mr speaker gentle lady to
say that.
Having an annual review with
recommendations from LFC would
strictly informational but a
great value Mr speaker gentle
lady I stand for questions.
The lady is is a friendly
amendment.
friendly amendment but I would
like to explain precisely why.
first regarding the first part
of the amendment.
of for the proposed amendment I
think it's a wonderful concept
but I actually feel it would be
more appropriate as a house
memorial to do that so that it's
you.
Gladly do I yield thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
thank you for bringing this
forward Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Diana so there are several
revenue streams that flow into
this trust fund of course there
was the beginning balance which
the excess oil and gas school
tax fund so Mister speaker
gentleman as I pointed out in
some previous discussions the
growth from three hundred
million.
this trust fund is fed by these
additional sources of revenue
which.
Mr speaker gentleman have been
absolutely impressive lately due
to oil and gas activity in New
Mexico thank you Mr speaker
access about leave a certain
five year rolling average if we
meet a certain threshold what's
that what's one of those
thresholds Mr speaker gentle
lady.
just a as a reminder to the body
Mr speaker gentle lady we have
to keep twenty five percent
reserve Mr speaker gentle lady
and then there's an excess above
at their because we kept our
reserves higher than that we're
now at thirty percent Mr speaker
and gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady
gentle lady.
us a number but to actually make
some recommendations based on
their professional experience
this is this fund it I believe
in my opinion Mr speaker let it
the legislature has the ability
to appropriate and Mr speaker
gentleman the trust fund does
have a hands off provision
revenue options of expects been
expended and we're basically in
a constitutional crisis position
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I I certainly
part of all of our HSC
presentations this has been
presented by LFC Mr speaker
gentle lady information that
that that much of what we're
legislation that the gentle lady
from Bernalillo caring did that
begin as an LFC endorsed bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman as far
hear recommendations going
forward especially as this trust
fund gets to be extremely large
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I appreciate that Mr
the projections along with the
executive the consensus revenue
estimating group they're the
source of those estimates and Mr
ninety one that we have today I
do think Mr speaker gentle lady
the sort of year round LFC
analysis engagement and
recommendation process is
closely or are already here
strictly only to these
recommendations any other
recommendations would be
disallowed Mr speaker gentle
lady is this
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
actually don't agree with that
simply because I think this
gives LESC more latitude to
really work on on in this
subject area and not just
maybe there are some other needs
the legislature would agree need
to be addressed through a fund
that's for the it's just it's
way over what what is really
needed for that the fund will
lady after sort of agreeing that
LESC is the source of the
analysis and Mr speaker gentle
lady the LFC was the source of
the recommendation for
essentially moving up our
to me there are two perhaps
three areas Mr speaker gentle
lady that we would be riding
into statute with adoption of
future years read to cut off all
other areas of recommendations
I'm sure that's not the intent I
know that's not the intent of Mr
speaker gentle lady what we have
I think now is working I
additional funds but this would
Mr speaker gentle lady limit the
recommendations
and and I don't think Mr speaker
gentle lady that that that not
Deleted from some Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment right where to table a
motion to house floor amendment
number one to house bill one
eighty one is amended.
The lady from any in the back to
thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate the time.
There's a gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Mr speaker yes I would yield to
the gentleman from Lee.
that we're just going to because
of what we have a listening on
the phone right now we're gonna
move up by here with the
distribution.
thank you gentlemen what we're
actually doing is because when
the fund was set up the amount
for distribution was based on
this year we are bringing it
more in line with where it
should be.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
Mr speaker and gentleman next
year would be about one fifty
three.
Thank you.
The first this department was
funded was in twenty twenty at
had a budget of a hundred and
sixty eight point four million
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
an increase of ninety six point
three percent.
That now Mr speaker and gentle
agency budget.
Out of thirty one.
Before I go any further can you
for early childhood.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Your question is what is the
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen give us just one
moment to locate that correct
information.
distributed from ECDC Fund.
And house bill two to other
agencies were those agencies all
of the total amount.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen that is an
excellent very detailed question
Using other state funds.
Would be transferring.
school based health centers
which is transferred to the
department of health.
Mr speaker and gentle lady for
agencies for fiscal year twenty
twenty four.
Mr speaker and gentleman twelve
plus three is fifteen so they
to the
total Fund our total funded
vacancy rate for fiscal year
twenty twenty four.
Mr speaker and gentle lady forum
drive into with this is in
twenty twenty two.
Within the budget that.
Ninety five point six million
was the twenty twenty to twenty
twenty three budget planning.
Transferred back we reverted
Those funds from salaries and
benefits and to other
categories as well.
It's been a to a point of why
did we pick a hundred twenty
five million.
When we're giving money from
categories which they don't need
to be held accountable for.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen thank you for
actually bringing up a really
time funds that had to be spent
on specific services so the
reversions up we're not a result
of other issues rather that they
Internally I appreciate that
that answer I heard that the
gazillion times out of a hundred
and thirty one HSD codes over
Mr speaker and gentleman the
Gentlelady so you're saying the.
Funded vacancy rate for the year
twenty twenty four.
Is six point eight percent which
Mr speaker and gentleman is
actually relatively low funded
vacancy rate.
gentleman it's difficult to
project funded vacancy rate for
an upcoming year.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
we were able to give that
number.
Early childhood as existed in
the state of New Mexico at some
level.
Compiled with other departments
moved in and created into its
That we are creating another the
department.
The consistently does not me
goals does not prove itself for.
measuring target on ECDC that
shows and indicates that the
work in the money in the state
of New Mexico taxpayers and
severance tax funds and
everything else that pays into
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
to report that we when we were a
stab in the chest when we wanted
to have a healthy.
Trespassers speaker we wanted a
checked touching the corpus.
Mr speaker and gentle lady now
and so I think that that's a
money that we're going to be
generating and continuing that
fund is that correct gentle lady
Mr speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes that's it thank you
are making sure that we still
fulfill the needs of the but the
intended a group that we were
supporting is that correct
gentle lady Mr speaker.
close thank you Mr speaker I
would move that house bill one
ninety one as amended do now
pass we are on final passage of
house bill one ninety one as
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Was one of fifty five in the
Fermi ate in the negative house
Yes Mr speaker would you give me
to the point that the record
reflect that election is there
for placing House Bill two zero
four of final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
so I know I know I'm sorry Mr
speaker my apologies wasn't
didn't catch that last night
when that when out so anyway
this is what this bill is is
here in the state petroleum
natural gas uranium potassium
salts coal copper gold silver
zinc lead and much much more and
given the significance of the
And so with that Mr speaker we
we do have several state items
you know we have a state song we
have a state bird a flower and
with this Mr speaker we would
Mexico as our State mineral and
others was brought to me Mr
speaker by New Mexico tech this
of Smithson night has been
Thank you Mr the gentle lady Mr
speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr Jim lady was turned into a
Mr speaker kind gentleman oil
can be found in other states as
well Smithson night cannot.
move that house bill two four do
now pass we are on final passage
of house bill two zero four the
vote is now open.
What about close.
The clerk to call the members
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
both yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Excuse me.
two zero four has duly passed
this house.
Is generated from Bernalillo
ready on item number seventeen
yes Mr speaker would you get me
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and before
I do I just want to acknowledge
my clothes Sanchez
Representative Representative
Introduce my expert guest
Cassandra Hey C. chief
technology officer for this a
judicial information division of
nineteen seventy eight to
provide for the electronic
storage of official records and
to provide the records stored
electronically shall be deemed
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house.
House bill one eighty two pass
do now pass final passage of
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
votes yes the vote is now closed
above sixty in the affirmative
zero the negative house bill one
eighty has duly passed this
house.
Thank you Mr speaker that was my
first.
Congratulations a lady this body
used to make.
Freshman missing but we're not
doing that anymore.
Gentleman from going on are you
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
one eighty two point six to add
the coming noted all newspaper
Mister speaker Senator gentleman
close Mr speaker I I now move
the house bill one eighty to do
now pass we are final passage of
house bill one eighty two of the
vote is now open.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes representative Sarinana
on item number.
Fifteen.
Mr speaker where you get me to
that point that the record
reflect that election is safer
please in house bill one twenty
I just want to tell the body
this is an important bill that
we missed in our last round
again raises to teachers a we
missed educational assistance
and people would say that these
five thousand dollars of for
every
licensed educational assistant
in the state and the this bill
passed unanimously through three
legislation through the house he
has a superintendent of former
a special ed teacher and the guy
In education today here we have
taken great strides to make sure
that we are have worked in with
different groups for recruitment
otherwise and as we know for
every certified teacher
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady this bill really recognizes
the unsung heroes fans are the
fans and families that work
tirelessly with their in their
preschool classrooms in the
the best and as a grant most
dedicated hardworking people so
with that Mr speaker and gentle
lady that I do thank you for
having me sign out of this bill
thank you Mr speaker I was going
to do that I'd like to introduce
Gwen Perea Warniment and she is
the director at the LFC
additionally there is debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
J. I know the hard work that is
entailed and the low pay that
comes with it so thank you thank
you both thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman there's for
the debate gentleman from some
Thank you Mr speaker kind gentle
lady I also rise briefly in
support I know that these
educational assistance do a lot
usually
what is the some quick massive
this new baseline for really
corresponds to about a twelve
dollar per hour right is that
about eighteen dollars an hour
Mr gradually that makes me feel
a little bit better because when
I was talking with my
superintendent she was saying
really we should be closer to
thank you contaminants you know
for the debate the gentle lady
to close.
Mr speaker I need I now move
that H. B. one twenty seven do
now pass world final passage of
As Representative votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
those yes Representative Rubio
A lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
We go to that order of business
committee reports.
In addition disorder.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to it's been
respectfully submitted directly
and the chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
production of the record for the
house bill ninety nine all those
favors if I was a nine.
consideration reports and
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted directly
and the chair Mr speaker move
adoption adoption of a federal
committee report on house bill
one eighty six as amended all
same with recommendation that do
not possible that house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill two thirty one to
pass respectfully submitted
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose a test of the committee
voted up to.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to impose been
referred house bill two sixty
house with to sixteen and all
those verison of this and I.
Was me just have a committee put
up to.
pass the house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to ninety one to
pass finance referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted of the Thompson chair
ninety one all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was me just have a committee
report is adopted Mr speaker and
health and Human Services
Committee too is been referred
house bill three thirty seven
has had it under consideration
house with three thirty seven
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Yes have a committee reported.
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair of adoption reduction of a
federal committee report on
house with three forty nine of
those in favor say if I was and
I.
amended and this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted.
Elisabeth Johnson chair
reduction reduction of federal
committee report on house with
two has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation to do passed as
amended and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respect for
some of the top ten chair for
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill fifty five
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that it do not pass the house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill fifty five to
Of an unfavorable report on
house of fifty five but a
favorable committee report on
house commerce and economic
development serves two thousand
five all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
would recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
during like I guess chair Mr
speaker move adoption we on
adoption of a federal committee
report on house bill two fifty
referred house later veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty five has had it under
consideration point amendment
management to pass respectfully
submitted during like I guess
Propose may be as Senate
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee team has
been referred house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
three has had it under
adoption of a favorable
committee report on health.
House health and Human Services
Committee Simpson for House Bill
fifty three all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was a test of a committee
reported up to.
reports it was recommendation
that it to pass as amended
respectfully submitted it and
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are an adoption of a
federal committee report on
house Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
Mr speaker I appropriations and
finance committee to impose an
effort house bill one sixty one
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation that
I do pass as amended
respectfully submitted anything
Opposing the S. have a committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
house bill twenty seven as
amended has had it under
consideration parsing with
recommendation that it do not
Mr speaker move adoption where
an adoption one of several could
report on house bill twenty
seven as amended but a federal
computer port has you district
committee observer of the twenty
seven all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
with House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty three to pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Stratos again all those if
everything of a state line.
Those opposed me in the eyes of
a committee reported opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
Bill to ninety seven do pass
sentence referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
in adoption no federal committee
Propose maybe we just have a
committee report about.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house bill
four twenty six has had it under
consideration point same with
before twenty six of the
severity of us and I am
proposing the as the eyes have
it could report opted.
two has had them under
consideration and reports the
same have been duly enrolled in
in gross preparatory to signing
by the officers of the house
respectfully submitted Cynthia
Borrego chair.
on house memorials to forty one
fifty fifty three and sixty told
us very much have a state not.
Those names.
one fifty fifty three sixty two
percent by the officers of the
house in open session.
The lady from Bernalillo.
respectfully submitted shady
Lujan chair Senator.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
sixty three Senate bill sixty
four as amended Senate bill
seventy two as amended.
Senate bill seventy seven as
amended Senate bill one forty
Mr speaker I have got about
order of Business third reading
of legislation judges ordered
gentle lady from Bernalillo
already on item number twenty
four.
and introduce our expert thank
you Mr speaker my expert witness
today's page to help she's an
attorney and health care policy
manager in the office of the
provision of the sons of the
surprise billing protection act
from two thousand twenty three
to two thousand twenty eight the
provision is related to the
time to incorporate data from
a new database that is currently
being built.
The office of the superintendent
of insurance has engaged all
major stakeholders to bring this
billing protection act in two
thousand nineteen which received
unanimous support in both
chambers.
I also want to let the body know
questions there is debate
generated from eleven percent of
Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
leader.
Representative it is not.
Mr speaker and let lady from
Bernalillo wanted to explain the
thousand twelve and then last
year decided to run again so
here I am.
So Mister speaker and lady from
Bernalillo welcome back.
Thank you.
Mr speaker I ask that all
in this body
do now
Close.
those members without a recorded
vote.
Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative then a votes
yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes representative Sarinana
votes yes.
Was one of fifteen and
informative urinated house bill
three seventy has only because
In objection is ordered to read.
House memorial sixty nine
introduced by Representative
and other egregious human rights
violations house memorial sixty
nine.
Zero six nine and been read
An act relating to
anesthesiologists assistance
revising practice requirements
supervision repealing laws
twenty fifteen chapter fifty two
section five Senate Judiciary
Committee says two percent about
thirty five Senator Senate
Judiciary Committee
Senate bill sixty three.
Introduced by senators Senator
Tallman and representative
Cadena and Chasey an act
public records act Senate bill
sixty three Senate bill sixty
three amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Introduced by senators Lopez
Representative Chasey Senator
o'neill and Representative Ortez
and asked relating to juvenile
justice reform prohibiting the
have been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house consumer public
affairs committee events the
house Judiciary Committee.
wildlife corridors Act to create
the wildlife quarter's Fund
requiring annual reporting
making appropriation Senate bill
seventy two as amended Senate
bill seventy two as amended have
been read twice by title is
Senate bill seventy seven as
amended introduced by Senator
Sorrells and potentially leading
amended.
Senate bill seventy seven as
amended having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee Vince the
Munoz act relating to public
property authorizing the
facility's Management Division
of the General Services
Department to acquire property
and to make improvements in
Senate bill one forty four as
amended have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house government
elections an indifference
Committee then South
appropriations of finance
committee.
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Jeweler from you thank you Mr
speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at two PM in
we'll do it two o'clock to.
EMNRD three seventeen thank you
Julie members signaled gentleman
meet in room three fifteen.
Fifteen minutes after we do that
is that he'll members signaled
gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker the house health and
Human Services Committee will
You should have received an
email from shell gas key at
Legislative Council Service on
noon Friday the twenty fourth
that is tomorrow.
Questions about the process
you're free to ask any of the
staff at the respective
received any information
regarding the governor's
commitments to fund capital
outlay projects and so many of
us cannot finalize our
be moved a little bit to
accommodate the governor's
office but I just bring up to
your attention thank you
gentlemen we'll check with our
respective with our the chairman
of the of the a couple of the
Mr speaker I move the host in
recess until eleven AM Friday
