It's.
The lady from.
Early you'll please rise.
For today's implications.
this morning for the light at
the end of the tunnel for the
strength you give us to insure
and to do the work you have
called us to do.
minds to serve with love is our
call in Jesus name amen.
Julie from.
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business objection
it is so ordered.
Good afternoon members.
And I'm gonna make sure that I
do this right so.
The gentleman from Chavis and
In the house today we have
Representative Jane part derail.
And all her plan with her.
Mr speaker and body.
I
think James R. for twenty two
years long time.
story Jane this morning as I was
getting and
Joe was in the parking lot.
We'll in get the enjoyment he
said.
Mister you look familiar he said
you have been in Santa Fe jail
lately have.
All they stand for.
In the house is a great day so
anytime we get the drill barb to
to members of the chamber I'd
like to read
to some highlights of others
Representative Powdrell Culbert
its career here as you know she
was a former state
twenty sixteen and also
sponsored the nation's first
stem program legislation in two
thousand three legislation which
benefit minority students in New
Mexico by creating pathways in
investment legislation because a
president for military spouses
can point in New Mexico and she
has supported numerous legacy.
Education and business
house representatives
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
members of the body I want to
just honor Jane Jane was my
office mate for six or eight
years we had a real good time
that know anything about police
and just because Jane and worked
at a PED so they figured they
become good friends and and of
course the pod derails you know
my family I got brothers and
sisters that went with there was
want to continue to see if by a
lady from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom thank
you Mr speaker I'd also like to
add a few comments in
the just so we could sit
together and have some lively
discussion and for a number of
years Mr speaker you would see
you do outside of the New Mexico
legislature and kind of things
that we were planning on doing
and I just want to say that
she's a special friend to me and
and thank you for providing a I
understand are supposed to be
barbecue for the members here
and I want to thank you for that
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generated early from Chavis
Representative Ezzell Mr speaker
with the the end every time out
hall all the for the two kids
and FFA kids up to the state
fair we went to Powdrell so I
As far as Mr going goes I can't
thank you enough for your
friendship.
Whenever I first started she was
in the out house with this we
had a good group of people out
there.
And all of those names that come
Representative Jones do it in.
I can't remember who sits in
front of Jane but he'd always
turn around and say be quiet
you're talking to lead to talk
she did she understood business
she that was the main thing to
make sure that the small
businesses were predicted the
best of her ability that that
me how to shop appeared Santa
Fe.
That was one of our things
whenever we would take a break
she and I had the same time
often we we hit some stores too
thank you Mr Jiang.
The gentleman from earlier
percent of the cruise.
Thank you Mr speaker.
J. E. Powdrell was very very
kind to me and then again being
here you you you need that you
need people to to reach out and
haven't forgot that gene I'm
gonna try to get there also Mr
speaker at the a rush from with
the.
when it was at this spot on
central and Broadway and so he's
been a dear friend and as a
county commissioner we worked on
a number of items including the
reaching out and partnering with
you were for much less of a of a
communities so George want to
thank for that knowledge you for
that thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman the gentleman from
you as we fought over who
represented Bernalillo more you
are I and I had the pleasure of
having time with you and and the
people that were around you
would always tell us to be quite
point where we came back from
COVID she looked at me and she
said.
For you guys thank.
Gentleman from Colfax community
where some again and you know
percentage of field thank you Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker you know when you
show up here brand new freshman
day in the I appreciate your
help and make a little easier
and a little better a little
more fun for me to begin the
survey here thank you Mr speaker
the gentle lady from Katrin
Mr speaker I to arise to say how
much we love you James.
Snappy dresser.
One of the most snap deist
dressers on the house floor and
And respect.
Respect.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
handful of members I think that
leave a lasting impression and
for me that was always to Jane
was the word that always came to
mind for me and still does when
I watched Jane as a legislator
stop to listen to what she had
to share I miss your laugh
because we will need their loved
that and I know of
behalf of your family to serve
the people of New Mexico to back
links to have that heart of
service I just really appreciate
that as well thank you.
on the transportation committee
and it was a wonderful
experience it was really
bipartisan people really work
together she was just really
committed change we're still
working on the bipartisan public
spiritually always so just thank
you for all you've done.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
representatives of thank you Mr
speaker I'm so glad to see miss
that in the building and it's so
in amazing places and just done
amazing things I appreciated for
serving on economic development
with her because I learned so
much about how to be a leader
entrepreneurs in our state and I
really admire him but to see
back here thank you two years
ago but.
Thank you Mr speaker
up with her and I think it's
your younger brother Brian and
I am a member of when you guys
back in the seventies earlier in
street that was really a and I
remember that he invited us to
to the opening of that but I
just have to say that bringing
the Powdrell so thank you and
welcome.
The gentle lady from that in the
rookie I shared a house with
Jane and representative Cadena
creek they have the upper story
and I have the basement and I
understand the process and I'll
be forever grateful for that but
what I remember most about gene
is that she lives with joy and
she is one of the funniest
history before she even reach
the legislature she's a woman of
great accomplishment and I don't
know if people know all the
things that she's done but it's
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
I appreciate you and I
appreciated you sense first met
Convention
it was tough to sit by you
because every time there was the
music came on it was time to
dance you made all the rest of
us look really bad.
welcoming and just took me under
the wings and the encouragement
we had that that I got my wife
and I got to from you to to to
gentry gentry.
Needed me to get everybody off
the board I forget what was
going on but we we got to get
everybody off the board he says
you go talk to Jane because you
then I got to say Jane I I I I
sure that special relationship
sometimes with the with the
Representative Ezzell had it for
whatever reason it was you go
the positions that you that you
took they weren't.
They weren't the for no reason
you are passionate about to
crime.
And I just got a state them as
also passionate about.
Economic development.
in the years you serve there on
move New Mexico forward and I
remember saying that you want
others to have the success that
you and your family at had here
in New Mexico so I do appreciate
a little while.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you Mr speaker it's
wonderful to see you here
Representative Powdrell today I
legislate tore I learned very
quickly that
most things went through Jane.
into to give it the gravitas and
respect that it deserves so
wonderful to see you here
federal and and and your family
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker it is
absolutely great to see the day
in here with the new provided
she was definitely very helpful
to me in that learning my way
leadership but I also want to Mr
speaker to recognize that in
this women's history month we
have two amazing women up on
that platform not only do we
a moment to this also understand
would read it
so soon was one of the curators
of New Mexicos African American
legacy visible vital and
valuable a pictorial history of
American history museum and
cultural center of New Mexico
but it doesn't stop there
looking at the every wonderful
person up on the rostrum today
they do going to enjoy today
it's time tested and nothing has
ever been nearly as great as
what they brought with them the
wonderful barbecue restaurant
that they have started a
know that you've always been
there guiding us and showing us
the way and making sure that day
and stayed on the right track so
I just wanted thank you all very
much for being here is
absolutely pleasure to have you
earlier Representative Garcia.
And as a speaker
Mr Darling
And and you know it's most Baker
a I have a special connection to
the battlegrounds and I
And
Mr speaker south Broadway is
known for being the enclave of
as well as a our first Mexican
immigrants settled the there and
so broadly along with the
But the south Broadway is not
only known for the Bob wells in
terms of being there their
homeland so to speak their of
involved from south Broadway
area and these after American
the individuals basically of the
void in terms of our business
south Broadway estimates bigger
and I'm proud to say that when
Jane and became a chairman of
the business and employment
house I had a back is the most
Baker.
because some of able friends on.
Really obnoxious.
hearings I stood up and told my
labor allies that they have to
respect the committee.
And they have to respect the
chairman of the committee.
And these undertones and these
admired you know Jane the
gentleman that a chairwoman of
that committee and Mr speaker of
I.
In fourth in the sessions since
since I started in nineteen
ninety seven so
so Jane I also kinda had to
back.
want we want input into this
bill because I think we can kind
of no change to district that
modifications to it but Jane you
know I'm always honored a.
being around you and your family
and and I hope you come visit us
more often.
connection to the power drills I
married into the family almost
thirty seven years ago and Jane
it was great serving with you we
finally got to be on the
committee together when we when
I joined NMFA and we went to
some nice places that we had
it's great to see you all and
wins the next family reunion.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
The trying to think who else
might have been here well it was
real Representative
Representative Brown it wasn't I
think that was.
about title nine and it was to
make sure that the
the schools were keeping track
of the girls who were playing in
sports.
A gentleman from Chavis side of
the aisle got up and said well I
don't think this is right it's
the boys that really need extra
help.
for and we heard her story and
it predates everybody up there
she could have run with Jackie
Joyner Kersee.
And I'm telling you that
gentleman slow out of the
chamber and did not vote.
to all of us about what
opportunities we might have
missed because we didn't have
the same advantages that the
boys and women do so I always
The lady from McKinley is and
one Representative Johnson thank
you Mr speaker I just want to
say a good to see you and your
family Jane and I want to thank
you for your friendship I miss
our talks I miss our laughs
every time I hear the word E.
thank you for your example and
wish you and your family the
very best thank you Mr speaker.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Sarinana thank
you Mr speaker first I want to
say thank you Jane for
everything thank you for your
army right really helped but
thank you for all your work we
miss you
I learned a lot from you just
listen to the committee and I
just want to say I have the
other projects in my district is
so I will always have you in my
count on Representative Powdrell
to support us and they give us
good advice in fact.
Of years ago maybe ten years ago
she called us during the interim
and asked us a very tough
question we all just sat in the
division within our department
so I'm grateful Representative
Powdrell for that for always
When I decided to run I went
around knocking on doors
collecting signatures.
In part of the redistricting I
Told how you doing I'm I'm all
collecting signatures because
I'm running for the house of
representatives and he looked at
me says how dare you.
in district twenty three says no
you don't know we don't start to
close the door I said
still not voting for you I'm
only voting for J..
also Mr speaker like to take a
few seconds to introduce my shot
Rebecca Watkins she is a home
Also in the past year she's
become involved in the battle
for the pre born along with the
parents
for wanted to thank her for
us us thank you Mr speaker I
also want to talk about of
course Representative Jeanne
cover cover all to seize such a
I think one thing that always
stands out as the stood out as
was used she's used to sit at
the end of this role right here
she was always dressed very very
I do want to stand in and
respect and say thank you to our
Representative.
inner family all for being here
but I just want to say thank you
for being inviting and and
holding the conversations with
have a lot of respect for you
and what you brought to this
chamber and I just want to say a
big thank you and what is
already a we remember our
conversations is when the
taught us and what we we take to
our hearts into our minds
continues on with all the work
and and and everything that you
Thank you Mr speaker and so good
to see you Jane I just wanted to
share that not only did you have
an incredible impact on on the
members here but also in the
wing and she at would tease me
about how nervous I would get
but she would also encourage me
and support me and we worked on
thought I'd be on this side of
the desk.
What do and I will think of you
every time I get nervous and
realize is going to be okay but
it's it's so good to see you
technology
the padre elves and their impact
not only to.
Albuquerque but to the state her
was thinking about that very
quickly which speaker years ago
I probably one of my first
committees in Albuquerque.
At the end of the meeting a
route is she's that are held
over not.
We went straight pod fails and
we enjoyed this just like you'll
went to high school with I'm not
sure if they're your grand if
user because and Sir grandsons
but the beautiful family indeed
and an institution here in New
listener so never really worked
out but the so good to have you
back here in to see you in good
health and spirits welcome back.
Remembers we're gonna discuss
give you a quick run of show
we're going to we're going to go
to our concurrence calendar
first and then we can do some
I don't believe there are HFC we
need to go on breaking in meat
cool excuse you but the plan is
to stay here and work facilities
built we've already shared a
list with both majority and
calendar item number three house
bill one of six by amended it is
incorrectly placed on the
calendar the math the message
was incorrect coming in the
be in the this is house bill one
oh six is twice amended item
number three on the concurrence
calendar the message was
incorrectly sent in within
floor so the bill will go
straight to do an eight.
The lady from Bernalillo
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to as been referred Senate bill
three ninety two has had it
under consideration reports it
was recognition that a do pass
is a nine.
Was a test of a good productive.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
natural resources committee to
is been referred Senate floor
substitute for Senate
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair of the board
optional Federal committed for
the center for service to for
Senate conservation committee
substitute presented before
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to whom is
been referred Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty one as amended has
had it under consideration point
could be subject to percent of a
fifty one as amended all those
in favor say if I was in line.
The supposed a test of a
committee board opted.
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation to
do pass respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair Mr
speaker move adoption option of
a favorable committed for the
I suppose yes I think we
reported up to.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to miss been referred to Senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill five twenty three as
amended has had it under
committee substitute for Senate
bill five twenty three as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
seventy House Bill three fifty
three was emergency clause has
had them under consideration
reports the same have been duly
enrolled in gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Bill to thirty two with an
emergency clause house bill two
seventy and house with three
fifty three with an emergency
clause all those in favor say if
I was a nine.
subs to browse with two thirty
two with an emergency clause
House Bill to seventy and house
with three fifty three with an
emergency clause for some of the
officers of the house in open
session.
order business messages in
addition it is so ordered click
to read message from the Senate
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the Senate
has concurred in house
amendments to Senate health of
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in those copy of Senate bill
seventy two as amended has been
read in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate no
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly rules and
grows copy of Senate bill three
ten as amended has been read in
full in order by the officers of
the Senate vote session requests
the house of the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five as amended
has been read in full inside by
House executive message number
four.
Dear Mister speaker.
Egolf Martinez the members of
the house I have the state
House bill one twenty seven.
House bill two zero one as
amended house bill two ninety
eight as amended House Bill
three forty two as amended
Remembers will turn attention to
concurrence calendar.
Item number five gentleman from
son of a son one internet well
are you ready.
that point very good Mr speaker
I move that the house not.
Concur.
With the.
Senate amendments to the
Mr speaker if if if I may the
changes that were made in the
Senate in relation to the way
twenty three and twenty four in
the changes that were made in
the Senate with the addition of
about ninety one point three
million dollars more this will
cost taxpayers in New Mexico the
seventy five point six million
dollar higher price tag that the
Senate ad in the way the bill
left from the house the Senate
changes added over a hundred
million in costs which are
dollars and capital gains of
about six point one million
dollars in the same scenario
locals net cost in FY twenty
four in out include that fifteen
bill the way left here grew
local revenues by about almost
two million dollars Mr speaker
and and members of this body
there are some good initiatives.
that were made in the Senate yet
none the less of in conference
with all the members of the
house taxation and revenue
committee of both from the
Republican and democratic side
an income tax deduction for
school supply purchases
purchased by a public school
teacher of up to five hundred
dollars the tax year in twenty
twenty three and one thousand
credit from a thousand dollars
per child to fifteen hundred
dollars per child.
the and and and both of those as
it relates to the general fund
will be a minimal hit to the
general fund.
the method in which they were
going to the way they left to
was it was fifteen cents per
volume the change that by way of
fifteen cents per volume tax
increase or if you want to call
it a fear attacks it's up to you
that it all a hundred percent of
those dollars would go to the
funds now go to some to that
prevention program but some to
the general fund which is not
the intent of that have the the
increase in taxes but it
maintains the sicker the cigar
Tax that we added here in the
house and so the issue there
again is that all of those
affected in regards to these
issues.
There's another issue that was
outline and one that I was a
vocal about in the committee Mr
speaker and and bodies in
relation to the film tax credit.
every year so that the costs
goes by ten million dollars the
first year.
The million dollars next year
and so on until the cost is an
additional hundred million
The second part of that is that
provides more benefits to above
the line wages for film partners
and those film partners above
the line meaning that those
partners currently have no cap
are from New Mexico this could
be a large cost but at this
point it's capped at fifty
million dollars are we we
believe that in conference with
members of our committee that
this is a policy consideration
increases the amount of film tax
credits for non resident crew
for film partners could cost
around five million dollars a
year to the general fund the
budget for nonresidents may run
counter to the state's new forty
And finally which is probably
not a bad thing for film but
nonetheless it's still Inc
inclusion this is it proposes
and included an extra five
percent tax rate for films in
rural areas but we realize how
over seventy million dollars it
was estimated by the
administration and by EDD and
others that that it would be
conservative about seventy
million dollars but looking at
in the out years so for for
those reasons and some among
some others Mr Mr speaker
members this body
motion.
I'm gonna rephrase emotional
images for clarity we have a
motion to concur with Senate
amendments to house excision
Revenue committee substantive
The sponsor has asked us not to
concur.
Ready.
There is debate the gentleman
from Santa thank you Mr speaker
the process that you lead in
this committee and in this house
led to a great bill that was a
expect was that the Senate would
take many of our balanced
compromises I just throw them
out the window Mr German I'm
talking specifically about the
factor.
And and even some of the alcohol
tobacco tax compromise so we
came with together latest
throughout all the window.
so that we can show New Mexico
the right way to work together
to pass legislation that
benefits all New Mexicans thank
you Mr speaker.
We have.
Because we have some new members
I'm gonna explain what happens
if we don't concur.
Financing some knocks if we
don't concur with Senate
Mr speaker point of order see
your point Mr speaker I believe
the motion is too can Kerr and
gentleman that was my mistake
Everybody calm down about the
For the rookies in the room.
If we don't go COVID sentiments
will be a message sent to the
Senate asking them trip that
Eight three from the Senate
agree from the house who will
then hold a conference committee
to.
On the floor for adoption.
If there's no agreement reached
there's no bill.
With the Senate amendments and
to ask them to recede.
So you voted yes.
And we would have not concurred.
We have a motion to not concur
can ask the Senate to receipt on
the amendments all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Thank you and apologies for the
confusion that I created.
lady from Bernalillo.
Jennifer current about the with
the liberalism again ready and
item sixty two for yes Sir Mr
speaker would you give me to
that point.
twenty nine is relating to
corrections including cannabis
in the definition of a
contraband prohibiting cannabis
in places of imprisonment with
We are on final passage of house
bill four twenty nine the vote
is now open.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson.
Are you ready and item number
forty one.
Thank you Mr speaker can you get
amendment or substitution the
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this bill
renames the Human Services
department of the health care
establishing a single unified
department responsible for
health care purchasing
regulation and policy provides a
foundation for more effective
for New Mexico for reducing
fragmentation and eliminating
the silos that exist today for
users.
And it will also six save money
O. H. secretary and carry on the
hose.
Acting secretary of HSD thank
generated should be a favorite
local here court a little bit
there maybe breaks up a little
gentle lady so you know we heard
this in committee for a little
bit and I just want to clarify a
few things that we heard so
Mister speaker gentle lady this
lady this new Department or
rather this
I guess it's the department Mr
speaker gentle lady this would
Mr speaker.
Get the development disabilities
division from department of
Albuquerque public schools and
New Mexico retiree health care
authority.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady and did you say
the schools or what other kinds
of things we be putting under
this new department Mr speaker
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
just the insurance.
gentle lady do we know how those
departments have worked in the
past and those other states and
if it's applicable to put it
into New Mexico and now Mr
speaker gentle lady.
health outcomes for New Mexicans
are for citizens.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady and then I'm
looking at the FIR now and I'm
Services and health and all the
other ones that may be
coordinated with the is is
adding additional costs are with
this simply just be flat lined
with what we're doing now Mr
come up with the real plan the
help of the plan is as far as
I'm concerned is to actually
save money because we all hear
about both purchasing and power
purchasing power will actually
save money.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady and then on the
affairs says that this bill
would administratively attached
New Mexico health policy
commission is that the two
entities review combining Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
yes.
Okay thank you so much Mr
speaker thank you generally if
those answers I appreciate it.
just a some clear clarification
questions I have by renaming the
the HSD two of the new title
health care sorority Department
I'm just what are you you're
gonna offer it's going to
operate under the current budget
from HSD is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentle lady it is and as I
about what the plans are and
then we will pass legislation
next year to make those changes
this is basically giving her
head start to say start looking
Madam madam and nine Mr speaker
for all tired thank you.
Three hours is the Mr speaker
gently thank you for
understanding
have a yield that is a gentleman
from Chavis Senator
Representative Townsend thank
you miss the gentle lady yield
Mister speaker I yield.
speaker gentle lady.
is going to save money can you
go into that a little bit please
ma'am Mr speaker and gentleman
so what what this bill does is
basically given the governor
ago well not be together and
they will be able to provide
better care for their for the
people who have that insurance
and save money because there'll
the gentle lady does this will
this give.
The governor who ever it is
the ability to further re
organizes state agency and make
When when when now we will get
the report back and then as I
said we will craft legislation
to to put things in place the
happen are we expecting big
changes that.
Of in this in this in this area.
Mr speaker and gentleman what do
In the coming months Mr speaker
and gentleman I think the the
main purpose is to get all of
the entities involved in health
care under one roof for lack of
this move toward single payer Mr
speaker and gentleman in no way.
Okay Mr speaker gentle lady.
to the governor of the
legislature to the governor.
Is that true Mr speaker and
gentleman as I said it will give
the governor until January first
legislative legislation next
year.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
there will be no changes Centel
report comes back in the
gentle lady.
There will be no changes
directed by the governor.
Until the report is returned and
authorization for them to start
getting together and figuring
out what makes the most sense
thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker center for the
legislative close Mr speaker I
The vote is now closed lower to
forty three in the affirmative
twenty three negative Senate
bill sixteen as in the past this
house.
amended us on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentlelady to explain the
bill.
Mr speaker and ladies and
gentlemen this bill updates our
with the the gentleman from
Chavis the minority whip about
putting on an amendment and so
speaker I guess I would move
that the gentle lady would for
for now move a.
House floor amendment number one
It is being passed so gentleman
and it is online.
Mr speaker is friendly and I
would like the gentleman to
explain the need for the
amendment.
You are more windows passed out
or go head administrative like
you could probably explain it
just because it's friendly and
Mr speaker this amendment
sensually deals with the issue
of service the bill as written
required service on the
defendant of some some.
so we took out the the service
provision and provided a new
section that allows the
garnishment to be mailed to the
defendant at their last known
amended bill gently from
Bernalillo back to you thank you
Mr speaker and my summary of the
bill it really doesn't include
the the service issues this bill
would modernize New Mexico law
the property basically is
especially Mr speaker and ladies
and gentleman the items like
homes cars and certain household
goods allows people to continue
That so Mr speaker and ladies
and gentlemen the items haven't
been updated in fifteen years
pass final passage of Senate
bill two six in FY cemented the
vote is now open.
What is one of six to six in the
yes Mr speaker to get me to that
point that the record reflect
that election is there for
places Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety two as amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
will be publicly viewable and
transparent with another bill
that will pass today with that
what I stand for questions
senior divisional and close the
speaker I move the Senate
the vote is now open.
The vote is about Los.
The gentleman from.
are you ready and item number
forty nine.
Yes Sir Mr speaker give me that
point the record reflect that
election is here for placing
Senate bill one forty three on
award of a gaming machine on the
premises of a nonprofit
organization gaming operator
licensee with that we stand for
questions seeing no debate
gentleman close.
The vote is now closed level to
fifty nine in the affirmative I
in the negative Senate bill one
Gentleman from Bernalillo
reserve the good news are you
ready and item forty four.
for forty two as three times
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
bill.
Yes there is a lady from
McKinley Representative
Lundstrom thank you Mr speaker
will the gentleman yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen can you tell can you
The governor lieutenant governor
secretary of state state auditor
state treasurer Attorney General
land commissioner Mr speaker.
governor let me just preface
this governor will not see an
increase it'll be the
predecessor of of this governor
but the governor goal for we'll
go from one hundred ten thousand
dollars to one hundred and sixty
go from eighty five thousand two
hundred forty four thousand
seven hundred fourteen the state
auditor will go from eighty five
thousand two hundred forty four
thousand four some fourteen the
seven hundred fourteen and the
land commissioner will go from
nine thousand two hundred forty
nine seven hundred fourteen
dollars gentle lady Mr speaker.
The exception of the governor
ninety days from the time that
we adjourn.
So Mister speaker gentleman I
assume that this is all of been
taken into consideration for
Mr speaker gentleman I just want
to rise and support I want to
thank you for bringing this
forward I know this is been
something that LFC is looked at
next year they'll be a bill for
bracing cabinet secretaries
salaries also they're incredibly
low so I appreciated that you
Chairman I yield Mister chairman
miss looks like K. five seventy
percent increase in the sewers
and.
Could you tell me where this
would
force positions on a.
Tional rank with the.
Salary scales.
populations that salaries are
higher so there isn't a cookie
cutter version although it'll be
I would say fairly in line with
most states Mr speaker chairman.
rank number three in the nation
on average.
Thank you Mr speaker German I'm
Gentleman nine C. two thousand
ten to two thousand and twenty
that's twenty one years and yes
Representative commission is
went along to a total of seventy
percent increase is that correct
Mr speaker gentleman that is
accurate you know it's been
twenty one years as you noted
two thousand and one was the
information Mr a gentleman Mr
speaker.
Speaker thank you chairman
there's a gentleman from Chavis
and in order to Representative
Townsend.
pay raises has been a question
can you address that.
time I actually read a couple of
cases that were brought back in
the early seventies and the the
Supreme Court has ruled that it
is indeed constitutional
gentleman Mr speaker.
A gentleman I believe that was
the District Court case that was
overruled by the Supreme Court
are you aware that.
Occurred gentleman I am being
told that it was overruled in
nineteen ninety two.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that was only for
county commissioners not for the
state officials.
I get from what I'm being told
we I guess we'll just have to
disagree what's coming in this
year and what you're telling me
and this year right now but they
don't compute right now
I would
our state personnel office.
I think has missed the mark as
far as keeping our.
I know Representative Lundstrom
and I worked on an issue several
years ago to correct one
problem.
And
And Mr speaker and gentleman I
think
I still think in this case from
correct method to do it but I
think it has to be corrected at
some point but you may we may
We ought to continue to
encourage our our STO.
To make sure that New Mexico is
To do things and the non
competitive pay position.
But I do personally have an
issue to.
That's my only issue for for
those that follow those people
that are in there I would
support this if it's
constitutional but I think
some time present at the
significantly I think a lot of
people in the public would like
a seventy percent pay increase
and they probably won't like
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman from Bernalillo
you'll Mr speaker gentleman
early I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman is
Mr chairman of.
Mr speaker and gentleman how do
we expect to pay for that.
Mr speaker and gentleman
this is such a.
Incredibly small fraction of of
our state budget and would not
you to list the names but how
many positions are are you
looking at raising.
Mr speaker German seven.
Gentleman all of them or elected
For me it's very personal with
the department of Veterans
Services in their veterans
service officers who were paid
Those veterans service officers
or those people of the
department of transportation
were out there in the sun and
the wind and the cold every day
I think that's what we need to
minimum wage but we have a bill
here to raise sometimes up to
seventy percent of an elected
official salary Mr speaker kind
for the body the reality is that
through this entire twenty plus
years.
All the employees have been
receiving raises Mr speaker
thank you very good thank you
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
I I do believe rate increases in
order I've we've looked at a
and we look to last I believe
last night we passed pay
increases for for this report
justices we passed through in
secretaries and the governor
lieutenant governor all make a
less than and then that what we
commensurate to the salaries of
the other departments that these
numbers are not unreasonable
the what the secretaries do what
the lieutenant governor's
responsible for with the
governor's responsible for that
being said Mr speaker and
gentleman I do believe the only
I believe it's because that's
the only one that's done within
the specific the very specific
confines of the constitution of
while they are in office Mr
speaker and gentleman to do you
have any any comment to that or
any thoughts about that Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman I
something is deemed
constitutional until the Supreme
Court rules.
so Mr speaker and gentleman I
the agency speaker and and
gentlemen if the Supreme Court
takes it up.
just because they did not rule
in ninety two would not set
precedents.
doing that Mr speaker and
gentleman I'm having an
amendment drafted just to change
the the the the implementation
reading of the
The reading of the constitution
is it cannot be done while they
are in office and the speaker
and gentleman I I believe it's
push for things while they're in
office Mr speaker so
I would ask if if this would be
a friendly amendment I'm gonna
Mexico when.
We are trying to push forward
pay raises.
the difference between that and
the
the destroying that and what
we've done in HB two is that
those were all discussed.
presented that and Mr speaker
and gentleman I I think that
that is.
The proper way to do it.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman I
the constitution so I I'm going
to be introducing this and I
would ask that it be friendly Mr
speaker this.
In the meantime chief clerk let
us know that they'll have to
make copies make sure to ride
and then distributed so
Very well.
Hold in place.
Speaker that is article four
section twenty seven.
Regimen is looks like the
amendment is about three passed
out.
makes for sections wanted to the
effective date of January first
twenty twenty seven the speaker
and the two to six number is.
Mr speaker I'm nothing if not
consistent.
With the rule breaking.
Jennifer Miller there is a
gentleman from San Juan County
yield yes Sir I yield my friend
from Travis county.
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
either the Senate Judiciary
Committee or the house Judiciary
this was constitutional Mr
speaker and gentleman that you
do serve on that committee what
is your reading of the words of
Mr speaker and and gentleman
from San Juan this will be a
good debate if we both get ask
questions but.
diminished during his term of
office except otherwise provided
in this constitution and so I
don't see any other exceptions
Gentleman.
When I was a county commissioner
my first term middle my first
term this body raise the rate
for county commissioners.
those of us that were already in
office had to wait until the end
of that first term which was two
years later in order to qualify
in office at the time they do
not get the pay raise if they
are
because if they're on elector
the facial but that those.
there's already a specific
provision in here for the
governor so I think it does make
it consistent that we we would
be constitutional with respect
You brought this ammendment and
is it your intent to avoid any
constitutional challenges by
bringing this ammendment.
the speaker and gentleman yes I
think of beyond that I think I
want to we should be trying to
avoid the perception the speaker
and gentleman from the public
the Senate or house judicial
committees
looks bad Mr speaker and
and and saying that we believe
for that reason it's
constitutional Mr speaker and
gentleman I I think to the
public this looks really really
But avoiding the very appearance
and some speaker John I think it
is incumbent upon this body to
to do what.
The public thinks is right in
this matter.
Speaker and gentleman that is
why this is a hand written
amendments one day after being
charged to not bring hand
believe that we do have a a duty
to try to adhere to those
principles enunciated in the
constitution thanks for taking
the in line with why we're all
here I thank you for that
gentleman and I also was remiss
generated from Santa Fe six of
us thank you Mr speaker Mr
speaker of the gentleman from
San Juan you yes I will yield to
my friend from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have not looked at that it was
actually came on pretty quick so
you want to read that to me Mr
Article I section twelve
addresses annual compensation
two officers
Mentioned in section one of the
executive branch.
public lands.
And Mr speaker and gentleman.
This section of the
or decreased at law by law after
the expiration of ten years from
the date of the admission of New
Mexico as a state.
chamber who has research the
case law on this matter.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
judge in this case held that in
mid term salary increase was
upheld.
intentioned I think this is
actually why the
effective date was removed.
the ruling as I've just been
told by my two expert witnesses
that the the that provision.
that while someone is in the
office
that they cannot receive a pay
raise while they are serving
This section of the constitution
article I section twenty seven.
States.
The language regarding no
language Mr speaker and
gentleman was added after the
addition of.
Article I section twelve and so
Article four section twenty
seven was added.
And that subsequently article I
section twelve and then that
speaker and gentleman that Santa
Fe District Court judge Santiago
combos found for the defendants
Right up with you Mr speaker and
gentleman but I would
State for the body I don't
believe this ammendment is
needed although I really
speaker gentle lady
Once again I as I stated earlier
constitutionality is not clear
until the Supreme Court weighs
in on a subject.
other things like that but as
long as they're not challenged
in as long as the Supreme Court
doesn't take it up
constitutionality is not
determined it is just not
Just wait in
it is so that this now in
nineteen seventy two as well as
nineteen ninety two the Supreme
Court has not weighed in for one
reason or another and Mr speaker
that they would both be in play
so Mister speaker and gentle
lady once again the reason.
The reason that
this that these provisions are
we're doing something to benefit
somebody and we may get
something in return those are
the those appearances.
Is the reason why we should not
be doing this and the speaker
do that please I don't believe
that that's what's happening
here I think we're having a
fascinating debate about the
constitutionality
Mr speaker.
The.
This bill is a contradiction in
itself.
And for whatever reason the pay
raises of the six other offices
are not the point that I was
going to make is.
That there would be no one bring
up a question.
As to whether or not the
governor was putting pressure.
On this that was the point I was
that and Sesame Street when as a
kid growing up one of these is
not like the others.
but the other six Mr speaker and
gentleman within the same bill
Mr speaker and gentleman with
regards to this ammendment I do
not believe that it is needed to
conform this law with the
by four years these needed pay
increases and I do believe that
they are equitable that they are
A statewide officials
and we Mr speaker and gentleman
have spent a lot of time
discussing.
How hard are public servants
work how difficult it has been
some time well at the same time
providing much needed increases
to state employees a Mister
speaker gentleman I think this
this ammendment thank you Mr
speaker.
I have asked the amendments not
be hand written we just realize
that.
So I would kindly ask so you
would draw the amendment
gentleman and if you want to get
one drafted.
I guess you could do that I
think we've be the.
withdraw this ammendment I will
I believe I have little bit more
debate our if and I still have
the floor so I will get that
drafted or I could have another
the speaker I do I I believe I
saw the floor you do.
Mr speaker and a body.
And gentleman.
employees is that we have I
think and and debate last night
the discussion was we had
positions.
Some speaker and gentleman what
we're dealing with on field
positions because we cannot get
people to apply.
And qualified people to take
And Mr speaker and gentleman
everyone.
Runs for these positions knows
in advance.
What.
win the office that they are
seeking some speaker and
gentleman I I think that's
different
than what we are talking about
and and Representative from
Bernalillo do you agree that we
have we're having a hard time
feeling FTEs for the for the for
would you agree with that Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman I agree
that we need to compensate our
employees fairly.
Equitably.
And like ourselves other elected
gentleman just because you run
for an office doesn't mean that
you are somehow not wanting to
be compensate fairly or should
not be treated as other people
are around the country Mr
The I think that is the issue
though that whites
constitutional is because these
are offices on there is
we're trying to get folks to
come to work for state
government.
And if they're looking at
to just to take a job.
Mr speaker and gentleman those
are those are
more available this speaker and
not a shortage of applicants for
them so Mr speaker that was
interesting Mr speaker gentle
was I was making more than my
boss.
So I understand the underlying.
governor specifically is
What I believe we should be
doing.
and and even if there is a
if this goes forward.
In the form that it's in.
Because I believe it it.
able to get this amended to
where all of these
All of these positions get the
that raise.
believe that these numbers that
have that are here on the page
are outrageous I think there
really I think they're fairly
and I I can't go for the way it
is thank you Mr this is a major
live from of the representative
block.
Thank you Mr speaker with my
friend from Bernalillo county
reading the legislation here and
my first question is Mr speaker
gentlemen we're always time
things to the consumer price
index Mr speaker Jim and I don't
gentleman have we considered
tying these salaries to the CPI.
The gentleman I apologize will
session the legislation I've
seen to the CPI the consumer
price index so Mister speaker
gentleman I'm wondering if we
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
on the Senate side they didn't
want to overcomplicate this
particular issue because of the
kept it fairly simple but I
would love to join you in a bill
seeing right now the current
salary for the governor's a
hundred ten thousand and then
most of the statewide offices Mr
speaker gentle and gentleman
around eighty five thousand
looks like the AG is ninety five
looks like about seventy two
grand for the land commissioner
about sixty five for the auditor
and then it looks like about
sixty five for the lieutenant
governor's how do we reach those
some kind of a like a formula
that they use to the what did
they do to arrive at these
figures Mr speaker German
speaking German I I can't answer
I don't know.
and I'm sure you one either so I
would love to see their thought
process behind it Mr speaker
gentleman.
And so the the next question I
have is regarding the lieutenant
governor's salary so Mister
Mr chairman that's correct.
Okay thank you Mr speaker John
but I see that the governor is
the one excluded Mr speaker
gentle and I'm just wondering
ballot on the same line as the
other one Mr speaker German.
Mr speaker gentle and.
The governor was excluded
because governor has to sign the
consideration.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen I appreciate that
so.
I'm just wondering because you
know it just doesn't seem right
to me that the the same people
neighboring states Colorado
Texas and Arizona Utah do you
know what these states are
currently paying there's
statewide elected officials do
we have any figures from other
really all over the place
there's state for the war
population that have higher
rates of pay there's students
with greater population that are
it's just everywhere Mr speaker
speaker and gentleman so you
know I'm just trying to find out
because I know the average
salary I think we talked about
this in another debates about
fifty four thousand for for
regular four have four percent
dollars so Mister speaker Jim
and I know and I have great
respect for all of our statewide
elected officials and I think
they deserve the salaries they
get you know they work hard I
I'm sure Mr speaker gentleman
Mr speaker gentleman none of
these offices of have seen an
increase since two thousand and
one I will note for the body Mr
speaker that the secretary of
received some kind of pain raise
increase including this year
there will be some.
In that entire time the
secretary of state has not
received an increase and it is
only consistent with the other
two thousand two was less
increase it was secretary state
about.
It was from sixty five thousand
so that was twenty thousand
increase from what it is
dollars Mr speaker gentleman so
Mr speaker gentleman I'm just
wondering why we're what such a
dramatic increase from the two
thousand to increase that we had
verses now it's twenty years
Mr speaker gentleman.
Again it it is a significant
amount of time that we're
talking about that this position
all the positions that we're
discussing have not been
gentleman and so I'm I'm getting
and not from your your expert
there Mr speaker gentleman but I
still would like to see how we
arrived at this figure did we
did we take into account
Of course LCS committee's
recommendation but you can also
go into the inflation.
Your available.
certainly do that.
And then another question I had
I know the governor they see has
a discretionary fund I believe
which is like for expenses
regarding her office official
gentleman that's outside of the
scope of this bill.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen I appreciate that
answer and so.
you know I I need to look myself
in the mirror I really can't
sleep at night at least myself
if I if I think that I'm I'm
supporting some kind kind of
thing like this especially as
and I just cannot myself go back
to my constituents and say I
voted for another politicians
increase especially one that may
or may not have large support so
I really appreciate that thank
Thank you Mr speaker can you
tell me how many other states of
we're raising the governor's
rate to one hundred sixty nine
thousand.
that question would come up so
I'm just going to read off a few
for you so that you get a a
niggling of how of what they are
seven hundred twenty nine
dollars tennis is our governor
hundred ninety eight and seventy
Washington the hundred eighty
seven three hundred fifty three
dollars.
hundred five thousand dollars Mr
speaker and gentleman did you
look at Colorado and ninety
thousand and Arizona at ninety
five Mr speaker down Mr speaker
noted that it's it's fairly all
over the map.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I see
that it is however there's
something to take into
consideration when I look at
this
especially when I start
comparing it because usually
when you look at positions and
how much you should pay people
you look at surrounding states
and I look more air zoom and
Colorado which are comparable to
cut to ninety thousand to beat
COVID Colorado Mr speaker Jim
and then I'm finished the
gentleman close.
and freezing the for our hard
working elected officials in the
state of New Mexico and I urge.
Pass.
forty two passed by amended.
Passage of Senate bill for forty
two as three times amended.
house.
Committee from Santa Fe.
Representative set up though are
you ready on item number seventy
on final passage has been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
generated to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker what this
bill does it continues our good
work of transparency to ensure
that all the projects that we
final passage of Senate bill one
fifty three with an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
an emergency clause has duly
passed this house.
Deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill one forty six
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker directed to inform the
house of the duly enrolled in
gross copies of Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five.
do the one Senate chief clerk
this is to be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate bill two
you on Senate chief clerk this
is to be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill one twenty six
Sherrie dean on Senate chief
clerk Mr be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill seventy five
Committee substitute for House
Bill three eighty four how's
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill for eighty one
and returned same here with
respectfully submitted surety
refused to recede from Senate
amendments to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill five forty seven as
amended by the house and further
amended by the Senate and
Peter Wirth respectfully
submitted sherry data on Senate
chief clerk.
This will be entered.
objection is so ordered.
Members in light of the Senate
not receiving from their
amendments to house bill five
forty seven hi will appoint
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation addition it is so
introduced by senator Munoz an
act relating to law enforcement
including receipts attributable
to the premium tax on health
insurance business any
providing that a certain amount
of the law enforcement
protection fund should be
transferred to law enforcement
retention Fund Senate bill four
ninety one.
Shendo and Representative Harper
and act relating to taxation
amending the amount of tax
liability requiring assessment
by the secretary of taxation
defeating a tax with sales
suppression software constitutes
tax fraud clarifying processes
for protesting the value or
classification of property by a
Representative Harper this is
when the kids I committee
estimates.
Senate bill forty six as amended
I've been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
Mr speaker I will go to that
order of Business third reading
of legislation.
To leave before I take the
motion going go to.
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we're
and optional fable Committee for
the Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute.
Supposedly the as of a good for
doctors.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred Senate bill
two nineteen as amended has had
it under consideration point
same as recommendation that it
to pass respectfully submitted
Was built in eighty as a grader
for doctor.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred Senate
health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
For the National Committee for
the Senate health public affairs
committee some server Senate
bill two forty six as some as
too is been refers Senate bill
for twenty six.
Has had it under consideration
point same as recommendation to
do pass as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
This was a test of a committee
for doctors Mr speaker and
rolling and grossing Committee
too is been referred house
concurrent resolution one house
bill one thirty four as amended
house bill one ninety seven
House Bill to twenty nine has
our Chavis chair Mister speaker
move to adopt.
We're not available committee
report on house concurrent
resolution one house bill one
thirty four as amended house
bill one ninety seven can house
that the only engrossed rules
copies of house speaker
resolution one house bill one
thirty four as amended house
bill one ninety seven and house
bill two twenty nine for signed
by the officers of the house in
open session.
It is reality from early already
an item number thirty two.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
get me to that point the record
eight as amended removes the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund balance from the general
fund reserves so the funds may
be invested with higher return
rates with that Mr speaker I'll
pass we are on final passage of
Senate bill one seventy eight as
amended the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
Members I'd like to direct you
Madam speaker if you can get us
to that point.
What the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
On final passage has been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Thank you madam speaker so
members the body Senate bill
five twenty three is a
looking open in New Mexico and
for patients who have been
harmed the protections provided
bar PCF remain intact and with
that Mr gradual to my co
participate in the patient
compensation fund started in
twenty twenty five W. three year
rolling average of CPA added to
the cafeteria just like
independent providers of the
harmed with that I can get back
to my co sponsor the gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker I
believe already stand for
questions.
There is debate.
the to the right of me and San
Juan yield.
Madam speaker there's not a lot
of people are to the right of
Representative Montoya would
cement but I said I I you.
Mr speaker are madam speaker and
and and gentleman can we go
briefly through the specifics of
the changes
time we're fairly dramatic can
we get an idea of
Where we were.
are back to now Mr speaker and
and gentleman.
Madam speaker John from San Juan
so the issue one of the issues
is created under prior
amendments was how independent
details on that so what this
bill will do is they creates
essentially for independent
outpatient health care
facilities which includes Amatil
dollar cap on a medical
malpractice act.
Some speaker and then gentleman
madam speaker and gentleman I
met about mastic or sorry about
gentleman so and San Juan County
in McKinley county county we've
had
not practice insurance so under
this provision this lowers their
cap the highest amount that they
couple years ago with what we
cover for choosing to be seventy
five these independent
outpatient health care
facilities were essentially can
unable to obtain medical map
malpractice insurance at all and
so madam speaker John from San
Juan so what this bill does is
it lowers that cap to one
thousand of of of of insurance
on the private market and that
allows and take advantage of of
the the protections offered
within the PCF.
seventy five was passed and
signed into law I am glad to see
this happen
I hope that the
The.
and fears that that the the
ground changed quite
dramatically under their feet
glad that we are changing this
least it will for for for others
who would be looking to go on to
practice in New Mexico that that
maybe now they would see this is
a bit more friendly environment
Excuse me the gentle lady from.
Thank you madam speaker at does
the gentleman yield.
long time coming to do this fix
Madam speaker when this bill was
first given to us there were
eight of us on the floor that
particular that first time then
last year chairwoman of Hochman
Vigil and I tried to make other
changes and it wasn't enough
because we weren't allowed to
New Mexicans.
Deserve good health care and
this is part of getting that and
it New Mexicans also deserve the
opportunity to be made whole
this gives us that kind of a
gentleman and a speaker Madam
speaker and gentleman
I do have a couple of questions
Madam speaker generated from
Dona Ana yes for these
independent operation health
care facilities that was part of
the discussions and negotiations
and that was confirmed prior to
this being drafted.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman could you also tell
the body a little bit about the
CPA.
come back as a body you know in
twenty years of got an outdated
number for those trying to take
advantage of the PCF and so it
it does a three year rolling
average in the idea behind the
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentlemen once again I
you know I know that when.
You lose somebody there's no way
speaker and gentleman
but we also need to make sure
that there are providers in New
Mexico that can make sure that
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
The gentleman from San Juan you.
Patient health care facilities
now or.
The recorder true to have full
part of that means that they
they are responsible for coming
up for the first five hundred
thousand dollars in in liability
insurance on the private market
and then and then PCF take some
What the PCS is and how is that
from the.
Madam speaker so I'm sorry P. C.
F. as in Frank so patient
compensation fund essentially
it's it's derived off of
funded as of Jan one likely
understands as well there have
been appropriations from the
general fund as well to sure up
that fund but it's designed in
Mexico taxpayers actually
subsidizing since position
position in terms premiums to
some extent record madam chair
general fund it to sure up some
of that fund.
Madam speaker and gentleman
which is in the phone today is
it solve.
million dollar deficit
currently.
I turned to.
because percent of glee they had
to pull up Parkinson were able
to train.
Insurance for these higher
Higher cap remaining in
existence Madam general from
ways of this bill only applies
to the independent operation
health care facilities if
Madam speaker and gentleman is
still subject to the six million
dollar liability limits and that
wasn't disclosed as part of this
column which is bigger generally
Improvement from where we have
been discretion.
I believe my question would be
whether it goes form of suppose.
yield Mister I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you so most of you know
I'm a physical therapist I
carried malpractice insurance
insurance rates are going to
rise they're gonna rise no
matter what we do no matter what
we don't do unfortunately that's
become the reality of our lives
I will vote for this bill I
think it's a good compromise but
I think we have to keep in mind
that we cannot be held hostage
thank you madam speaker.
Garcia thank you madam speaker
we don't because you'll.
Speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Bernalillo Cibola McKinley.
Mexico could you briefly touched
on it in front of it before can
you briefly touched on what the
face for the for on on rural New
Mexico those figures are gonna
be happy to let me give an
example that from my own
by a local nonprofit hospital
under current law.
That eight out of that
outpatient facility which feels
go out of business and they
perform numerous surgeries that
are that are very impactful in
our community and so what this
bill would changes because their
own sixty percent by private
my community in a very real
sense that means that that they
get to stay in business I get to
continue to offer services to to
my rural area in my rural
constituents.
the hardest for the the best
legislation.
Mr chairman I I'm I mean I guess
it's open to to debate I I in my
opinion I think they've been hit
on the border community with
Colorado Utah and Arizona what
we've seen is those docs have
plenty of offers in Durango
which is thirty minutes from
where I live and so without
these kind of changes frankly
Thank you gentlemen madam
speaker we know that the whole
state New Mexico about affected
by this on rural New Mexico
really got it hard you know I
appreciate that I appreciate
Thank you madam speaker this
gentleman yield Mister curricula
generated from Bernalillo thank
you Jim and San Juan Madam
almost broke the legislature.
it's madam speaker gentleman's
hard to go back through
everything that we've been
Juan I am just relieved and
happy to see the parties come
together I think it shows that
we can function as a political
body Madam speaker gentleman
from San Juan and I think it
So madam speaker gentleman
I I'm happy to see this I think
this is a fantastic example of
bipartisanship and I really
appreciate the work that every
you I will be supporting this
legislation.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative cream.
We have heard for years about
the shortage of medical
personnel and in two years ago
this.
raised when you compared to our
old statute with California
California is more favorable to
doctors.
doctors in my district court in
my city is well.
Talking about how this was going
to be difficult for them.
have a list of providers and
doctors that we're closing.
Had a close friend that they
were trying to get a referral
My doctors that I visited this
last year.
Both of them told well all three
of them I'm sorry all three of
I stood up and told the body
about one of my providers he
said I'm gonna retire early and
I get notice couple weeks ago he
did retire early.
I'm glad that we've come to a
compromise.
We have to support them we have
to become business friendly we
have to be friendly to the
Of each piece of legislation as
we debated and passes.
I just can't say how happy I am
thank you gentleman from San
Juan.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Eddy and
Otero counties Representative
This
Compromise.
I I do think.
We have because careers the and
early and we have cause people
to lose equity in in entities
myself I we should all learn
from this mistake this was a bad
day.
Sorry and it was not it was not
good for our state it was not a
The gentleman it's sixty eight
million is what I'm being told.
things I believe there's money
in H. two two this year to help
with sure of some of the
solvency frankly these kind of
changes should help because what
would happen otherwise as we
have these independent
outpatient health care
it's a few things in terms of
how we we tackle that debt that
deficit.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I agree
with you wholeheartedly I think
we need to work to rebuild
of my neck to stand up just a
little bit I
I don't know that we're headed
down the right road the
gentleman I
the insurers that kinda held us
hostage I would tell you from
the other side of the fence I
think the trial lawyers are the
you very much.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Otero County
Representative black bloc.
and support your legislation you
know our doctors or physicians
or healthcare providers are what
keep our communities whole they
keep us safe they keep us
omitting Mr Madam speaker
calling us and to get that right
Madam speaker and gentleman.
What specific entities would be
subject to the six million
just six to amend and create
this new tier of independent
outpatient health care
facilities.
Okay great thank you madam
Madam speaker gentleman this is
now tied to.
It's tied to some kind of index
madam speaker John can you tell
me what kind of index that is
thousand you might be looking at
the independent providers
there's some major center
vindicate cap as far as that
three year rolling average CPI
the idea is we we realize that
that sometimes an economy can be
turbulent and so by doing a
three year rolling average you
kind of speak without those
those sharp spikes.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
appreciate the answers I
appreciate the sponsorship of
this legislation the
bipartisanship that we've seen
madam speaker I was not here and
when we passes through our our
house and Senate and twenty
bleeding out of our state and we
are just really hurting so I
appreciate this madam speaker
gentleman I think this is a very
good compromise I appreciate it.
There is further debate the
speaker I yield the gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you madam chair and
gentleman.
As you know in our district we
have the Indian health service I
they are referred to the border
town hospitals is I have a
number of friends who are
doctors and I know they're going
I'm still going to be taken
boards from the front and areas
from the back simply because I
know of some since that are
still pending.
Mr chairman for San Juan so to
start with that my caution
making friends with lawyers that
would be the first thing I would
I would say in response but
is happy I'm still going to the
bills from the front areas from
the back thank you very much for
the answers thank you madam
chair.
gentleman from San Juan County
yield.
Mr Graham the to the gentleman
from Chavis.
Mr speaker on me Mr speaker.
coal mine is really rural New
Mexico.
In those of us that
Representative those parts of
the state we realize that it's
gentleman but the way I see this
is this is really just one step
that we're trying to do to
ensure that those doctors and
accurate Mr Jennifer Chavis that
it is accurate and it's not like
the docks
don't want to participate in the
PCF in those in that context is
that they literally couldn't
dollar cap obtain the five
hundred thousand dollar
insurance policy on the private
market so they can stay within
the PCF.
facility that he intends to
build for his osteopathic clinic
and that was jeopardized by the
work that we did a couple years
she is capital investment will
likely be made hearing that this
legislation if signed by the
governor is becomes law so it
to help particularly those of us
in rural parts of the state to
try to retain the medical
professionals that we have and
like I said this is just I think
what else we need to do to
attract that talent to our state
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman.
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Catron grant and Hidalgo.
Speaker
it you know first allied I think
this is a wonderful day for
health care for New Mexico.
actually even Los crucis so work
with a lot of doctors are also
and I've seen how it has been
this using this transition over
the last two years
and so I just this is a great
great day for again for health
care in New Mexico it is only a
see that our our both our our
speaker and our our minority
leader the house the Senate all
together are working together to
straighten this out this this
talked some of the doctors and
they don't want to leave New
Mexico they love New Mexico it's
a beautiful place to live
and and they were frustrated and
stressed and so it's this is a
great thing so madam speaker
representative from Chavis Eddie
and Lee Representative of Mason.
Madam speaker
Representative the Hilton Mexico
probably been said now stand
mainly in support of this bill
it's a.
It's been we've had a lot of us
waiting the last few that is.
Somewhat care of this doctors in
my
district were pretty despondent
until this compromise contained
allied in again I'd like to
What we can get done and I
appreciate the the effort from
our.
In line.
And or.
I do that with the lawyers but
again I just want to stand out
make it longer.
Harding quay and cemig San
Miguel and union counties
Representative Chatfield thank
you for your the gentleman yield
Mister grill the gentleman from
couldn't afford malpractice
insurance we we have a very
extreme shortage of doctors and
health care and are very rural
remote areas and and many of
those were also fixing to go
in support of this bill thank
you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close thank you
madam speaker so I I agree with
the sentiments spoken of here
my hat to the Senate
leadership on both sides to the
speaker for their leadership on
this as well there's been a lot
of back and forth this bill will
ensure that patients are still
I would appreciate the
opportunity yield to my co
sponsor as well.
Thank you madam speaker and and
thank you leader I think the
let's not forget that at the end
of the day this is about people
this is about real people out in
our communities from rural New
Mexico to urban New Mexico from
ensuring we have access to
health care and if there are
unintended consequences and
legislation that we passed in
this body it is up to us as
legislators to come together and
as our co sponsor our leader
lane for bringing all of us
together.
and for all of those legislators
to three do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate taxation business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill five
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty three in the
affirmative and zero in the and
And San Miguel.
Ready on on item seventy six yes
madam speaker would you give me
to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
or substitution gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you madam speaker Senate
bill two hundred related to
procurement provided an egg
Of more than five hundred
million dollars with that we
stand for questions madam
speaker.
As amended.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill two hundred as a
been amended the vote is now
open.
The vote is about to close.
Sixty one in the affirmative.
Zero in the negative Senate bill
two hundred as amended has duly
Forty seven but only if you have
one with you that you can show
for us.
Mr speaker I'm ready but you'll
might get in a unanimous vote if
they into the for the record
reflect that election is sort of
replaces Senate Judiciary
Committee subs to for Senate
bill sixty nine as amended a
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
include E. bikes it defines
electric assisted bicycle which
we currently don't of men into
three classes and provide
standards for the regulation and
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
the passage of the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill sixty nine is
twice amended.
We are on final passage of
What is one of six for the
affirmative during the negative
Senate Judiciary Committee
supposed to present a bill sixty
nine as amended because of the
are for placing Senate bills of
the one assessment of final
passage has been taken as a
subject to debate amendment
there's a petition the donated
explained the bill thank you Mr
speaker as the two fifty one AM
and the metropolitan we've
of properties within the
dedicated metropolitan
development area to is
individually to close Mr speaker
I move that Senate bill to
Close.
Little is now closed by a vote
of six in the affirmative one in
Brown are you ready on item
number nineteen.
I'm ready Mr speaker would you
please give me to that point
that the record reflect that
election is a Sir for placing
Senate bill twenty as amended on
final passage is been taken it
is now subject to debate
ties the minimum district
distribution retirement age to
Internal Revenue Service
regulation and it adds
southeastern Mexico college by
speaker I move that south
thirteen to the Senate bill
twenty as amended do now pass we
are on final passage of Senate
bill twenty as amended the vote
is now open.
has duly passed this house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
members heroes or in do we have
a HFC I know needs to meet this
afternoon so what we're gonna do
is we're going to recess subject
to the call of the chair so
don't go too far so that we can
gonna go to messages and read
some more messages generated
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business messages
for House Bill two thirty two
with emergency clause house bill
two seventy House Bill three
fifty three with emergency
clause have been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the house that the duly enrolled
in those copy of Senate bill two
sixty as amended has been read
in full in order by the officers
of the Senate in open session
and request the signatures of
the officers of the house
four seven nine Senate bill four
seventy four as amended has been
read in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate vote
session requests the signatures
of the officers of the house.
Bill three fourteen as amended
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill four hundred as amended
returns same here with
passed house bill one sixty one
as amended by the house and
further amended by the Senate.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty four as amended by the
Senate and requests the
the Senate has passed Senate
Joint Memorial fourteen as
amended and request the
concurrence of the house.
Respectfully submitted sure do
business objection is ordered to
if you thank you Mr speaker your
house appropriation of finance
committee will meet at four
fifteen PM in room three zero
seven we will do our work
So the federal.
I think we're good.
What.
Storefront.
There's Senate bills.
Gentle lady from.
Members of house school etcetera
recess until I call back
hopefully not too long ago for.
