The residents were extremely
happy for various reasons one
enjoy activities walking jogging
and cycling safely to children
walking to and from school we're
safer three when the monsoon
rains come you don't have to
worry about public funny because
now there are important things.
Wanderings me that we were not
going to be in a flood zone and
our flood insurance could be
removed safely homeowners that
expense.
A new subdivision of twilight
homes was built right off of the
funds just down the road from my
home.
With the new subdivision traffic
increase greatly there were many
more people using the sidewalks
for daily exercise of leisure
strolls and getting access to
viable skatepark on sensitive
role process artists and
children walk to and from the
nearby elementary school I use
the date.
When I once again what the in
many places on the street the
three next to my house I call
vermilion county services to
request I want to prepare for
the safety of all those who use
it five.
This is when accounting manager
informed me that the homeowner
Reis was responsible for the
repair she went on to work for
me this is there is enormous in
the county it is implemented
following the same words this
place for the City of
Albuquerque I was shocked.
How would this be that
owners would be responsible for
this so I began to present
different scenarios I said what
what if someone is walking
jogging or riding a bike on the
sidewalk in front of my house is
buckled practice for broken and
they have this half injured
himself was responsible for that
brand to was you are.
To what my husband is trying to
repair sidewalks and he sustains
an injury who is responsible for
that requests or was you are.
Three what if I can't afford to
pay someone to repair her answer
once you are still responsible.
I went on to express that I
thought that the ordinance was
very unfair and put holders in a
vulnerable position and open to
lawsuits I express this is the
sidewalk is property the owner
had no way of placing it under
their homeowner's insurance and
I told the manager that I'm sure
that most school had no idea of
their responsibility for the
sidewalk and the liability to be
as soon with that site one.
After a conversation and it I
knew that I had the would be
moved forward with this and try
to come to some kind of
resolution.
And that's my fault
Representative Garcia is a
champion and application for all
the constituents in his district
I think chairman
he needed and he went to work on
it.
As a homeowner I have no problem
accepting the responsibility for
keeping the sidewalk free and
clean of debris that struck past
what I cannot agree with is that
a holder is required to assume
the responsibility for repairing
awful broken for Packsize law
and the liability that may come
with that sidewalk.
My hope is that this order can
be heard by so that homeowners
no longer have the sole
responsibility for sidewalk and
their livelihoods are not put in
jeopardy.
And we do know.
investigation by the Legislative
Council library that there you
you understand you agree that I
know of which is Connecticut
Hawaii and DC they have the type
of ordinance in place that I
agree with the the new residents
are responsible for leave that
keep it that way but the
municipality is responsible for
the repair of any.
Open cracked sidewalks and
that's money will that we go in
that direction and I as of today
there's not a single person
whether it's in county or city
limits that even knew that this
is the first week we had no idea
that that they're responsibility
that they're carrying with them
in having that site which is
such a great thing.
To to to feel safe.
To have the storm drains all of
that but in comparison to the
liability it's it's not you know
it's just not thank you thank
you so much Madam chair on the
house bill up for us it repeals
this section of law three dash
forty nine dash for them explain
what the request for the nine
four US diplomatic chair members
of the committee allows local
government to give notice to the
property owner that are by the
public.
Sidewalk.
Ism notice that there's issues
with the sidewalk and they have
to do the repair.
So they're given as a period of
time in which to do the repair
if the property owner that abuts
the public sidewalk does not do
the repair the state law allows
the minister of local government
to.
Do the repair.
And then.
The local government sends the
bill to the property owner.
And if the property owner does
not make the payment back to the
local government for the repairs
that the local government maybe
the local government that puts
seventeen.
On the property owners property.
Public Regis is that next year
you know we're talking about
public property.
Here we're not talking about
private property.
And madam chair you know this
issue buckle sidewalks of the
tutor and sidewalks is really
problematic.
In the in in the especially in
our towns and cities and
and it's a public safety.
Public health issue.
We have these local sidewalks in
the in the young mother.
in the stroller taking her
infant child just on an evening
walk.
You not to get out of the house
and kind of read some good air
and the infant also kind of
partaking in activity when they
come to that local sidewalk
stroller can legally she ate
that global cyber manager so
what are they do they go on to
the streets.
They go around the block a
sidewalk creating another safety
issue that we in the valley.
Are known for.
The you know with the the we
have a disproportionate number
of pedestrian accidents in the
valley.
Mainly because we don't have
sidewalks on our streets.
In this case the sidewalks that
we do have in there is this
problem of the Buckley the
duration go into.
You know the streets also the
issue of our.
You know in individuals madam
chair tripping on the local side
walk or if you're in the
sidewalks.
But trusting breaking their
their name all that means grapes
or whatever maybe even kind of
vibe of falling on their heads
when the number of the graph
who's responsible the property
responsible for those them for
those damages if that person
that was injured wishes to kind
of pursue legal proceedings in
order for for just compensation
plans.
This is the also agreed as part
about this madam chair.
Is that low income elderly
property owners low income
disabled property owners.
A firsttime homebuyer young
families starting now madam
chair with kids.
In the in the start of Alvarado
fixer upper.
Being imposed that three to
seven thousand dollar bill.
For fixing.
The the city or the county
sidewalk.
It is just outlandish.
You know working families people
on fixed incomes don't have that
disposable income to cough up
three to seven thousand dollars
for the repair madam chair.
And I want to share some
testimonials that really kind of
of
bring this to life.
you Mr Garcia I sure hope your
bill about sidewalk passes they
tore up almost on my side with
this morning except for two
slabs I want to be only seven
thousand dollars.
I have no idea I was responsible
for this I just brought the part
I just bought the property in
twenty twenty I am I am very
upset and worried over the team
they will also on.
Hello Representative Garcia
thank you for taking the issue
with the sidewalk ordinance we
were recently forced to make
repairs on four squares of our I
hate and I in front of our
downtown home to the tune of
three thousand dollars we were
able to get on a payment plan to
ease the pain but it's not
something we feel we should be
on the hook for.
I always local funds that
support I passed museums
libraries senior citizens that
there are my question is.
Why don't we use bond money to
pay for sidewalk repairs.
It's not not everyone uses by
pastor senior centers but most
use sidewalks I just don't get
it.
I hope you make progress with
this issue.
Madam chair
With that we stand for questions
thank you Representative so with
that we'll go to the audience
I'd like to see show of hands in
support of the bill in the
audience the and the is there
any opposition in the audience
this bill okay seeing none let's
go ahead and hear from
supporting audience beginning
from the side of the room.
my name is Anne silly on the
second vice president democratic
black caucus and we stand and
support for the opposition keep
it short.
Of the is there any one else
would like to express their
support.
Showcasing the other comments
let's go to committee members
Representative law yes thank you
madam chair and representative
for bringing this bill forward
and it's important especially
because the this has happened to
some of my family members they
have the David got the got a
letter and said well you got to
prepare the sidewalk in ten days
or something and it seems very
unreasonable but I would like to
know a little bit about this a
state law that you referenced
three dash forty nine just for I
just looked up and said the past
two thousand nine do you know
what the circumstances could
have been to the passage of that
piece of legislation up.
Madam chair and members bonafide
I'm not familiar with that
history
but I would like to kind of
explore that and I think in the
end of an altercation there is
maybe some of that the
reflection of the.
Have the of the thank you for
okay thank you madam chair and
representative and then in the
bill I just ready here for bill
thank you for that but a I
didn't see anything with it
explicitly saying that the local
government couldn't sharks.
The person at that address for
the repairs do you know if
there's a section in your bill
that protects the homeowner from
having to pay those costs madam
chair.
the.
Madam was blocked
the decline was the specific.
In that it basically puts the
governing body in the position
to do the repairs.
And give notice to the property
owners that they're going to do
the repair.
But there is nothing in this
legislation that holds the
property County.
So from the very get go.
The local government takes the
initiative when there is notice
given to that local government
that there's this buckle signed
off deteriorates up then it's up
to them.
Based on this legislation to
take action and move to prepare
and do the maintenance on the
side.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative that's all I
have.
Thank you thanks to have
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam chair
thank you Representative for
this bill I just have a few
questions and just for my own
edification you're talking about
public I want to raise public
property anybody may be on the
sidewalk this is not part of of
someone homesteaders or private
we are.
That's correct chair of the I
and and Madam chair
representative so what we're
basically talking about with
this bill is.
Shifting the notice requirements
for repair from essentially
owner of the property.
I walked to the local
government.
And if the local government is
unsuccessful in finding whatever
the property owner is the local
government will then take
initiative to complete that
repair Madam chair
representative from the note.
The repair this feather stations
with the responsibility on the
local government to take that
initiative to do the maintenance
and repair of that the the
notice madam chair to the
property is that they're
engaging in this activity.
Okay thank you and then notice
that this is going to happen
their property starting tested
positive.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
At.
From the health so the next the
I don't see an FIR this is
Representative is that this
I didn't get it in time or is
this.
Why are.
Representative says there's
nothing our strong and it's not
just it's indeterminate so I
guess I I agree madam chair
representative and and the
substance of this bill I guess I
have some reservations and not
looks like we may be.
Shifting a large amount of
financial burden on to the
public entities I would like to
know a little bit more about
what that looks like for those
public entities in us tax payers
then last question on chair is
do we know if the state
homeowner's policies would cover
these tax repairs so if the
sidewalk needs to be repaired
properly can a homeowner with
homeowners insurance me claims
against that policy which would
also allow for that repair
jobs in the yes as my.
Testified.
To put that question to.
And.
In terms of.
Can I get can we.
But this can we allowed this.
Issues.
The previous.
Checks the actually.
You can flip.
And not for.
Is insurance because it's not
part of your property the public
property.
So not all of an insurance
company will not.
Coverage on the sidewalk with
their injuries thank you madam
chair thank your president
really dealing and a property
real property no man's land
sounds like this issue so
I thank you for information for
bringing in the bill if this was
an interesting issue off I will
be supporting it right home
visiting Manson dances on their
mind we might consider kind of.
Compromising in that for those
residents who are capable of
paying for those repairs maybe
have a
just having because of the law
that allows for the municipality
to charge back those folks maybe
it's at a tax deduction or
something for those folks that
are able to people to pay for
because I absolutely agree with
you that for those ones that are
just don't have the the
financial wherewithal to make
these are compares they should
not be responsible for it but
that's all I have madam chair
thank you very much thank you
and the colleagues before is
oranges of housekeeping.
Of the democratic analysis were
all filed at the fact that the
provider for the find all of.
And.
Is that.
And
Representative.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative Representative
Garcia I want to take you to
page two one three and four and
the construction is to occur in
fifteen days.
That is no reasonable time you
can't get a contractor to the
your sidewalk to repair it so I
I think you need to change that
date and I don't know what that
date needs to be but
So the you just can't find a
contractor in the and then of
time so we need to we need to up
that I don't move it needs to be
forty five days but all of the
work on that for the next
committee that madam chair and
the Senate we definitely look
into that.
I'll see what other states have.
and also exist in the current
statutes.
In terms of what the local
government is giving the
property owner right of the I
see it there is a larger a
period of time I've definitely
look into that and have
something available for this
committee.
Madam chair representative
Garcia I agree with with the
process of this that you know
the I have to give the city or
the county and eastern online
land but then you want me to be
responsible for all the
maintenance on it and that just
doesn't seem right thank you.
Representative Representative
Chasey thank you madam chair and
are we webcasting yes these are
live their life I know they are
sisters that was.
Shocked the problem and it
occurs to me.
That if this is the case if
we're gonna have to deal with
the the sidewalks it ought to be
in the appraisal of your poll so
that you're actually aware just
like the notice requirement
that.
There is a responsible for the
cycle has fronted which.
But
And then we get the assessment
so that's one that's one issue
then we have the county
assessors and the value of your
property annually.
Includes your taxes accordingly.
And so.
I I agree that there needs to be
a solution I also madam chair we
would.
Representative Hochman Vigil
that we may not we need to
problem solving.
to look at this because one of
the things in this is in our
analysis now if you copy if you
don't have one
I yield in statute repealing
removing the option for written
objection.
I'm not sure you want to do that
the other thing you're doing is
that you are.
And this is this is that moves
the discussion from this call is
to counties it probably the ones
with the counties of it's an
either or and then it removes
the requirement for the
governing body to adopt a
resolution to repair and and
really.
The governing body.
Should resolve to prepare and
pay for.
In my.
And so you may not want.
it also removes the requirement
to publish a resolution so that
may be good if you're not going
to ever charged as property
owner but it's it seems like
there about intricacies in the
law here that you might want to
not to renew to include in that.
For permanent solutions.
It protects the property does it
so
You don't.
The reason you don't want to get
rid of notice proper notice and
you do want to figure out
ultimately who's going to pay.
And I guess I would just suggest
that I know we have a new county
assessors Bernalillo county who
I think would be sympathetic to
the issue and try to help solve
the problem and I I agree with
that let's get this going.
Being discussed but check out
the.
Maybe unintended consequences
of repealing statute.
Thanks.
Thank and Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair actually have a question
for you I get started is I don't
see a microphone in front of the
presenters and use that I
if they could hear boilers.
I think they are and I guess as
we go we'll learn these things
about how to do my work and
stuff they can't they I think
they can be heard Sir okay thank
you madam chair
Madam chair in the
Representative so is there any
difference.
In in in the sidewalk in the
driveway for your car are those.
What a driveway for your car the
statutes be.
Part of the sidewalk or is that
a whole different thing I know
the driveways come out past the
sidewalk and people tend to drop
walk through your drive wise
also and stuff is that going to
create a problem.
Madam chair representative Laura
The.
The company Dr Pam.
The.
Kind of that that coincides with
the sidewalk I think that would
be part of.
The sidewalk.
You know and that to the
The current law basically says
that sidewalk but then you got
the right offense.
You know that would I in my
opinion I think it up gently be
part of the sidewalk in order so
so there is no issue in terms of
the legislation.
Currently the sidewalk in the
drive bands that are on the
public right away.
You know during the repair falls
on the property with our
legislation the sidewalk and
drive bands that are connected
to the sidewalk Department side.
Because the responsibility of
the local government the
maintenance and repair and madam
chair today and Representative I
think that might get into a
problem because.
I had I bought a new home in
town because we solar farm
Arnold home town and and we were
we remodel that fixes and we
tore out all the driveway is
retired.
So.
If we pass this bill.
I would just call the city home
you need to prepare almost my
god what.
My reference so I think there's
gonna be an issue there and then
is there parts of the city's.
Border towns our the sidewalk
might be private and public.
And there has to be a
determination of whether it's
public or private side wall.
Madam chair was somewhat a our
legislation deals exclusively
with public sidewalks.
And then the.
I do have some concerns madam
chair and representative about.
There not being any any wording
in the bill as to the the city
is responsible for the physical
part of this so.
I'd I would feel better about
the bill if it did state.
That the city has to pay for the
repairs it's not in there and if
if the ordinance overrides the
bill.
I would see us being exactly the
same spot or at.
In the.
I believe that's all I have
madam chair.
Madam chair of the legislation's
us makes the city and families
are responsible for repair if if
I if I may back up on that then
can you show me for in the bill
with the clothes line which is
the governing body of accounting
for men's.
That is necessary repair or
construct.
sidewalk funding an individual
tract or parcel of land to
conform with existing sidewalks
Centers adopted by the counties
County the governing body shop
provides less funding.
As the last in the dress of the
owner or agent of the track the
parcel of land that is
contagious the sidewalk the
municipality shall commence we
period.
Rooting for constructing the
sidewalk within fifteen days.
And and madam chair as a
representative of all due
respect there's nothing about
fees and pay for the for the
cost.
Also the response it's falls on
this little government madam
chair and representative what we
discussed before in your
testimony you said that the
ordinance said that the owner
had to pay for the cost the
ordinance still exists it would
put this into play they're still
going to send the bill to the to
the private land on.
Legislation the manager does not
allow for that to happen because
the local government is.
Yes paying.
For the repairs on.
They're doing the repairs in
order for this repair they have
to contract a somebody to do
those repairs and madam chair
and representative in your
testimony you said that they
were doing the repairs with this
in the bill to the to the owner
of the property.
And what is going on with this
Madam chair is that's the
current law.
That sense that allows local
government to do the repair the
local property owner does not do
that.
If they do the repair.
And they send the bill to the
property owner and chairman.
And if the property owner does
not pay the city or the county
for the improvements that they
made then they put a lien on the
property.
Okay thank thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative said
Representative little yes thank
you madam chair Representative
Garcia I was curious
my colleague Representative K..
At this point and I'm wondering
before two thousand nine how was
this done and my question goes
to madam chair what was the
experience that actually led to
this and from that what might
have worked with didn't work in
there that this happens.
Madam chair representative at
all percent of lock asked the
same question.
And I do not know the history.
But I am willing to kinds of
other research because the
statute there are a and
altercations at the end.
That kind of reflect on.
What went into the drafting of
the legislation.
But I do not know that history.
But I'm willing to kind of look
into it and see exactly what
whether what what were the
reasons and the legislative
intent for reading this
legislation four pack that
Madam.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Thank you Representative.
The law by.
Check thank you madam chair
Hold up.
Thank you madam chair and
representative for bringing the
bill I also have no idea and I'm
going to be going home and
looking at my staff.
Thanks.
I pulled up the section of law
that.
Your proposal repeals and I do
think there pieces in there that
protect the homeowner that you
might want to say and call back
in and one of them is a process
for the homeowner to object if
the city or municipality
determines that they want to
construct a sidewalk or repair
sidewalk.
Probably wouldn't object for
repairs that maybe you don't
want the sidewalk builds or
maybe it's a question of timing
and the owner used to say no
wait plumbers are coming and
they're gonna without that whole
section of my property don't
build in the next fifteen days
you know it needs to be some
kind of process saved for the
homeowner to act to that city's
determination I think so you
might want to save that piece
Clarifying that it's that the
have your municipality isn't
going to then charge the
homeowner put a lien on the
property might be worthwhile
because in the old law that was
a separate section it said it
had language very similar to
your proposal that the city and
county will commence doing the
repairs will do the repairs but
then there's an additional
section what yes and then they
will charge the home on.
So
It may not be necessary but it
might not hurt to be super clear
on that point.
There is I don't know what the
process would be around the
driveways madam chair and
representative but I think
that is tricky what advise a
homeowner said you know part of
my driveway is bad I want to
prepare the driveway.
How do I tell the city I'm
reading out this part this is
your part you know and I need
you to do it.
On this date because that's when
my contractors coming and I can
have a pile of dirt that I'm
driving over.
if there are nuances here that I
think.
Might have to be preserved eight
I do think homeowners need to be
informed and need to be
protected it sounds like this
could be disastrous.
But I also wanted to know how
much it's gonna cost and I think
that's the easy question if we
ask madam chair if we could get
somebody from a municipality to
come and say this is how much we
spent.
Building fixing sidewalks and
billing homeowners in the last
year then at least we have a
ballpark figure number
and could you know what we're
really waiting on them.
Those are the questions Madam
chair representative and I don't
know if you have the answers I
just thought there are some
things to consider as you move
the bill for the momentary
Representative Figueroa
You know the.
We're we're kind of going into
uncharted waters here.
For the better.
In our and and sometimes we
don't have that fine print.
That's available.
And I sure to testimonials.
But that's what they're asking.
What what they're being charged
three thousand dollars in one
case seven thousand.
So we already know what the cost
is.
Based on what I particularly
that is anti up.
My bill is real clear.
Is that there is no liability
for property owners.
There is no.
Coming from the property owner
of the pairs and men's that fall
solely on.
The local government.
I can understand Madam chair
this issue I notice.
Or protess the thing is.
The property owner is not being
held liable for anything.
What with the property owner
protests to the local government
doing repairs on their property
on the on their side of the city
or county property you know I'm
not properly welcome.
The local government doing the
repairs on this there's on the
on the local government
sidewalk you know and the so
there's that issue about the
notice that that has no
relevancy to our our legislation
but I can understand a penny may
be added protections in terms of
maybe the scenarios that you
mentioned.
Madam chair regarding.
Doing a kind of systematic
repair on the drive act on the
driveway that maybe might
include.
Going into that local government
portion I could see maybe
addressing that.
And and I'd like to kind of
person that you know.
Hopefully if this bill gets out
of this committee and going on
before the next committee.
You know I'm I'm already
committed chair to the to the
issue that represents the ring
address and on the kind of
person who these other issues
that act our fiber Senator can
off and Representative cheese.
Thank you madam chair and I
appreciate that Representative
Another question and I don't
know if it's addressed in the
statute or elsewhere is if if a
homeowner damages.
What's now the city's
responsibility to prepare to
prepare under this.
I don't know how that would be
handing that because it it is
possible not likely but it's
possible for a homeowner or
renter.
To to damage drive over destroy
that sidewalk and then how is
responsibility and prepare
assigned is another tricky issue
and I don't know if it has to be
addressed in this legislation
are not but it's something to
think about.
Thank you.
And that okay great thank you
committee members just Madam
chairman of the past can we have
a motion for to pass a
substitute motion for no
recommendations
steps to motion for an
organization to pass without
record.
Also have a motion of
substitute.
Madam can you explain that
please I don't quite hear all of
it and and.
I can explain wanted the motion
no objections I just thought
that because we absolutely.
Concerns that rather than having
to pass that makes sense to do
it without recommendation and
that includes it essentially has
no
it doesn't stop it or anything
it just to.
Maybe has a little I caution.
They need to get some work done
on that thank you for that
explanation Representative Eli.
Okay so we have the a motion by
Representative Chasey.
Or
Do passed with no drugs.
We have a second by.
Representative right okay please
take all.
Representative monitoring yes.
Representative lock yes.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little piece.
Representative reef yes ma'am.
Representative Zamora yes.
Vice chair the city's figure
this yes and I'm sure.
Yes.
Thank you Representative.
The possibility of the.
Yes the.
All okay let's move on to the
next available.
Representative Nibert.
The.
That's still a.
Thank you madam chair
good to be back to this
committee and the good to see
some new faces.
This is a bill that this
committee is for we tell us the
times record this time we've got
that out of this committee and
actually we there was a bill
over here without.
Website.
That would be Representative re
life
decided not to run this is the
same build.
Thank you words with very few
exceptions to update the years
That the we better use the last.
Almost three years.
This bill is genesis is wanted
for in two thousand one after
the aftermath of nine eleven.
State and.
Most states enacted
The legislation.
Representative impacts related
to the executive of the state
of.
I would say virtually.
We power to deal with
emergencies are off and.
We as a legislative body
divested ourselves of of.
Control over the matter if.
It's ironic that in New Mexico
or constitution with respect to
and insurrection on martial law
being where we are required to
come into session and we five or
seven days after after the fall
of after the martial law orders
and we cannot.
Recess or adjourn until that
matters taken care of.
So.
We have public health
emergencies.
We've had one cleared cents
March of twenty twenty.
We I lost count we're somewhere
in the thirty range of the
executive orders standard margin
to your amendment we have.
And as for those of you that
have served and passed
legislature's no last three
years
Legislative body does not have
any significant discussion on
the public policy issues that
have arisen have arisen from
that.
And so this bill.
It was an effort our collective
effort of myself and
Representative be lifetime.
To rest back.
What we feel is a life full
place of the legislature can
delay we're crafting public
policy in extended emergency we
understand the executive needs
can we have our inability to
deal with with emergencies say
Ross.
Most emergencies are related to
whether.
Whether forms for natives of
we've had you know some other
kinds of emergencies but the.
This one of there's been a usual
for for all of us and it is now
approaching years in duration.
And I believe and I have argued
for almost three years now this
I believe that you as elected
representatives.
Ought to be able to represent
your.
And have a seat at the table and
properties public policies these
vertices.
Our expanded for long periods of
time.
So this bill for centuries of.
The governor of the governor for
sectors and declared emergency.
I take care the emergency.
That emergency of if if the
should be extended beyond ninety
days them the legislature needs
to be called in the session
Santa.
I'm not saying.
How were involved that's up to
the legislature but we need to
see that the table to discuss
those matters moving forward.
Will those it says the same
thing as last year same thing
for the year before
and I've promised folks and I
will continue to bring this and
I don't care whether the
Republican governor of the
democratic gov it's a separate
issue that's that's all it is
so.
I will stand for questions and
and I sincerely miss the I I
fear with me through this entire
journey.
Thank you Representative we Mr
site keeps.
Right wise is to have and we
miss you.
So let's go to the audience and
do we have public comment in
support of the bill.
Good morning members my name is
Tennessee's second vice
president democratic black
caucus and I stand in support
House Bill Page I want to say it
is hard for the average person
to get in contact with the
governor to provide feedback
about emergency orders the
average person can get in
contact with the legislature
because communities you
representative the legislature
should have a stronger mechanism
for the legislature to share the
feedback of the people in your
community about the emergency
for.
This bill would improve the
average persist for years and
the government's ability to be
responsive to people's concerns
Joanne and mark
thank you Sir other comments.
In support of the bill any
comments in opposition.
let's go to the zoom.
And
Go ahead Carla.
Can you verify.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Carla Sonntag's
the C. E. O. of better together
New Mexico and I'm here to
support this bill I think it's
very important legislation you
know in just a couple of months
we will be at three years.
These orders have been in place
and we have had no say for more
legislature.
I think that you need the power
to represent your people your
constituents in all matters
dealing with important emergency
orders like this.
We have supported this measure
since it was first introduced
and we hope that you will
supported as well thank you.
Thank you.
Any further comments on Sam.
CNN let's go to committee
members Representative Rehm.
Madam chair.
One comment was I think express
Best Buy the public comment here
begin with I was gonna join now
the I think that the legislators
are closest to the community and
have the most contact with the
but he said the phone with thank
you that's my comment.
But I was gonna ask a the
representative he felt that was
true from what happened in your
community.
I think of.
Madam chair representative of
I think that's what drove.
Myself to work with with
Representative the lack of time
on crafting this bills without
strongly that.
We needed to be able to
represent our constituents as
that were the fault of the call
Portions of that order shut down
businesses portions of the were.
Alright Sir people to continue
working other people not to
work.
I mean there were automatic
impacts in every community in
the state and we we thought that
I still think that the
legislature and the thirty one
thousand people and most of you
Representative
Needed a seat at the table be
able to come from your community
and say here's how it's
impacting our community and if
we needed to the lady on on on
how to deal with that we can do
so we can say the governor's
doing a fine job and continue on
but we did not have a seat to to
to do anything in fact I believe
the only
K. that was one.
There were several that resulted
from those events the case of
water once the power called the
forklift is senator Candelaria
finally won on the financial
part of the this body has to
appropriate the funds for those
but absent that we have not
really had a significant
discussions ever have a
significant discussion on on the
public policy that arose and I
think of.
That's.
Part of our job is to make sure
that we are.
The voice of the people that
elected us here and and to let
the executive no what the hell
it's impacting our.
And madam chair I I agree I
think in the drafting of the
regional build is contemplated
the short term.
A rigid State you know force
fire Ryan.
some short term emergency and I
think the you have to involve
the legislature I think the the
in ninety days of the executive
may need a larger amount of
money if I remember right it
appropriates seven hundred fifty
thousand when they filed the
CEO.
It may need more money in that
source our job is is seven fifty
correct.
It was at that time I don't know
Madam chair representative of
there's been some changes to
staffing additionally the
I was authorized to spend seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
And then it was orders over time
she renewed it she was taking
the position that you have the
authority to allocate seven
hundred fifty thousand more of
this this bill also makes it
clear that there's one emergency
program.
You care it's not a new
emergency every sixty days or
ninety days or however long you
have an emergency and then this
body would determine whether
it's extended lost.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill forward again
When when COVID broke out.
That was a real busy time for us
legislators because we're
getting all kinds of calls for
our constituents.
In that happening all the other
questions are coming up is is.
About the rules that we're being
set forth.
When it first came out.
Every just about every business
was halted.
I represent a lot of Ag people.
And there's a lot of things that
happen in the agriculture
business that you can not stop.
Especially in the very business
the very business runs twenty
four hours a day.
and what it tells me to go to
slaughter for instance they have
to go you do you don't have a
choice it's about timing it's
about keeping the chain rolling
Livestock sales
Planting dates need to be met
there's so many things that have
to happen in this world to keep
our people fed.
Through the agriculture
agriculture community.
That is unrealistic it really
woke us up to what we do in our
responsibilities.
Providing food for the people.
And then there was we could sit
here and talk all day about all
the other Havanese.
The constituents warning
agreement with.
And not only did the
constituents our constituents
aren't able to get a hold of the
governor the governor's office
US representative had a hard
time getting a hold of people in
the government to get questions
answered.
I believe it's very important I
don't think the governor will
lose any of our authority or
power with this bill.
But I will give the the governor
more.
Understanding about what's going
on.
At each individual community and
and that we represent so we can
bring to the table to help the
governor in these situations.
And.
My question to you
representative is has the bill
change Danny from the first time
that is.
The goushi Asians between the
Representative a lot of the time
myself.
we came up with ninety days
farger.
One of the shorter if you want a
longer period we agreed on
ninety days I did not change
anything in this bill from what
I have agreed with
Representative the loss of the
whole I so it's it's exactly
like the prior bills of the
scene.
Council service had to update a
couple things number one
different session of the
legislature number two one
twenty twenty thirty five to
twenty twenty twenty twenty one
twenty twenty two years of so
those little things for change
but to my knowledge those are
the only things that were
changed between this this bill
is before you and the other
renditions of the this
committees previously asked.
And and the Madam chair
representative do you think.
Is it.
In my testimony and my
understanding am I correct in
thinking that it does not take
any power and authority away
from the.
It doesn't take any power
authority within the governor
for the first nine digits.
The legislature within shape.
If it chooses to extend the
chooses to terminate or chooses
to do something else of but it
gives us a seat at the table to
help make those determinations
so you can decide at that point.
The governor does have possible
limitations but those would be
placed on the governor I that
legislature through proceedings
we would have a seat at the time
to discuss so I I I don't know
whether it would or would I
suspect that with with the story
and as long as they choose
reasonable the emergency order
would would continue to be
enforcing the fact and and and
we would have our state and the
governor could do with this
issue felt the this.
The governor got align with one
of the with what the majority of
this body would want the the
this body would have the ability
to sorry you know we don't want
all of businesses where we don't
want this or that you need to
tweak locally there will be some
of.
Some relationships built to to
move the thing forward because
we as a state have an obligation
to deal with the purpose.
We as a state have that
obligation not just we as a
legislature or for is an
executive with the state have an
obligation to the people to try
to keep both sides to try to
keep to do things that the will
keep this save the state the
Sam.
But right now all the powers
vested in the executive.
For the last.
As of this on Texas almost three
years.
All of the powers vested in the
executive and this body has not
done one safe other than
approved budgetary items to deal
with the emergency orders that
remain in effect as in thirty
thirty so level at this point.
And thank you for that answer
representative madam chair I
know we I personally.
Had to write letters to
constituents that work right.
To go on with business as they
needed to because they're afraid
to go against the governor's
orders and they were trying to
comply in every way they could
so so they were good citizens
trying to help the problem.
But were afraid to break those
those rules being set for fourth
because they didn't really
completely understand and we
didn't have much more input this
legislators than they did.
So we were kind of put ourselves
out on land.
Proceeding forward with with and
and it happened to me mostly the
agriculture business and we're
trying to go forward with what
had to be done and kind of put
ourselves out on the land trying
to comply with the rules so it's
pretty tough I think it be a lot
better if we could come in and
have some kind of a session
understand the rules understand
why then we get taken back to
the people
I think madam chair that that
concludes my questions and thank
you for Representative.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey okay you
madam chair.
And Representative nine or if
you know how I feel about this
Catcher.
If we were to record branch of
government I wouldn't disagree
can I.
Talked about this before because
we would be more readily
available to meet.
You know you've heard the
modernization discussion if we
actually had more
The for easier for us to callers
thousand special session if we
were here for more than thirty
days one years sixty days the
next year I I wouldn't
necessarily object but.
Why I checked with no is that.
Although the first emergency
powers act was passed after
knowing.
This comment
Pandemic was really not
foreseeable although thank you
president George W. bush
approved.
Looking into the history of
pandemics became concerned and
his administration looked pretty
carefully at what to do in the
case of the pandemic ninety days
this pandemic.
It wasn't safe for us to come up
here it was it was the middle of
the day of twenty twenty and
before we came in the special
session in twenty twenty we have
the national labs do a state of
the building to see if there
were
Health risks if we assembled as
we ordinarily do and and those
of us who are here that we saw
all of the research and we.
With gentian violet of the
public who didn't.
I agree with the science on it
they were in my view looking
more update.
The facts of the limitations
that the science
they didn't want to have that
limitation they didn't have the
state in they wanted things to
happen as usual and then up by
nature we don't like change we
prefer to just happen within
continue the same it's
It would have been really
dangerous for us to come in and
and then you're only going to
have the order continue for
It's forty days or sixty days
sixty four sixty eight that was
that another.
The point you Representative
Eli.
I I have in my mind.
Those in smaller numbers of days
that fewer days so
And heaven help us I hope I hope
I hope we never have to get hit
with something as devastating
and on anticipated as COVID
again but if we do I mean I
think we saved lives the way it
was so
All right I.
I'll be willing to consider this
update when we are a more equal
pensions government.
I I think it's we simply cannot
predict and
Because some people.
And I I I
I think sometimes of some of the
complete some retail businesses
and then I hear representative
Lara and I hear their.
There probably needs to be a lot
we're sorry of what these.
Could safely continue.
In the way of
Ever cultural activities or
getting people fed and getting
to the people the health care
that we but I I'm not willing to
go here the act and I think we
need.
Probably.
To begin with structurally and
functionally to be in a more
Reasonable position to respond
flexibly and quickly vacillate
than we are.
As a legislature but there was.
Sign in.
Shop of a resale like secondhand
clothing store in Phoenix that
somebody.
The owners posted on the door.
If you Jack to our requiring
balance of.
We'll be glad to talk to about
that when you come in at the end
of the pandemic to sell us your
dead grandmother's clothing.
And
So.
That's where that's where I go I
mean you can get a little bit
of.
Some some who were
I have to.
I think I think we're not where
I can support this.
I see that with the greatest
respect for college.
Thank you madam chairman point
can I make this point comment on
the
Point to make just this one
time.
Thank you madam chair I don't
want to save it for views of
the.
You all of the medical and chair
of marketing aside this is a
very serious issue.
And and Representative Chasey
raised a good point in in
concerns about our safety and
the health of everybody.
In the pandemic.
Representative.
The.
We did a lot of zoom.
While the pandemic was going on.
And why couldn't we do zoom to
bring better ideas to the table.
To help our governor.
And help the people the state
even if it saved one life that
we one more life with a state.
If we could have some input.
On what was going on and how it
happened and how it all plays
out.
It's just it's just seems to me
that we are elected by the
people to represent them.
And and we didn't get the
opportunity to do that through
the pandemic and and and we were
getting phone calls and emails
like I've never gotten before.
Us.
And that's all I have Mister
shared and Representative Chasey
with all due respect thank you
for your testimony.
Thank you Representative of
block thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative I
appreciate you for bringing this
bill forward to is that a thirty
year now and I think it's such
an important piece of
legislation and on the point of
our calling from Bernalillo
county we do want to get to that
point where we are an equal co
equal branch of government we
want to be as powerful as
possible because we are the
closest body to the people and
you know we have to go back home
and talk to our constituents
every two years here in the
house and the Senate every four
years and that is the most
accountable we possibly could be
and I think also on that point I
think
Madam chair and representative
this also makes us more
accountable for what we do
during the pandemic any kind of
state of emergency it's not just
the governor who gets to get the
hits now it's all of us as well
and I think that's a very
important point to me because we
all here in New Mexico where a a
land of United cultures as we
say in our our state anthem but
really right now the governor
has a lot of power that the
legislature I believe should
have so I agree I agree with
Representative Chasey I think we
do need more powerful as a body
and I am in strong support of
this legislation so I in the
past.
Proportion would just.
In the.
I'll explain it.
At a Representative right our
our notice okay.
Madam I make it affects
consent all second that
to to to to.
I have a motion for that to pass
a second by Representative green
however I also have a substitute
motion for to table.
Question subsequent emotion to
take substitute motion does that
truck more discussion or do we
finish is good thank you.
You're here to make your closing
yeah.
I.
Is.
I have a substitute motion to
table.
The Sanchez okay.
thank you madam chair.
You know the prior times I've
come before the committee the
committee the concern has been
that this was an effort to shine
a light on the governor
criticized sessions she made.
And I again.
One of the oil that has never
been the intent of the donor of
the original sponsors for the
sponsors of the legislation is
truly heartfelt that I think we
legislative body to rest back
something some of our that maybe
two thousand one.
Right you know so we have to
deal with this huge emergency
the the
looking back on it I think they
were short sighted in in just
giving carte lunch to the
executive in this state frankly
other states I would note that
there is model uniformed.
Legislation this bill is not the
model uniform building because
this was in good shape before we
of the.
Myself and representative Ely
and I'm comfortable with it
with the I would be happy to
look at the uniform taxes well
in advance of the I can tell you
states and doesn't matter
whatever they're record blues
and then over the great
affordable of the legislation
has passed you really are most
stations provided because I the
legislative bodies of realized.
They gave me too much power over
to the executive and they have
taken that far back and that's
what I'm asking this committee
to do is to allow us to serve
our constitutional lawyers and
to be the voice of the people
to represent us everyone who
elected represent them in this
body and.
Hi we need a place at the table
we don't have so with that I
would encourage you not to table
in to allow us to move forward
you might see the same fate
Judiciary it's always got
through those to go through the
judiciary of our thank you
please give me that opportunity.
Okay so we have a motion tabled
substitute to table.
We have a second.
It
will be because.
Percent.
So we could come okay let's call
the roll a motion for.
Representative on your.
Madam chair.
It did fit nobody second the
table motion how can we
technical
please.
Thank thank you for what.
Thank.
Representative walk no to table.
Representative Chasey yes to
table.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little.
Representative right now.
Representative Zamora noted.
Representative Figueroa they
chair no to table.
And madam chair Johnson no to
table.
Okay thank you Representative I
am I voted no because I'd like
to for the opportunity for this
bill to be heard in Judiciary.
Thank you.
Press one to vote.
Of we have to pass we have to
pass a motion.
How.
Six in favor three in
opposition.
You have to take.
The.
The.
Thank
you okay so now we're on the
main okay R. yes.
We have not finished discussion
and would like to okay.
Discussion on discussion okay
good that was.
no one so.
To discuss because there's an
issue that has.
Just barely touched upon is the
main issue for because with the
concrete core of this bill I
agree in terms of emergency
speed and flexibility to serve
the people to New Mexico and
your safety is key but the third
pieces information and I think
the information that was
happening on the ground is what
we bring as legislators to the
discussion Fischer safety I
don't want that piece left out
but I would just madam chair
with not in this bill get
conservative great.
He's.
That we have a limitation for
the governor in terms of funding
if their state emergency and.
Seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars is not enough to deal
with a one day tour data
emergency much less a ninety day
span.
If we don't address the money
accessible to the governor for
that ninety days until the
legislature's calling to
continue or not we are severely
limiting speed and flexibility
of response and keeping people
say so well I agree with the
core of this unless that pieces
addressed right along side of
it.
I would be able to go for it on
the floor.
So I'm gonna do what we're never
supposed to do madam chair which
is I'm gonna support it now and
I'm gonna ask the sponsor to
address that piece for I will be
able to support it going
forward.
Representative Nibert you madam
chair and representative for
rural
Seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars doesn't mean that that's
all the money that the governor
has available to for us to
expand if it's a tornado.
For instance and there's a lot
of damage.
Transportation department there
are many departments are going
to have funds and resources
available to address so I don't
know why recapped at seven fifty
that may not be a reasonable sum
now without this other
legislation.
In that spot.
That's appropriations one of
what they allow reviews without
are coming back and that's
better.
Representative other agencies
and in those types of of.
I have tremendous resources to
apply to to deal.
Margins
within their own budgets so it
is not the government only spend
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars and then walks away from
a flood of.
That doesn't happen there's
going to be other monies who
that have been budgeted in
agency budget staff will be
utilized affect for for
responding to the normal of
course
and and I'm sure that even in
this emergency department health
expended a lot of money that was
within its budget.
To deal with things that came up
yes I would I would venture gaps
that.
With vaccines became available.
Budget money with was utilized
for that although we did COVID
we met we appropriated a lot
more money for the overall of
the but there was no gap in in
the service because of the state
what this legislation would do
that.
It would have us coming back
together.
Regularly to do exactly what
you're asking for.
If we have an extended
emergency.
We will be coming together every
sixty days to appropriate funds
and have a state of where those
funds go so so.
Respectfully
Disagree with with your analysis
I I think that this legislation
actually gets to the point that
you want to get to and that is
we as the appropriating Bob we
as a legislature would have
hands on throughout that there
would appropriate the
appropriate monies to deal with
Amsterdam you know the the
flexibility for.
I don't I don't see it as a as a
real real interest in one of the
hundreds this time and it won't
be the best.
The agencies have.
Bills and budget there's some
flexibility there we would come
back and replace those funds and
their agency budget so they
continue to gather his.
But I I don't see that the news.
Madam chair thank you
Representative for an
informative answer in some
respects I think he's right
about funds from other agencies
but I am not comfortable with
that cat because we have to
match to get the federal funds
for emergencies and that has to
be done along federal timelines
dollars so that still makes me
very uncomfortable but I agree.
Madam chair with with the
thought that we have to be part
of the discussion and I want to
be clear madam chair it's not
for me and question the building
co equal branches is a question
of bringing the information we
have to the discussion to keep
people's.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair and receiving information
to take.
To our community.
That I see that isn't as
important as far bringing
information to the executive
taking information that is I
think we can be a key component.
Thank you madam vice chair thank
you Representative Nibert any
further comments before we go
back to the main motion.
CNN we have a motion for two
passed by Representative block
the second by Representative
green can we take growth please.
Two three of those
okay by Representative two
passed by the second by block.
We'll get this together.
Representative on in order yes
I'd like to explain.
That's.
Keep public.
Representative walks yes ma'am.
Representative Chasey now.
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
I like to explain the.
Representative little yes.
Representative Rehm yes I want
to explore the move of.
Representative Zamora yes and
I'd like to explain level.
We're gonna have a whole
discussion.
Vice chair Figueroa you go back
to the past.
Before you do what student.
Is that correct everybody so it
is what it I'm sorry I thought I
heard a past I mean in yes.
And madam chair Johnson yes.
Can we have a due pass
representative Nibert and the
team will go.
Back to the committee members to
explain votes.
Didn't need to establish a
transfer.
I move to table because of the
reasons that.
Senator cheesy Representative
Figueroa question wrongly out I
do have some concerns of the
bill that just like the
substance accord  I do agree
with it so I.
Of voting yes to table because
of my concerns but I voted yes
to move forward because I would
like it heard and judiciary I
think we can address those
concerns down the line.
The representative of the day
Hochman Vigil thank you madam
chair so I yeah if we're if
we're going to Judiciary anyway
Representative
to have this discussion why not
make a comprehensive I think
that all of my colleagues here
today madam chair have brought
up some salient points I think
the first one is our process of
the legislature is broken.
And modernization is a huge part
of all of this we can't expect
to just fix one small part of it
and not have it reverberates
through the rest of the of the
process right so my my distinct
hope for you Representative
Nibert because if anybody can do
it I know you can.
Is one worked out no pressure.
When we're more.
Twenty.
When we're talking about we're
talking about modernization as
it relates to public health
emergencies
We we have to curve that power
of appropriately and it's not
just about what the government
can do what we can do about what
we can do with the government so
I hope that you will include
this and whatever modernization
efforts we know are coming down
the pipeline including they are
the seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars limitation that picture
figure of process but this this
needs to be part of the whole
package I'm not just
freestanding selves thank you
madam chair thank you
representative Representative
little thank you Representative
Zamora yes thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative I
prefer bring this bill for this
bill sounds.
It is so much legal but it's
more than that it's about saving
lives.
It's about us getting a chance
to get.
To take the input from the
citizens on how it's affecting
them and bring it to the table
and do our jobs as
representatives there's we can
help save lives also.
And us being at the table and
having some discussion about it.
There's nothing wrong with that.
That's what we're here for we
live in America a democratic
system.
That everybody ought to have
their voice heard.
And that's what this bill is
about.
Thank you Representative Nibert
thank you madam chair members of
the committee representative
here madam chair thank you I I
will vote yes whether it's a
Democrat or Republican governor
because I think we need to take
back our power I do agree with
vice chair and one I actually
think is that the governor
should be able to appropriate up
to two million dollars in the
Merseyside read the it's two of
thank you.
Hey thank you and with that
Representative nine very fast
and could lead to Judiciary.
And.
Note for the record that took
three times longer with one
lawyer to.
And there is still one.
The city of house bill twenty
six madam chair.
Ask your indulgence we have the
magistrate.
For bills for some justice
patients chart tracks.
Yes.
Okay Representative go.
thank you madam chair and hello
Committee.
Great to be here with you today.
We are on house bill one
thirteen magistrates court
changes.
This is bill that.
Is a priority you can say for
the supreme court yes my expert
witness I have justice Chief
Justice Shannon Bacon.
Briefly touch on what the bill
does and I just.
More information to share.
One for the first thing that the
field is just a qualifications
of the magistrate judge.
To run for affection.
Right now the only
qualifications are that you have
to be eighteen years of age and.
Have a high school.
G. E. T. that's correct so
I think the enhanced
responsibilities of the
magistrate found the increase
complex it complex on the basis
that magistrates are hearing
that's I think it antiquated
qualification rules in the
courts have are have come up
with the suggestions that I
think is very prudent it the
first thirty years of age and
and then there are a number of
other potential qualifications
eight years of experience record
judge court clerk equivalent
have a four year degree from an
accredited institution of higher
education or brief in four years
of work.
Teaching social work social
services law enforcement
participation rations.
Or the court system or council.
And we also grandfathered in
current financial aspects this
bill also correct grandfathers
Mr then if you move to page
three there are some
jurisdictional changes
magistrate court in the one has
to do with the fact that
magistrates will have the have
Mexico who extensive have
jurisdiction that is the same as
the District Court under which
stage Sir so for example let's
take the first district that's
where I'm from the first
district is lost almost real
Santa Fe counties so that would
be magistrates and any one of
those counties could perform the
magistrates.
And lastly it appears statewide
station street in traffic cases
except for for the office.
I believe that is pretty much
the sum total housing.
Yes one last.
Right now and three point are
not what we call a point of
record and this would create a
record system some of the
records of the proceedings on
I'm sure the Chief Justice and
explain to you what the plans
are organs and so on and so
forth so with that managers at
your pleasure to hear from the
Chief Justice yes thank you.
good morning madam chair members
of the committee as the
representative.
Point out this is a priority
bill for the judiciary this year
I think that when I listen to
the discussion on the prior bill
about modernization this is
essentially modernization of the
magistrate courts magistrate
court judges have jobs that are
much more complex than what is
reflected in their
qualifications this time.
Magistrate judges and be non
adversarial terminations of
probable cause they set
conditions of release they
authorize searches of persons
and property big usual issues.
We can order arrests workforce
reduction.
The order eviction thing garnish
wages they can order the taking
of property so these are big we
issues and we strongly believe
that the qualifications
magistrate should meet that
moment by way of education
training.
We attempted over the course of
the past year and a half
conversations with the
magistrates of the body about
what they think that while
think you should look like.
Lee I.
I I say it is not perfect but I
believe we have to magistrate
judges hearing remotely to
hopefully investor they then
jumped back on the bench but
they're trying to participate
today because they support the
qualifications that for by the
sent out a series of options for
the magistrates to be voted on
in this is the option that was
selected by their bodies all.
Thirty years old and he's
educational or experience
requirements are are important
for the public to have
Faith and confidence in the
magistrate judges but also for
the legislature
have faith and confidence in the
magistrate judge's they are
professional body.
we believe that by changing the
qualifications that will reflect
their professionalism which is
really important.
On the related topics of
magistrates courts becoming a
quarter of record it is a
furtherance of that seem ideal
right now if you go to network
or District Court yield of three
point there is a physical
recording of what is happening
in court and that also.
Is a big piece of transparency
the magistrate court we don't
have that so it's very difficult
to know upon later review
there's standards complaint in
the life what actually happened
in the portal so we believe this
is an important step towards
that professionalization.
As well I know that questions
had been raised about what
happens on kids.
way that magistrate judges
court.
And we have a two step process
as we look towards making the is
we've asked for a one year delay
implementation
because with the magistrate
judges going on the record one
accomplishment couple of things
in the in the coming year first
technology make sure we have all
the technology we need to do
this training.
And the spending time with the
court of appeals of what about
what their needs will be because
these cases will now go directly
to the court of appeals rather
than the district.
Right now cases that in many out
of magistrates court given what
we refer to this for by at the
apple.
So he started magistrates court
you can go to District Court
Virginia over he'll then you can
go to the court of appeals and
then you can come to the Supreme
Court if we say yes.
No other cases debt for by apple
so this will eliminate the
detour to the District Court
take the cases directly to feels
we amended statutory provisions
in twenty nineteen to reflect
this for the metropolitan court
in Albuquerque which is also a
magistrate court
in thirty five thirteen dash to
a and thirty four dash eight
eight six we with the
cooperation of the Legislature
were able to change the past for
appeals for metro courts that
they go directly to the court to
the people's factored in that
for by to the apple so we would
be asking you to replicate that
next year as we figure out the
parts of the technology and the
term.
And then the last piece of the
bill and sponsor indicated is
changing what I refer to as the
footprint of the magistrate
judge's jurisdiction and the
first judicial district is
probably the best exhibit of why
that is so important.
So the first initial district
which covers Santa Fe
also.
Is.
The Santa Fe magistrate court is
incredibly busy court thousands
and thousands of cases assigned
job.
The magistrate court in Los
Alamos that judge has about two
hundred K..
Real inequity.
And so what we're this is
designed to do is to create a
more even playing field with in
the district of the slowed the
each check here on the first
judicial district is not the
only district that past these
challenges and so right now we.
we we try to balance things a
little bit port workers.
the record because of the last
one that is very transparent to
the public rather than by the
chief judge signing.
And adhoc orders to with cases
around everyone should
understand.
The potential of the body of
judges that the.
In front of.
We talked about traffic cases
being statewide we've moved all
traffic cases thank you
yesterday yesterday to an online
process is very simple for
people here in traffic cases the
card D. W. why our.
Because the W. wise very local
issue we also know what law
enforcement having to bounce
around in any fashion to testify
at the Y. series because again
Michael offices on.
So those are the changes that we
have proposed chair and I happy
to answer any questions that and
the numbers have we also have
Representative to a see here
because reductions.
Thank you this is very much
appreciated do you have any
further comments Representative
madam chair.
Of eight then we will go to
public yes when we in the rule
would you raise your hand if
you're here to say something in
support.
But I'm sure
any opposition in the room.
Our acting will go online online
and this you is there anyone who
wishes to speak in support of
the house bill one thirty.
Any opposition to house bill one
thirteen.
None madam chair suggested a few
they can hear you well that's a
good question.
In this is
us.
Thank.
but then we will go to committee
are there any questions from the
committee.
Representative some more madam
chair thank you and thank you
for your presentation thank you
very much
Is there a young judge somewhere
because it's a problem.
Well for starters said
I think it's a little scary to
have an eighteen year old
deciding.
In.
That could be somebody's try it
I I I think it's very prudent
to.
To increase the age of.
Maturity and responsibility
that's not to be negative about
eighteen year olds but there's a
lot of growth that happens
between eighteen and thirty that
I think and wisdom that is
acquired I think is necessary
for Spence justice and madam
chair and and the
Representative is a scope change
anyway the election process or
anything about the judge I don't
believe so okay thank you thank
you madam chair and thank.
Thank you representative
Representative re well madam
chair.
While it wants the opportunity
to to have the Chief Justice of
the heart share.
We have a motion for the past we
have further discussion.
Chair and Representative and
Chief Justice.
The committee and also says that
it's not highly clear an
appeals.
Maybe in the master for
requiring the trial in the
District Court I know it's a
trial for feels that need can
you clarify that and and maybe
make us of.
The table with how it's worded.
If if the Chief Justice.
Madam chair representative.
Right now magistrates court
appeals go to they have a right
to know will appeal in the
District.
That's where we're chair for
now.
for now for now okay we will be
asking madam chair
representative changes so that
it is very clear that once this
is ready for prime time so to
speak that they will go directly
to the court of appeals rather
and that way.
temporary station at at the
District Court which is one too
many it's a process that is very
very here for calling.
Share.
Representative.
If what just it I was
contemplated they're not there
will be a trial.
Know that I'm chair
representative no ma'am it will
be appealed it would just be a
record that the record will go
out as it doesn't yes yes yes
thank you on that point chair so
really the only no vote you're
getting is when the Apennines
straight.
Madam chair representative yes
accepted there is a car madam
certain cases for landlord
tenant right now but that is
like needed to change by way of
internal for rural as well so
we're trying to eliminate four
stops in the process have
wrecked recorded preceding in
magistrate court then we'll
speak typical appeal in the
court yes thank you madam chair
I think that was my bill
actually some.
This question yeah.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to yes thank you
Representative I appreciate the
bill and the so I just had a few
questions regarding to some
language in the bill on page two
it says the.
On page one four nine seventeen
the.
Year degree from an accredited
institution of higher education
in order to.
Four years of experience it
doesn't specify that to your
degree has to be twelve is that
slide or.
Yeah.
So.
please madam madam chair
Representative that's that's a
fair question the term look over
my shoulder.
My folks here but I think two
years.
Just thinking Sienna for example
okay so that is that that's a
that's a that's a fair very fair
question appreciate thank you
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and I I also
feel like I have the duty to
stand up for the eighteen to.
I just want to see how many
currently serves serious for
within that bracket.
Madam chair representative the.
Our youngest
magistrate if I am correct is
the president of the magistrate
judge's Association he started
right about the time is turning.
And what I can share with you
name it it's on the list up
there but he might be in court
which he shared with me and I
hope he doesn't mind sharing
this is what I talked about the
age qualification you thought
the first day he put on the
roads had advantage that maybe I
should be a little bit older.
I feel you yes.
As the sponsor indicated this is
not committee on see you know
kind of the intelligence of
young people I by any stretch
but we believe that judges from
the job some life experience and
understanding of what's coming
before them is is largely.
Great thank you madam chair to
Texas and Representative
appreciated.
Thank you for further
discussion.
Seeing none will go back to the
past motion by Representative.
Second and there's a second by
Representative things change.
Okay second by.
Representative on your new yes.
Yes ma'am.
Representative.
Yes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil yes.
Representative little sh yes.
Representative reading yes
Representative.
Representative Zamora yes.
Vice chair building robot yes.
And madam chair Johnson yes.
Have to pass thank you thank you
very much thank you.
thank you here.
We are now on house bill twenty
six.
I have with the
Lawyers.
The program
you know.
Programs also this or press
association use my experts with.
This bill addresses change that
we made last year.
Twenty twenty.
Okay excuse me twenty one and
what we call kind of that tax
lien of the bill is often
promoted by the tax department.
But before I talk about it I
just.
Money to what we're talking.
So I am sure many of you have
opened up the newspaper.
Yes there are still plenty of
communities that rely on these
papers for the news.
We've seen a big list of people
right in building people like we
are like old names of people and
we look because we want to see
if our names on the list M. and
then we don't see our neighbor
maybe we do see here and we also
look for our friends names and
then what we do is say
oh so and so might have
something of value that set the
tax department and we let's call
a month or less and that
percentage.
Or you know so it's very visible
to the people who are reading
the newspaper what's going on
what what the change in twenty
twenty one.
Is it eliminated the need for
the requirement that publish
those names be published
abandoned property published
annually and put it online and
the tax
and
you know that's a great message
to.
And reading the FIR actually
speaking with the secretary
because before I filed with the
online discourse reach out to my
friend the secretary of TRD
discussed it and she pointed out
of what is pointed out in the
FIR that the also do kind of
public service round where
there's simplicity and that
actually people claiming
property has increased and
that's a great thing.
But there's always room for
improvement and people still
rely on newspapers and I would
point out to you and I don't
have to tell those of you in
rural.
And maybe even after because I I
get a lot of complaints about
what goes on in Albuquerque to
broadband for rural communities
in disadvantaged communities and
low income communities they are
not on the internet like we are
here like constantly surfing the
net looking for information.
And I feel that there's a
certain kind of social equity
thing in ensuring that we
continue the publication in the
newspapers as well so that
there's maximum access to the
public and before you say
newspapers are dead we don't do
newspapers I guess reading to
newspapers and pay delivered to
my house plus on.
and you're noticing the corrals
comments then fall out there
some other hard copy papers that
are being now rent you know kind
of rest resuscitated the real
grandson's been bought being
resuscitated so I think there's
a renaissance papers and I think
people rely on it and I would
like to encourage us to get back
to this system where we have to
do is our online is great for
those of us who love just being
with to our telephones are
computers but there are people
don't have access to those kinds
of.
Thank you madam chair I don't
know
Mr grant has anything you want
to add a manager committee
leader and rich lawyers
association I I think
Representative great jobs going
down the economy change that
what I will say is what happened
in twenty twenty one this the
the change was clearly in the
tax tax bills in the FIR as you
remember.
Session I hate to recoup the
COVID session we just missed we
talked about it would have had
this discussion.
What I will say is change the
tax adjusted for the website we
kept in statute because we think
the right equipment and how
people have access to and
property we don't think it
should be either or.
Because we're talking about
properties from fifty dollars
minimum all the way to thousand
and we think the people you're
talking about the property ship
every opportunity to find out
about that was that I would like
to thank you let's go to the
audience do we have any audience
would like to express in support
of the bill.
Sir.
Yes I'm sandy Lopez.
Chair members of the committee.
Executive director New Mexico
press.
In your packet you'll see a
readership stated.
In two thousand twenty one
service for the membership
study.
Page three seventy seven percent
of New Mexicans public notices
in local print newspaper up.
Eighty six percent site local
newspapers and newspaper website
as their most trusted source of
public notices is seventy two
percent believe that government
should be required to publish
publish those papers.
So we want to find out about New
Mexico's miss.
Really essential paper in New
Mexico the Albuquerque journal
local paper is this as big
circulation we're not like the
needs were not left out in all
our communities still well read
whether it's
Scott stand in for some degree
not that I can use or or the
general just purchase the the
Deming headlight.
The site will so we're sitting
there gathering local news local
names.
To tier C. New Mexico that paper
still runs on rules every week
all those names in the paper
they still run sports forces
still run you know the.
This sporting events and I'll
tell you people are still
reading their willful produced
newspaper that's the only place
you can get.
Thank you thank you for your
work you do appreciate.
Chairman of the committee my
name is Brian Fallon.
Albuquerque generalized echo
what what sandy said on and in
just putting the notice in the
broadcast news site which might
last a day or morning if
something else comes up a new
cycle or the cycle that seems
more attention grabbing if you
will that's that's their
livelihood
State and and and her comments
about the solution of.
If I see it this morning and I'm
gonna get to work those changes
stayed with us all taken with
very and can always refer to
them later so which is some more
lasting impression on the public
then just a quick notice on
rockets and we certainly stand
and support.
Thank you.
The general membership plans
tomgram I used this.
I used to be a lot.
Stolen that sort of.
All the time.
Some of the property before he
died and we got some after.
The life insurance policies
rejected trials.
My mother in law.
I did want to move over one
house to another shareholders
this is so.
All information for FedEx
Senator short of central out of
they'll come around Senator
well.
Loosened HM the welcome bill
southwest Pacific.
Shareholders drive which is full
for the outside for years.
She on the thousand dollar our
property we with all I think I
don't want to Representative
Lara.
Twelve to.
So I can tell you.
The the what happens is as of by
see your name in the paper I'm
here for all the love for family
members and tell us what off of
work.
Well there's also among the
profits are funded what is your
bill will suspect.
One of the.
As chief of what we're talking.
To the state capitol so I would
love.
All.
Thank you any further comments
in the audience for supporting
the bill of.
Have any common sense do.
CNN any closing comments thank
you madam chair members of the
committee and as much as they
need to stand in opposition to
anything that I'm sure Chandler
is sponsoring a do have to
advocate for the needs of tax
revenue this case we were
thoughtful when we brought
forward house bill ninety eight
that was enacted in twenty
twenty one that did make that
change that would be reversed
here and bringing that forward
taxed residents looking at best
practices for unclaimed property
management across all the states
and looking really for governor
governments to work smarter not
harder to make sure that
taxpayer funds expended in a way
that generates a defensible
return on investment of taxpayer
and so the concern here is
mainly with an unfunded mandate
coming back to the Department
the change that was made the
twenty one allows us to reduce
our expenditure and legal
notices by almost a hundred
twenty thousand dollars every
year that's the cost it's
basically because which shortens
the length of the notice that we
must publish annually in thirty
three counties staff also spent
about a month preparing those
legal notices so there's an
unfunded mandate to the
Department and that's that's the
main concern that the reason as
advocating unfunded mandate
would cause us to leave about
three positions vacant every
year revenue processing division
absent some other institution of
money and what that results in
this are slower processing of
tax credit refunds returns and.
Overall spending is our
performance to the public
another concern just has to do
with public safety and this is
really my bailiwick but
there is a liability with
publishing the names and
addresses of these tens of
thousands of New Mexicans
annually we just as an exercise
you looked at unclaimed property
for the nine members of this
committee five out of the line
have unclaimed property with tax
revenue okay with you privately
afterwards.
but that would be in your names
and addresses in those papers as
well as the names and addresses
of tens of thousands of
potential crime victims domestic
violence victims and it might
not be in their best interest to
have their name and address
published in the paper can be
searched online.
last of the state that we're
very passionate about
connecting people to their
unclaimed property and as such
we do make sure that we do a
good job of getting our media
with as Mr chair and mentions
that are new spots on local TV
and whatnot it costs us nothing
but about fifteen minutes of my
time and it generates about
three times more claims
afterwards than do that and can
property notices that go in the
paper we've also been doing
social media and just outreach
several weeks if we send someone
with a laptop to search anything
property to the state fair to
blue PSS there in the house
loans yesterday and today so for
the five of you to have a
property go to the house lounge
and.
We also last thing I know you're
pressed for time.
Is me we watched in New
automated system in September
and I see some of you have the
analysis the chart we sent that
claims to that system it's
automated people can.
And their property completely
automated without talking to
taxed removal here for doing
anything at all of that stuff I
do I do appreciate the test and
approach you know that we could
be doing all these things but I
do question you know that the
last big
property notice that we publish
all the names generated a little
more than fourteen hundred
claims that it costs about
eighty dollars per claim the
amount claimed is typically less
than the cost to publish in the
newspaper so I just question
whether that's a good use of
taxpayer dollars but mostly I
want to make sure the department
as well funded and doesn't have
to carry a concealed for that we
do.
Thank you can you please state
your name I'm sorry.
Clark the cabinet secretaries
taxes.
Thank you thank you okay.
I.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair of.
And Representative one of the
things and the analysis that I
saw and I don't it and I want to
try to speed this up because we
need to get on the floor so us
can you talk about.
Published verses TV and maybe we
need to have a combination of
both well so madam chair and
representative yes I mean I.
Regis are obviously important
and they have the the use the
message that the secretary
processing using has read some
good benefits but has at five
has been noted by our common the
R. presses
participants
that is also fleas because TV if
you catch the TV you catch the
TV but if you I don't watch a
lot of TV so if my if I I would
never see anyone
else so I think both methods are
definitely preferable I do want
to point out that we're talking
about people's personal you
know.
Personal property and the states
holding it under a process
that's covered by statute and I
feel we should be doing
everything that we possibly can
to try to get that person's
property to that person's we
heard some commentary about
eighty thousand dollars is a lot
of money some people well most
people in this
state so you know I appreciate
where the secretaries coming
from but certainly we can adjust
your budget all you have to do
is ask we we are in the middle
of the budget hearings right now
and I of course would be happy
to come and support her in her
efforts to try to increase our
budgets to accommodate this
expense thank you thank you
Representative.
status.
Their their database you know
when we do our campaign mailing.
Mail office runs said is yes
there.
Then.
And then the next one is persons
that are.
Their address is confidential or
at the department of secretary
of state for the domestic
violence maybe we ought to hit
that the the so that we don't do
you have a comment.
Of Madam chair representative
yes in my building on that
system address to name.
City or lasts we are not
specific to address we we have
that discussion before okay I
think that's a very good
suggestions we just take up the
personal address and we just
referred to so and so in the
city of Los crucis or something
so that there's no specific
location madam chair that was
gonna be my third see just list
every fight city I understand
John Smith is going to be
Senator is now for two years.
Anyway those are my comments
thank you thank you any further.
The state in the miss madam
chair thank you Representative
but
I am very aware that in rural
communities there is a great
alliance and perfect
even and it's
not exactly true that even in
the metropolitan area that
everyone has access to the
internet or wifi since that is
not that is not and that there
may be people especially those
in
in those individuals will need
to.
Maybe just could benefit from
this print to the cemetery also
I see the and and would support
this thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative and thank you Mr
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I support this bill hi
Representative rural communities
in northwest New Mexico and I am
in the process of moving from
the city to the.
To the country I get the papers
now and gas and so I'm already
missing
You know district fifteen miles
to the store and I still love
Peter is still sucks and to get.
And I and I like online too so
with that we have a motion for
the past.
I do pass in the second.
Senate little.
Hey take broke.
Is there any opposition.
See no opposition.
Analysts go head and
Make a motion to pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
She just stepped down give
direction.
The the representative.
Is this yes this message and
thank you for that around.
Thank you for your patience.
This is.
Okay so this is possible or is.
It's.
I'm pretty this is house bill
thirty four.
Thirty five.
Thirty five is expansion of
eighteen three of three from two
thousand nineteen it unanimously
passed both house and Senate and
was signed into law to read
section thirty eight three dash
from the foster families read
mission to museums and state
parks.
There are currently eight
hundred fifty foster families
from the state of New Mexico for
one thousand eight hundred plus
you the prosecutor also films
right safe and secure home for
mobile use while they're looking
to unify the family.
These families often through
their own first hand from on the
needs of children here for and
from those exposed.
After a man was cast into this
bill twenty nineteen without to
bring back bring this back
expenditures not where they're
these privileges a bill I also
College also specifically foster
youth and young adults more
recently age is being faster
connections access and so that
why this bill is here today this
is a promise to be.
Before we go any further we like
to recognize that in FY R. K.
three is a technical issue see
what he said that if the purpose
of the bill is to expand the
population eligible for these
programs to young adults who
have been turned into the
voluntary services for agreeing
to pursuant to the faster
connection act not purpose will
be best accomplished by teaching
you central fostering
connections program to use
adults enrolled in foster care
program we will do that.
So page two lines would be
amended just two people.
When the stated goals of the
peace neglect excess reserves
and unified family and one of
the school's tech services are.
As well as family time often
family time visits are held in
state office building to
McDonald's this bill introduce
that families working to renew I
could have free access date on
these parks we have expanded to
ensure you have access to this
to you and specifically want to
include you in care in shelters
like new day Amistad Santa Fe
and top shelters certainly this
bill existed expands free access
to include you fishing licenses
overnight camping trips many
foster families and foster care
take advantage of the outdoors
for the pandemic we want to make
sure we will facilitate this is.
This bill it's a great feeling
to support our first of Family
faster you.
Faster questions and forced
someone to introduce my experts
back
experiment Act and the executive
director and founder of New
Mexico toppers for your
dedicated to improving the lives
of children in foster care
and internet service and and to
me right after the system sent.
Madam chair members of the
committee is this as a result of
this with my special person.
And families questions.
Let's go to the audience really
quickly do we have any comments
supporting comments from the
audience.
Really quickly.
good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Jennifer
actually refer this to the
family's Department thank you
stand in support of House Bill
hi I agree with the numbers that
you sent we do have multiple
resource
we and as it has laces true.
Uprooted faster.
Well aware that eighty two this
one.
Care protect our children.
By positive experiences we
talked about adverse childhood
experiences all the time and the
this bill would have providers
positive excuses are actually.
Thank you any further comments
to support the bill have any
comments on soon.
CNN
no opposing comments in the
audience committee members
Representative Rehm is present
checks.
Madam chair and Representative
border airlines.
You know I want to I want to see
the kids get out of one one of
support that activity.
What I want to point out is the
proposal and I want to talk
specifically about game and fish
budget.
So where this was understand
that if you're eleven years.
You get a free fish or you don't
have to have a vision lines
sector law.
If you're twelve to seventeen
your fishing license for the
year is five dollars.
Now why is that important so
when you Bahri a fishing reel
lowers even fired so
purchased gas that are late or
something like that it that
there is portion of that money
that goes to a fund called the
Dingell Johnson funds.
That is federal money.
And this is of.
Read it back to the state based
on Weiss and safes.
So what we have.
And I have the twenty twenty one
figures so in twenty twenty one
game and fish sold eight point
four seven million in license
sales and from the dangle funds
they received seven point three
three million.
So I don't think that that is a
large cost five dollars.
And it does that much damage to
the fund.
because they're looking at it
it's it's tied to the sale of
licenses there's been a proposal
given of one day losses well I
get it one day and the next day
on one day of the state again
one day and so you parlay that
long so that's how you to play
it again I can't support the
bill in its current form.
But I want to support the
concept.
And I'm willing to work with you
on how to do that but
of what I have seen the
legislature and I understand we
want to help many people.
And we give discounted licenses
for all different groups and
everything of what we're in
doing is impacting the budget of
game and fish gamefish received
low cost appropriation is
replete did by hunting and
fishing license fees and
then of federal money that are
matches.
So.
That's my problem.
And if you can go ahead yeah.
Representative right
standing with the population
that we're talking about the
children in foster care and
fostering connections.
I just thought populations
currently taking advantage of
the fishing places and so you
know one thing that the way we
look at this is gonna be a loss
in revenue
sort of outlined by are because
they're not getting a license
right now.
The gamefish would not capture
the revenue office licenses we
really look at this as sort of
future think this is what's
going to build this gonna
recruit potentially retain
future anglers so that is the
result life throughout their
lifetime hopefully the.
Going by this issue licenses
once they're out of this program
so we look at long term that
could this could potentially
increase special licenses
increase the funds for this
purpose right now this
population isn't buying so if we
give licenses to these children
there's not gonna be additional
revenue that the
will get there's not going to be
a loss of revenue they're not
for purchase.
Madam chair and restenosis I
agree about increasing.
The activity of the group in the
future totally agree with that.
I don't think the five dollars
is no reasonable fees for the
person to have of the year long
fishing license and probably the
the next question is what does
the our foster care receive per
child
for the sport of that child per
month.
And then the next follow up
question is.
When you buy that license and
now it should be a free license
there's a one dollar vendor
fees.
What are you gonna do about the
vendor fee.
This goes to the come to the
company that's actually above
you would registry New or
printing after whites.
Right Madam chair representative
three all of Maryland response
of the questions in terms of the
the payments the faster grantees
I just just said.
Here's reinforce the the
expected loss of revenue we're
not capture revenue is ten
thousand dollars we were talking
about a small amount and and.
At the vendor fee and other
things for a small amount of
money to these children an
opportunity to experience.
Going to let yeah this these are
questions thank you chairman
thank you Representative
repressing these questions again
we have the latest numbers and
see what he can help answer the
questions I'm currently ages six
to eight there are two hundred
seventy six youth in care ages
nine eleven there two hundred
seventy eight ages twelve to
fourteen there are two hundred
seventy eight ages fifteen about
there are two hundred and sixty
seven we're talking a roughly
around a thousand years in care
I'm the average reimbursement
rate for volunteer foster
parents is approximately twenty
one dollars a day give or take
level one or level two again
foster parents in the CYFD
system are not hate their
volunteer state reimbursement
that's different for treatment
foster care so some of that was
different and you can ask that
we can pull those numbers but as
bad Mr Senator said that the
reason we are bringing this
forward is right now we actually
have a for calling your crisis
in recruitment and retention of
foster families this is why we
originally profit so fast
forward in twenty nineteen it's
really hard to be a foster
parent and the point of foster
carers to reunify with families
the reason we thought this to be
great is that we can have family
time visit specifically actually
part right we can help instill
the love of fishing outdoors
during the pandemic we all
struggle for family time and
family time is another word we
safer visits with family if the
child is removed from that
family how do we get them
because of the restrictions we
were really trying to find
outdoor locations which is why
the fishing the team lead each
idea came about so parents were
working to reunify with their
children can half outdoor
experiences also campaign was a
request that we had I'm one of
the questions we have had in the
opposed yet to get answers is
how many foster families foster
youth in the foster care options
have taken advantage of this it
is not the full at eighteen
hundred using care and and so in
the year and windfall budget we
think that there are ways that
we can
I'm process this and move
forward with this so that the
ten thousand dollars would not
be cut.
Just listening at our goal with
this is truly to instill that
outdoors well about doors it is
also worth noting ham that we
really do believe that the
reason we're in this bill for
now is to we also encompass the
faster you said that those in
separate settings were trying to
get rid of congregate care
unfortunately that is still part
of our process so that hope
youth homelessness shelters like
new day on the status and
additional how shelter can
engage in some of these offsite
activities without having to
incur costs budgets to their
budgets.
You madam chair and.
And Mr secretary.
The problem is I've noticed is
there's no appropriation from
the state to game and fish.
Does see what the.
Anne Stine.
To help the families do other
outside activities okay and I
see it's not and I think that I
think that's the approach we
need to go to give them a line
item go ahead and have foster
families bill yes I go back to a
fishing license is five dollars
and that's a nominal amount but
it compounds to David this but
hello.
That's that's my opposition I
think we could figure out
something I'm not sure right now
on slide what it is but I did
notice was Espinoza and.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
Chasey thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for the
first time that we pass this
bill see your districts
I.
There was one technical issue in
FIR.
And it's really it's on the very
last.
Which.
Two twenty one.
The Phillips who says the
department David fish doesn't.
Handled the issues thank you.
So.
Recreations I'm not saying what
it would look at that and the
other technical issue was on
page two line thirteen eight
point as you rules and prostrate
connections.
Because you are defined as those
for two or
to read do suggest making the
jobs so those are the only two
things in the you know I really
appreciate what the staff sent
about this being a really
provide opportunity for families
who are working hard on
reunification have this objects
so I think that's a great thank
you thank you madam chair so
that was one of the things that
we did address consideration to
to.
Representative Jerry moved the
path.
Motion passed the Representative
law a second by Representative
Chasey do you have any
opposition.
Just physicians take.
Representative on your own or
you.
Representative block yes.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am as a small.
Representative Zamora yes.
By Terry Figueroa yes.
And madam chair Johnson yes.
You have to pass.
You can be patient.
Thank you.
Committee members see you on
Friday at thirty three.
So
thinking.
As with all.
We want to do the.
Yes.
I.
Yes.
In these regions.
Students.
Well.
We.
In.
Which.
Hi.
Hi.
To.
Okay needing.
Thank.
Working.
Yes.
I.
All of it so.
Yes.
The meeting.
So that's part of.
For the.
Thank
The.
Once you get.
It's coming yes.
So.
And.
Action in support.
The
probably.
You can.
Okay I just need to gather some
little.
We need to address these other
the democratic system how.
Students.
These are.
So she.
We we have we have.
J..
In the.
Okay.
Mexico.
It
does.
This
is.
Yes it is.
Yeah.
One of those little.
Just because.
Thank.
