Representative night part.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Rehm here.
Representative Zamora.
Representative night birch.
Representative Zamora.
Hi Mister Johnson.
Here finally.
Madam chair.
Madam chair with that we have
seven members present great
thank you so we do have a quorum
and we will be can
we're gonna begin with house
bill sixteen and generally when
we start to a bill we don't
publish it so that was my
oversight because we already did
take comments a few meetings ago
but I think we are going to get
Representative I'm twenty eight
back on and then we'll go ahead
and proceed to taking a vote and
I will have to jump up here
shortly so as soon as that
occurs then by chart Johnson
chair.
And so it looks like we have
Representative Montoya.
Yes great good morning.
Good morning.
Madam chair members thank you so
much for having me back.
you make any changes to your
bill does you.
Yes where we left.
Madam chair and members I we're
really well with Representative
Nibert he made an excellent
recommendation to create
equitable language around the
for rural quadrant so I have an
amendment that we got in well
within the twenty five for our
rural and if if it makes sense
to do that first I'm not sure
following the amendment for
discussion so Representative
Montoya please tell us about
your amendment.
Okay.
As I just stated
I am proposing an amendment
directed to this committee
how state government elections
it Indian Affairs house bill
sixteen as amended would read.
On page two line twelve strike
and between lines twelve and
thirteen insert the following.
Number two equitable
representation from rural areas
in each quadrant of the state
and to remember the succeeding
paragraph accordingly.
That's the full amendment the
number if you need that.
Yes place is point two two zero
one two four point two.
Okay great discussion on the
amendment.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair in this
since we don't have
Representative night but yet up.
Representative could you explain
what it addresses I'm not sure
what the the discussion was you
all had.
Madam chair and Representative
Representative
cream yes.
Representative Nibert brought up
a very very good question he
said you know I want to ensure
that there's equitable.
Representation across all four
quadrants of the state and I
said at that point that I felt
you did read that way but after
we discuss it made perfect sense
to me.
Clarity is the best way to
ensure that all regions across
ideologies party lines no it
doesn't matter we have to do the
best we can for this entire
state so I took his good advice
and we worked out a very quick
and good amendment which I just
read and that was the purpose of
that work.
I hope I answered your question
up perfect.
Madam chair now I remember the
conversation I am the discussion
from before I know I'm not
supposed to do this I'm supposed
to go off and then come back but
I'll move adoption of the
amendment.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and.
Members what is the next order
what we're thank you so we have
an adoption of that amendment by
representative Ely is that
correct I'm sorry what we have
we have a motion to adopt by
Representative remain a second
by Representative the black.
Okay so
Is there an objection to
adopting the amendment.
Then
we have an adopted amendment.
And now back to the bill.
Amended.
Yes madam chair due process.
with.
Also sixteen and also that.
We have a motion for to pass as
amended on house bill sixteen.
By Representative Chasey and a
second by Representative Eli
What is the pressure of the
committee.
Madam chair I think we go to a
vote okay.
Yes I don't know this is a
proper time but I just logged in
so I want you to.
But then on the panel.
Okay counted absent.
Okay
clerk to count Representative
Zamora as a present and
according to take role madam
chair you about.
Yes Representative will do.
Can you hear me Representative
Zamora.
I'm not sure you're still muted
now we can we can all hear her
Representative Representative is
more can you hear me.
For.
Representative Rehm would you
mind texting him letting him
know what's going on.
It is so.
Yeah I can hear
you can't hear anything.
It's not about us.
Okay.
All.
Okay now I see has more button
okay clerk to call Rowe on the
vote.
Four to pass on house bill
sixteen as amended.
Representative Chasey we are.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy it goes yes.
Representative night part.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Or Representative night part.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair I believe is
excused.
Yes yes madam chair with that we
have to excuse ten seven in the
affirmative.
Zero in the negative.
Thank you Representative Montoya
you have a do pass on house bill
sixteen as amended.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
giving me the time to come back
on the roll back rule over.
Thank you next we have house
bill one ninety four
Representative Ortez.
Are you ready to present.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am and I have to
expert witnesses who need to be
brought over a public or Sierra
and as we get our madam.
Sure Reese are you.
Noting that two witnesses.
Yes madam chair just promoted
and Rickett and I'm looking for
miss Garcia they don't seem to
find her.
Listed under another identity.
Madam chair her hand is raised
in the attendees.
Sure yes to to.
Hi expert witnesses yes madam
chair both X. K. have been
promoted right we can begin
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
eighty one ninety four is a
simple bill that does a lot of
good for our second communities
the bill amends the A. C. T. F.
a second community debt funds so
that the implementation of water
rights settlements is included
in the purpose of the Act this
is so important for us I guess
cessations to access the funds
that they need for the legal and
technical expertise thirty three
years ago we passed the ACTF so
that a secular and Community
dishes for parties to the water
right education process could
have access to legal
representation and experts many
of you here know that the
education process is highly
technical I am an asset get a
and commissioner of my ditch so
and I have talked to many
executives in my community who
really struggled with the the
legal technical issues in a
water rights settlement case I
think yes who's percent as are
named as defendants in need that
legal representation at every
point in the process including
after the settlement has been to
create so that's that's what
this bill does it helps our
staff is indigenous after the
settlement after that final
decree or that partial final
decrease as is the case with the
doctor that settlement.
I want to
the straight why this is so
important sometimes the the
folks involved in New in a
settlement move on sometimes
they passed and the president
just take their place and and
those new par Sanchez have to
implement the decree with that
not a lot of history or support
yet they're required to be in
compliance so this bill meet
makes a much needed
clarification and the ACTF Act
without this change centuries
old a second and the members
could be negatively impacted if
they're if they're unable to
our equity if they're unable to
equitably participate in the
settlement implementation and as
we all know lack of compliance
with the settlement could have
major consequences for their
water rights and with that I
stand for questions along with
our our expert witnesses at
public Garcia and usually get a
settlement thank you.
Thank you Representative now we
will go to our usual poll.
And we will have staff begin the
poll.
The whole is complete and the
results show that there are
thirteen.
In favor of the bill and zero in
opposition who took the poll so
now we will go to public comment
and we will begin with.
The those.
In favor of the bill would you
raise your hand.
And then I will call
accordingly.
So let's begin with Herrell
Trujillo please provide support
of the bill.
Good morning chairman can you
hear me.
Yes.
Thank you we encourage the
support of this bill we have
many challenges when it comes to
implementing education we hear
back from our members so that
things are a really challenging
in terms of having technical
resources to make sure that
things are implemented properly
and also legal resources are
important so we would appreciate
that your support of this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have Charles
this so in.
And you have one minute Sir
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and
Representative Ortez
my name is Charles to sail in
I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
and we support house bill one
ninety four the bill would
provide funding for legal and
technical expertise for the sake
yes in the implementation of the
water rights settlements and I
know from my own personal
experience that those
settlements can be extremely
complicated with difficult
technical and legal issues so we
think this is appropriate.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee.
Thank you next we have Daryl
Madrid.
Yes good morning madam speaker
and esteemed committee members
my name is Daryl Madrid I am a
commissioner of law Salazar
community DH and watchin and I
am also president of the real
the trauma secular Association
representing twenty two Seki has
from the low Avid you down along
the compliance of the rewrite
Sharma we are currently in New
Mexico and Education process
with okay we get Pueblo
the pueblo has access at no
charge to them of the best water
attorneys in the nation and the
ACD Act funds helps level the
playing field for us because it
allows us to be able to hire the
best water training that we have
here in New Mexico and and
without it we we we wouldn't be
able to compete with these
education processes thank you.
Thank you next we have Robert
Apodaca.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee yes my name's
Robert up with us to and I do on
behalf of the New Mexico state
to commission we are also in
support of house bill one ninety
four it will provide resources
and help on the number of these
dedication issues that were
the season and will continue K.
as we move forward so thank you
madam chair and commissioners.
Thank you next we have lily
Irvin Vitela.
Thank you madam chair and
committee and thank you
Representative for yes my name
is lily Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first seven years
ago we worked with over six
hundred stakeholders across all
regions in New Mexico holding
community forums both in English
and in Spanish and we also had a
round table with tribal
leadership to develop the New
Mexico agricultural resilience
plan and we've been working
through collective impact
efforts to implement that plan
but in that time were several
recommendations including
supportive you know the ability
of people to have fair
representation in the education
of their water rights and so
this legislation is wise
legislation that really provides
the opportunity for everybody
who needs to be at the table to
be and to be represented fairly
and so we encourage support of
house bill one ninety four and
thank you for your time and.
Thank you next we have Judy
Torres.
Thank you madam chairman and
committee members and
Representative she no or yes
I represent the yes no yes thank
you so ciation we have been in
the education process since
nineteen eighty nine
Representative over fifty
seconds of the tells valley and
two thousand sixteen yes well
yes I guess ciation she's
reached a partial final decree
and we are now in the process of
implementation of the House
valley water rights settlement
with the tells Pueblo in the
implementation of the settlement
for the past four years we know
the need of the continuing
support of the AC def Fund we
have with the advice of our
experts especially our attorneys
and our head Drolet just in that
are secular underfunded and have
no other resource the funding it
is so important to be able to
use a CDF funding for the
implementation thank you.
Thank you next we have
Representative Duran.
Good morning madam chair
committee members thank you so
much to Sanchez and all those
who spoke in support of this
bill.
I am a generational resident of
Espanola my family have always
use our staff is in order to
grow our food and I am in full
support of house bill one ninety
four and asked that everyone on
the committee support this
because you're supporting.
People culture land and water.
In ensuring that.
Law making process these and
Judy cation.
Not negatively impact all of
those factors thank you.
Thank you next we have Jan
Watkins.
Good morning my name is Jen
Watkins and I'm the treasurer
for the collective value we need
not just a kia Association I
fully support H. B. one ninety
four because you stayed yes that
that PED are a a representative
are in need of funding to help
with the settlement compliance
understanding the and that
settlement terms more often than
not require Siegel and other
technical assistance especially
for us thank you and they're
doing most and commissioners who
are not part of the settlement
process the CBS don't have the
means to retain attorneys or
other experts to help them
understand the nuances and
complexities of the settlement
there are in some cases dire
consequences for not complying
or understanding the provisions
of the settlement for example if
we don't accurately report are
irrigated acreage by March first
the state engineer has the
potential of meeting the SDGS
without water in the middle of
the irrigation system season
again thank you for the
opportunity to comment on this
legislation and I am in full
support of H. B. one ninety four
and I urge the committee to
support the bill as well.
Thank you and I see Charles the
so lands name again but I'm
going to skip Pam.
To Serafino Barty.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee good morning I
am surfing along party I'm
calling in from to my present in
the Martinez at a budget and
also on our regional a stick in
the board the real come although
real mail real families real
center Christine system a second
so ciation we are in the process
of abit Education and that for
any of you have come into
contact with education and you
understand that this is decades
and decades of many parties
coming together making huge
investments of time and
financial resources to try and
come to some agreement we really
need you all the support he
three one ninety four so that we
can honor all of that hard work
in implementing the agreements
we come to thank you so much for
your support and your time.
Thank you next we will go to
Ruben Baca.
I'm sorry I didn't want to just
filed this bill.
Okay how about Robert Martinez.
Hello my name is Robert Martinez
I am a commissioner on the
second mother the level more
than what she does so I'll hold
in now in the past Ollie
this bill is is extremely
important to help provide both
legal and technical resources to
get through the education
process our house values in the
midst of or in the
implementation phase of the of
I'm sure I'm sorry of the
settlement agreement in the
would you do K. the water but up
we have many issues that we are
as lay people cannot really
address and in need the support
of both legal and technical
support I draw just for instance
in order to to really complete
the implementation phase
otherwise I left too late people
are we open ourselves for issues
so thank you for your
consideration please support
this bill.
Thank you now we will go to
attendees if there is any
opposition please raise your
hand.
CNN we will go to the committee.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me OK.
Yes thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative are
plans for bringing this bill
forward I just have a few
questions
The first one is can and all the
thank you boards
Access this fund.
And Representative
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative some of that are
I believe so but right now that
fund goes to a second some
percent those that are in the
the water rights settlement
process will ms Garcia Mr Romero
please on elaborate.
I think happy to Madam
chairwoman and Representative
Zamora I thank you for the
question and if I understand the
question you're asking you this
is open to all and seconds hello
thank you commissions across the
state
and so the just to clarify this
fund is is for a second that are
going through the education
process and there are some areas
of the state that are going
through the judicata process
either in the active phase of
the education on the settlement
implementation phase and then
there are our vast areas that
are not going through education
so this fund was set up for
those that are in in the
education and they're the ones
are eligible to be eligible for
the fund yes I guess have to be
organized into regional as a kid
so stations the represent the
majority of a second in their
respective stream basins and so
and those those Stream basins
are determined by whatever is
the separately administrate
administer bowl section of the
adjudications to so I hope that
answers your question and I I
can elaborate further if needed
thank you madam chair and
representative.
And madam chair and and
Representative what what kind of
money the this Fund handle what
what amount.
Madam chair and Representative
Zamora that the fund has
approximately six hundred
thousand dollars and it is
administered by the New Mexico
department of agriculture that
of funding is administered and
allocated through of annual
grant making process and the New
Mexico department of agriculture
of manages the whole process
through through an RFP and the
regional just like it's
associations are applied through
that process and then that there
is a committee comprised of
three individuals representing
the Interstate Stream Commission
New Mexico second commission and
department of agriculture and
the secretary of agriculture
those three members comprised
ACTF Committee and are they take
recommendations from the office
of the state engineer no systems
more for.
Pairs a detailed report on the
status of the educations in
these different areas for their
applicants and they will rank
them based on low to high
priority depending on the pace
of education in that area or
that the importance and ACTF
take those recommendations and
makes their decision and they
will decide how much to allocate
to the different seconds we toss
associations of a second.
During the current fiscal year
there were thirteen grants
awarded totaling less than six
hundred thousand the left about
thirty thousand aside for
contingency fund and of of those
thirteen be repairing amounts
from about ten to fifteen
thousand up to over a hundred
thousand to the different
association of depending on what
was happening in their
respective basins.
Thank you for that answer and
then thank you madam chair and
Representative Representative
how many attorneys for for this
thank you this is a second.
Madam chair and and
Representative Zamora I
typically there will be one one
attorney for for each
regionalization and that
that attorney will represent
a large numbers of a seconds for
example in the town's values
second so ciation they have we
have an attorney and there are
fifty four sec as represented by
that association
and in each regional so ciation
our our grantee that's getting
funding will have one attorney
but will also be able to to
contract with experts as needed
so they could be
hydrologist typically but
sometimes they also contract
with with other kinds of of
academics and education process
like historians.
Or are on to Polish its in the
settlement implementation phase
it would typically being
attorneys and hydrologists.
Thank you for that Sir and madam
chair and representative that
concludes my answers thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative to
yours or mute years.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and with
your indulgence I would like to
talk yeah I I support the bill
but I wanted to talk about water
for about two minutes fifth if
you allow me it's not actually
on the bill.
Would that be alright.
Representative Rehm.
Water pertaining to the bill
well it's it's water how do we
get water to New Mexico and what
I've been trying to do because
serves a group of individuals
here at this meeting who would
understand why I'm trying to get
water into New Mexico okay is it
okay with that Representative
Ortez.
This
bill Madam chair representative
green I I I believe I'm okay
with that okay all right let's
thank you.
And thank you committee because
of when I first came the
legislature you know one of the
goals was to try to provide
water for New Mexico it and
there's none in the west but in
a meeting with the
chairman of the Texas natural
resource committee we started
talking about how do we get
water to New Mexico and Texas
for fifty years for a hundred
years where there is excess
water is actually in the
Mississippi valley and all of
its tributaries of.
Texas is working with Louisiana
to bring some water into the of
the eastern side of Texas from
Louisiana I sent a letter to the
president and all of our federal
delegates
Why are couple years ago and
what I was suggesting is is
what's do a pipeline did sure
whatever from let's take the
Missouri River it's a tributary
and we can come right through
Oklahoma and into the
southeast part of New Mexico but
we need to move water from.
The Mississippi valley where we
are.
Billions of dollars every year
in of federal flood insurance
claims so we know hurricanes
coming or whatever starts moving
water west but anyway that said
I'd like to see other people
maybe get on board and we come
up with an idea we've got the
real charm on a project that
moved water over a mountain it
actually moves at through a
mountain but
that's it thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm do
we have as a committee members
would like to.
I don't see any other hands.
So what is.
Madam chair I move a new path.
Okay.
We have a motion for to pass by
Representative Zamora a second
by Representative Eli.
It is moved to pass house bill
one nine four the clerk to take
role please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night perch.
I believe he's excused
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes ma'am.
Representative some on a yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
And madam chair is excused so
madam chair that is with that we
have to excuse and seven in the
affirmative zero and the
negative.
Thank you and to you have to
pass on health bill one ninety
four Representative Ortez thank
you Jerry Johnson and members of
the committee.
Thank you next we have house
bill one ninety two as amended
amended.
Do we have Representative.
In the queue.
Welcome Representative.
Are you ready to present.
I am if we could bring over I
don't know if any of my co
sponsors we're able to make it
on but if we can check for
Representative are heavily Rubio
I Melanie Stansbury and Roger
Montoya.
And my experts today are we on
Howard with ACLU and Marshall
Martinez.
Sure Reese did you get all of
those names madam chair I'm
looking for them now thank you
okay might help if they raise
their hands I have Marshall
Martinez thank you.
Okay are we set would you like
to begin.
Yes madam chair thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm here to present
for your consideration house
bill one ninety two this
modernizes the Human Rights Act
I'm a proud New Mexicans and one
of the many things that makes me
so proud of our home is that we
truly are multicultural
multiracial an incredibly
diverse state with the power of
million dollar strength is in
our differences.
I believe that is one reason we
have such a strong and powerful
Human Rights Act in fact we were
only the third state in the
country our gender identity to
our law protecting our transit
went across New Mexico.
This bill is an effort to
further strengthen clean up and
modernize the language in the
act to reflect our values our
values as New Mexicans.
House bill one ninety two please
a loophole but as long existed
in our Human Rights Act it
allows taxpayer funded
discrimination this will all I
believe was never intended to be
left open.
Our.
Prohibits discrimination by
employers and housing and public
accommodations public
accommodations is narrowly
defined as trading or selling
goods or services to the public.
The reality the state agencies
and their contractors as well as
local government providers
provide services but not to the
public.
For example children youth and
families department staff and
children or I'm sorry I'm sorry
stop in child protective
services investigate guardians
for suspicions of neglect or
abuse and children this is not a
service that's provided to the
public so this all means that
the investigator the parents
waste or sexual orientation as a
factor in that investigation and
discriminate unfairly against
New Mexico Koreans there are
dozens more examples like the
contracted businesses that
provide shelter for homeless
population the local governments
that operate senior.
The subcontractors and grantees
that provide food services you
our incarcerated New Mexicans
are just a few more.
This bill adds state agencies
and public bodies to the Human
Rights Act to further protect
New Mexicans.
Madam chair I would like for my
experts to introduce themselves
and talk a little bit about the
the bill we can start with
Marshall Martinez and go on to
Leon halip thank you very much.
Thank you please proceed.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
morning I Marshall Martinez in
the interim executive director
of the quality New Mexico the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization New Mexico's Human
Rights Act as Representative but
I said is one of the strongest
in the country and we are
incredibly proud of that it is
our belief in equality New
Mexico the all New Mexicans are
protected from discrimination
including our young people and
education systems and state
services but it's not that clear
imagine if you will a teenage
New Mexicans in a medium sized
community this young person has
come out to their family as gay
and you kicked out of their
home.
They come out of school and they
are discriminated against by
teachers or school staff.
Imagine this young person
vulnerable and scared doesn't
know where to turn.
They don't know how to access
the resources they need such as
housing for young people that
it's safe or provide the support
that school is our believe that
the Human Rights Act already
covers education institutions or
state funded shelters for use as
examples but that hasn't always
been clear many of these
institutions say that it isn't
imagine on top of all of these
hurdles this young person faces
if at any point in this process
there turned away from services
simply because they are gay they
don't even have a promise of
protection we have an incredibly
strong nondiscrimination law as
it is rooted in our values in
New Mexico we really believe
that it prohibits this
discrimination so many places
but imagine our most vulnerable
New Mexicans the victims of
discrimination being stuck in
years of court battles arguing
over whether or not we ever
intended this law to apply to
these entities today we have the
opportunity to make it clear
today we have the opportunity to
clarify the values of New Mexico
and this nondiscrimination law
that we do not that we didn't
will not accept taxpayer funded
discrimination based on race
religion sexual orientation or
any other category mentioned in
the Human Rights Act thank you
all so much for the time this
morning.
But at.
Thank you madam chair
representative but where is my
name is Leon Howard the legal
director at the ACLU of New
Mexico and
it's.
I would like to begin by
thanking this this body for its
service to New Mexico's in to
New Mexico I'm delighted to be
part of this process it's my
hope today to provide some
insight as to the need for more
clarity in the New Mexico Human
Rights Act public accommodation
provision as it pertains to
public bodies and at the same
time maybe quell could any
concern that this could open up
the floodgates for claims
against public bodies.
As it stands now.
When public accommodation claims
are brought against public
bodies there is an argument that
they're making that they are not
subject to this provision
because public accommodation
should be defined as involving a
business for commercial inner
products while.
I think and it is our stance and
the the arguments that we've
been putting forth that the
tenants of statutory
construction
as this lady legislative body is
made clear would indicate that
they are not immune from the
Human Rights Act public
accommodation provision
these arguments are still
happening in courts and the need
for more clarity you could put
an end to those arguments and
result and needless litigation
going away thank you and I'm
here for questions at the
discretion of Representative
Ferrary thank you.
Thank you Mr sorry.
I thank you Mr Howard and we now
stand for questions thank you
madam chair thank you now we
will go to the public and we
will conduct a poll.
It looks like we have seventy
one attendees and those in favor
or in opposition of house bill
one nine two can now take a
poll.
Okay we have.
Thanks team.
In favor in two in opposition
and now we will hear public
comment.
And we will begin with comments
in support of the bill please
raise your hand and we will call
you.
Right there AT correctly I'm
sorry if I'm mispronouncing your
name.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is greedy Garrity student intern
with lobbyist Julianna Koob and
we stand in support of this.
Still on behalf of Planned
Parenthood thank you.
Next we have Fernando Trujillo.
The lower the chairman and
members of the committee my name
is that Randall T. C. R. O.
policy fellow with bold features
in it I am here in support of
the of the H. B. one eighty to
HB one ninety two of these
current law to ensure that all
New Mexicans are protected as a
quick check on offer mess when
you allow the bill to be to be
protected by law it is not just
a legal necessity but a very
real world issue black
indigenous and the entrance
people of color face the most
significant significant
disparities and discrimination
we think this bond.
Being this bill to the
legislature and standing with
myself in the many New Mexicans
that would be protected we urge
the committee to support H. B.
one eighty to ensure for the
protection of your constituents
thank you.
Next we have
Madam chair Julie under group
madam chair members of the
committee I just wanna
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing this forward this is an
incredible safety and justice
measure for a for a lot of folks
the coalition of sexual assault
programs stands in support of
this bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair Linda
Siegel for the quality New
Mexico and I have been involved
in this legislation for quite a
few decades it took us fourteen
years to amend the Human Rights
Act includes sexual orientation
and gender identity and at that
time we were very concerned
about other areas that weren't
covered by the public
accommodations are language
especially education so this
this ammendment will relate sure
that comprehensive throughout
state government we will make
sure that people cannot be
discriminated against for any of
the categories within the Human
Rights Act thank you.
Thank you Tim Davis.
Thank you madam chair this is
Tim Davis with the New Mexico
Center on poverty and we want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this legislation this provides
an important clarification Human
Rights Act we urge the committee
to support it thank you.
Thank you next we have a really
Irvin Vitela.
Madam chair committee thank you
again for your time this morning
and Representative but it us
thank you so much for your
leadership on this issue New
Mexico first were a multi issue
organization and one of the
policy areas that is a pillar of
of our organization is really
around good governance and so
when we look at house bill one
ninety two and understand from
across partisan perspective the
importance of there being checks
and balances and protections in
place about how government
operates it's very very clear
that there needs to be
mechanisms for accountability so
that way when people experience
discrimination that they have
access to justice in addition to
that you know we we did
significant work in this last
year around health equity issues
in our town hall health body
mind and spirit and as we went
around and we had community
conversations in over you know
twenty communities from catching
how.
Thank you next we have Eileen
hence.
You madam chair Ellen pints on
behalf of the disability
coalition as a community that
has long experience of
discrimination the disability
coalition or the disability
community stands in strong
support of measures to eliminate
discrimination and therefore we
stand in support of this bill
and I would also particularly
like to express our appreciation
of the changes to the bill
excuse me the changes to the act
that would eliminate outdated
references to disability and
replace them with more
acceptable current language
thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have Clarissa
Duran.
Thank you again madam chair
committee members thank you so
much to the sponsors and those
two have spoken in support of
this bill I fully support house
bill one ninety two and asked
that all committee members do as
a social worker who is mainly
work with you an older adults I
would like to
give my full support to all
members all residents of New
Mexico feeling that they are
safe and that anytime they're
discriminated against they have
the opportunity to fight that
it's so important for our
society to reach equity
at this time so that we can move
forward into growing in New
Mexico that is strong and
healthy thank you.
Thank you next we have Jim
Jackson.
Thank you madam chair of the Jim
Jackson here for disability
rights New Mexico
our community.
Certainly understands the
importance of strong anti
discrimination provisions in us
both state and federal law and
we encourage your support of
this bill and we also I also
want to recognize the efforts of
the sponsors and supporters to
update the language in the
existing Human Rights Act to
reflect more person friendly and
current language with respect to
disability so we encourage your
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you next we will go to
public comments in opposition of
the bill please raise your hand.
And I have Jim Jackson.
In opposition of the bill.
Okay.
I don't see any hands raised for
comments in opposition of the
bill so let's go to the
committee.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair.
And.
Representative.
First of all I'm you know I'm
not trying to question that we
don't need to scrape them
discriminating discrimination
laws but have you read the FIR
there's a lot in this FIR that
is quite contrary and says that
we already have all these.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative Rehm I
appreciate the question if I can
I would like to turn it over to
Marshall Martinez our to our to
to answer this for you thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Rehm I am a bit
we appreciate the question and I
think would could probably
answer to some more specifics
what we're doing with this
legislation though is that we
are we're clarifying and and I
believe you'll see from the
administrative office of the
courts in the analysis the
support for this what we're
doing is clarifying very
specifically and that this law
would apply to public bodies and
state agencies and so what the
what the bill has done before
with a lot has done before has
protected employees from
discrimination by their
employers that is protected
tendons and and folks from
discrimination in housing and
the piece it is unclear and
Mister Howard from the so you
can give a very specific case
the piece that is that has been
unclear is whether these these
state agencies and public bodies
are expressly prohibited.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair of rules let me go
through some of the specifics
and and I'm looking at the FIR
so let's begin with workforce
solutions asserts its human
rights bureau does not have
sufficient staff to handle the
additional is what they say
they're gonna need five
investigators one and
administrative assistant one
attorney and one legal assistant
and data the FIR shows eight
hundred fifty nine thousand so
how we gonna address that.
Thank you madam chair
representative Marshall.
Absolutely madam chair and
Representative Rehm so a couple
of them and I appreciate the
question about workforce
solutions a couple of notes
about that right one of the one
thing it madam chair and
Representative that I would say
first and foremost is that
The understanding I have from
communications with workforce
solutions department is that
that is a that is a projection
that is cumulative with regard
to all of the pieces of
legislation that are that are
being discussed in this session
and there's a number of bills
that that to madam chair and and
Representative ring there's a
number of bills working their
way through right now that
workforce solutions would have
some implementation or
enforcement mechanism for and so
what we we don't believe and and
I would disagree is that there
are so many cases of
discrimination happening in our
public bodies of state agencies
that it would really require
that many additional staff what
I would say Madam chair
representative reading is that
if that is the case then this
law is it really necessary if
that many people are being
discriminated against our in
schools or in a juvenile justice
programs are and other in in
other state agencies then we
have a real problem on our hands
in New Mexico that that
absolutely needs to be
addressed.
Mr Martinez was so wonderful
significant issues is however
certain agencies for design
provide services to specific
groups and in some cases
eligibility for services maybe
based on membership in a
protected class such as age race
gender spousal filiation any
goes on it says government
services could be impacted
including but not limited to
under the children's code mental
health and disability and
developmental disabilities act
juvenile justice law and health
services.
How do we how do we address is.
Madam chair representative thank
you so much the question I'm
gonna actually let Mister Howard
our take this one thank you.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
That's a great question and it's
it's way in my opening when I
talked about quelling concerns
for opening up the floodgates
for these types of claims that's
precisely it will courts
do it with the New Mexico
Supreme Court has done is
directed courts interpreting the
public accommodation provision
of New Mexico Human Rights Act
to take each case on a case by
case basis and the
interpretation is very stringent
on
yes a T. providing a public
service or goods to the the
public and so a recent case in
two thousand seventeen
interpreting the PED waiver
program the what the court held
is that DD waiver program is not
subject to the public
accommodation provision because
applicants to that program must
meet stringent criteria to even
apply so this is not a program
that is open for all so if
you're challenging something a
ballot the program itself that
is confined to a limited
population that is not a public
accommodation and that's with
the courts have said now the
reason why we need to take that
on a case by case basis Is there
debate and after the DD waiver
program could discriminate
against somebody while offering
a service for instance if you
know you were able to use to
determine a practice in the
waiver program if they're not
accepting people because of a
protected reason or somebody
walks to a clerk window and says
you know I'm sorry you know we
don't serve people of a
particular religion
the that type of instance and
instance of discrimination by a
program.
Would.
under my interpretation of the
public accommodation provision
qualifies discrimination
prohibited discrimination but if
you're challenging just
something about the program
itself then then it would be
considered a public
accommodation hoping I'm making
those two two points clear.
Thank you madam chair in experts
the next one that they have
under significant the AOC the
the court's noted a number of
current laws that protect
against discrimination by public
bodies in the state agencies
currently all public bodies and
state agencies are required to
follow hi all seven of the Civil
Rights Act of nineteen sixty
four the copay Act of nineteen
sixty three the discrimination
in employment act.
Of nineteen sixty seven as
amended in seventy five and it
goes on
These laws prohibit
discrimination based on race
color sex religion national
origin age disability genetic
information the.
How do we get around this are
you know why are we already
covered.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of Mr Howard.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative I'd like to start
with
comment that I heard Justice
Boston read recently given a a
connection to the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act Bill Gates get
moving through the process right
now he says when we lean on
Federal into tease or or the
federal courts to interpret
since the civil rights of New
Mexico New Mexicans that reeks
of elitism so all of those
provisions are federal prison
visions that would require New
Mexicans to go into federal
courts under different standards
under different laws that we've
developed here in New Mexico and
so that's that's that's a short
response to that the reality is
that
the jurisprudence and and and
our legislative bodies have have
created greater protections for
New Mexicans and so are our acts
would and making it available to
New Mexicans and people in New
Mexico
would result and what I what I
would say more just outcomes and
would allow people to go in
front of judges that the people
elect as as opposed to judges
who are appointed from.
The president to to sit in New
Mexico.
Current and Mister Howard that's
probably on the next issue under
other states where they talk
about each one of the you know a
lot of the agencies have their
own grievance procedure and this
is in essence doing away with
they note that and I don't know
if you have a comment on that or
not.
Yes thank you madam chair
representative it is true that a
lot of these agencies have their
internal grievance process but
the remedies would be
dramatically different and and
in most instances instances
those would have to be exhausted
before they get to
being able to bring a claim
and and you know I mean and and
and in terms of a more robust
process I don't know how each
individual agency is the correct
to handle complaints from the
public
and and therefore you know going
to a by the that is is quick to
handle discrimination
investigations why The New
Mexico Human Rights bureau would
be more appropriate set to so
just you know go through those
those types of investigations
one thing that that that I would
like to add a about your initial
questions about the need for
investigators are you know
there's the old saying justice
delayed is justice denied and
and I would say that just on a
broader scale
Spectrum of discrimination cases
brought by employees and the
public for public accommodation
discrimination there is a little
law.
The backlog of cases and and you
know investigators are having
spoken to some of them or
struggling to get through cases
and so that you must be
exhausted before litigants can
see their day in court so act
you know I understand there's
some fiscal impact of hiring
more investigators but there is
a need for more in fact this the
Gators for for that body thank
you Representative.
Madam chair Mister Howard the
the other one that they brought
up here under significant issues
as are talking about the the
definition of state agency that
also includes contractors
independent contractors with the
state and so I see that the
state risk management didn't
weigh in and so the state could
be liable for any of the actions
of these contractors and that's
somewhat concerning as well but
I I the support concept.
You know what I'm really
concerned about is all the
derogatory information that's in
the FIR and I'm wondering if we
should work on this to get the
FIR new more neutral if you will
you know to produce forty this
would be really good
but anyway I'm just listen to
some of the other questions of
the people may have but R. I'm
really concerned by what's in
the FIR thank you.
Thank you Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair.
To you're the discussion and
also then to be looking at the
FIR and
when I when I noticed is that
John.
The last committee actually did
what.
What the Legislative Council
Service should have done in
drafting the bill which is to
change antiquated language when
I carry this bill in two
thousand three and two thousand
three into it would come back
and fix it in two thousand four
because it's been enrolled in a
post rock.
To change the statute initially
but I'm single is probably
having a somatic stress just
might buy my talking about it
was ability stressful
event.
That was kind of a marathon.
It really didn't occur to me
that that it didn't apply to
public body so to hear that we
need.
All of these
Workers in.
In order to.
Implement what we meant to
implement in two thousand three
in two thousand four it's kind
of disturbing.
Now I
I actually think.
Thirty that we expect.
The contractors.
With state governments to follow
state government standards is a
good one and you know we're
having that just.
All over the state right now.
When when and city hires a
contractor who doesn't provide
equal pay for women for example.
They're trying to get around it
they're saying well they're
almost there and you know we're
never going to be there as a
society until we require these
things of our state government.
And our local government and the
contractors.
That and gauge what.
I am certainly in favor of this
and I noticed that it didn't
join quite a bit of support in
the last committee I was really
pleased to see that.
I I guess I wonder.
Every every time I see a an FIR
that says this is going to cost
the state agency million dollars
and I look at it and and it's
not.
Access.
The
Adding to their workload unless
there are all kinds of claims
that come forth I wonder.
Why would there suddenly the.
A proliferation of claims of
discrimination if really this is
probably a technical fix.
To the Human Rights Act.
And we're just making it
perfectly clear and I think the
thing that makes it
Perhaps a little more burdensome
than the current Human Rights
Act is requiring that the state
government.
Expect this of their contract
but state government nearly has
to say prove to us.
What your policies are and
follow them.
I don't see that the
Well I think maybe you my former
law school class.
Leon Howard might.
address how this might with this
actually
make the state liable for
hiring.
Sorry I you can turn everything
off when you got you're on mute.
Okay.
So I think maybe I would like to
hear Mr Howard talk about states
like.
Thirty.
Because I think that's the only
fiscal impact and I can the
state thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative
you know I I can only speak to
how we would view these claims
and these these independent
contractors typically.
Have a contract with the state
to perform a traditional
function
you know that that the state
carries out
I can think of several context
under which the the contractors
actually it's so subject to the
Human Rights Act so you know I I
can't say that the the state
would evade liability all
together but but the way we
bring claims typically I'm
thinking of the prison stating
there's medical contractors
and and private contractors in
contractors to to run those
facilities we often bring our
twenties directly against those
entities if they're doing
business in New Mexico they
themselves are not immune from
the Human Rights Act.
The only way I could see the
state being bitter a direct or
government body being a direct
target in those instances is if
the government body itself
Was participating in the
discrimination or had a policy
or practice in
you know giving out the
contracts or something like that
that that led to the direct
discrimination.
Thank you very much madam chair
Mister how are that's exactly
how I see it.
And with regard to Madam chair
representative brings comment
about why not use the federal
staff to.
There's no federal law that
doesn't.
Yesterday the house of
representatives US house of
representatives passed such a
law.
Right now it's going over to the
Senate but we have greater
protection here in New Mexico
then at the federal level.
So I I and this is just fine
it's really just a technical
amendment and I don't think
there should be
A lot of concern or opposition.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you Representative.
Thank you the other committee
members.
Madam moved to pass.
Thank you also.
Okay we have a due pass motion
by Representative Elias second
time between Representative
Chasey and Ortez.
The clerk to take role please.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
And madam chair blue is excused
madam chair with that we have
one excuse I in the affirmative
and three and then they get to.
Thank you and Representative you
have would you pass on house
bill one nine two.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee and
I will see you all on the floor
with this bad boy thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have house bill two six
eight.
Madam chair I will be presenting
on behalf of Representative
Hochman Vigil and if you could
bring up Steven Curtis he is in
the attendees list.
Okay.
Would you raise your hand so
staff can promote you Steven
Curtis.
Your.
Okay Representative.
R. madam chair members the
committee so.
Figure out how to make this as
straight forward as possible and
as as simple as possible on this
is a bill that
has on the one hand what we've
been referring to on the house
floor as heroes research is
businesses that are not
following the public health
guidelines so by way of
background.
What's happened is.
when people and this is very
specifically limited to the
Corona virus.
When they contract the Corona
virus.
I'm if they want to get com.
Workers compensation.
They have to prove that they
were so that they
are suffered the disease or
caught the disease however you
would the the virus of from
their from their employment and
that and I'm reading from this
and that the injuries they
sustained in this case the virus
the medical bills the Los work
are related to that contraction
of the virus at work and that
they have a disability arising
from that at work well
obviously I it's impossible to
prove that it just yes I mean
the viruses everywhere and so
are that they will be denied.
any benefits.
R. under the workers
compensation system which by the
way I would add or not
particularly generous to start
with but they will be denied any
benefits because they will not
be able to meet their burden of
proof.
So that's why the burden of
proof is so important hang on a
second we should restore.
that's why the burden of proof
is so important.
So what this bill does is it
says all right.
If you are a business that is
not following existing.
Public health guidelines then
the burden of proof is shifts to
the employer.
And it shifts to the employer so
that the employer has to prove
then that the
that that the and I got
distracted I apologize the
employer needs to prove them.
That that virus was not
contracted at work now there are
very strict limitations for this
presumption no one and most
important.
These have to be essential
workers.
Which is to provide
as meaning public safety
employees school employees or
employee to clear to be an
essential employee pursuant to a
public health order of the
governor or secretary of health
but that presumption can be
rebutted if the employer can
show that the employee was out
you know what a bar would not
wearing a mask and not complying
with public health guidelines
the bottom line is this.
If we don't pass something like
this then heroes who are working
for state hospital that's not
following a public health
guidelines will not get workers
compensation so generally
speaking heroes aren't entitled
to workers compensation because
they won't be able to meet the
burden and so we created this
very narrow exception for when
that burden is switched to an
employer that is decided we're
not gonna have masks in our
workplace we're not gonna
separated place we're not going
to have social distancing
whatever would be that they're
not following the exit that
existing guidelines the burden
then shifts to the employer it
is a completely fair bill and
very limited to what we have
constantly referred to is here
us and so I keep going back to
that word because we're not
using that word quite a bit on
the floor with this bill if we
really want to protect heroes
this is one way to show it yes
when were pitted against
businesses that have decided
that the viruses and real
workers who contract the virus
should have the ability at least
to be able to prove that their
entire workers comp and with
that it Mr Curtis wants to say
anything or I said anything
wrong I'm happy to turn it over
to him madam chair.
Thank you Mr Curtis I thank you
madam chair and and and
Representative Ely and certainly
he said nothing wrong I I would
I have a few remarks just to
give some context here my name
is Steven Curtis I'm a labor and
employment lawyer practicing in
Albuquerque New Mexico for the
law firm of units involved as
this bill does what a number of
other states have already done.
And I'm creates a burden
shifting framework that Mr
Representative Eli described and
the fundamental trade off in the
workers compensation system.
has been it is that an employer
issued ID from greater tort
liability through the
exclusivity portions of the
workers comp in exchange the
worker who's posted have a
swifter easier process to assert
and bring claims and get
compensation for workplace
injuries or illnesses.
Such a fundamental trade off
works well for certain types of
injuries if a worker falls off a
ladder it's relatively
straightforward and simple and
quick to show that I fell off a
ladder and that was a workplace
injury I can't sue my employer
for that but I have a swift an
adequate administrative remedy.
It's that fundamental trade
office broken down as
Representative Eli described in
the COVID world.
I happen to representative asked
me and the nurses you know from
their experience that we do have
essential workers who have been
denied claims we have essential
workers who have brought claims
successfully or at least had the
insurance company recognized the
claims but we've also had ones
denied
based on the causation issue
Representative Eli.
has raced this bill restores the
balance by creating the
evidentiary framework that Mr
representative Ely described it
does so in a way that's very
clever.
And
incentivizes good behavior on
both the employers part and the
employees part I'm as
Representative Eli described it.
shifts the burden it requires a
showing that compliance with
public health orders has not
been dealt with.
I would also add to it
representative Ely described in
that it allows an employer to be
excused from this presumption if
they have.
a trust testing and tracing plan
that has been approved by the
department of health so.
These types of risky behaviors
are dis incentivized on both the
that they half of I'm sorry are
both part of the employer and
the employee and rather and this
bill would incentivize both the
employer and the employee to
follow all relevant public
health orders thank you very
much madam chair the only thing
I would add to that the will
turn over for questions is that
we're gonna hear a lot of
comments about how the
businesses because I've been
getting calls are required to do
certain things they're not
required to do anything on this
bill if they want they don't
want to do it that's fine but
then if they're not going to
follow the public health
guidelines their employee should
needlessly suffer because of it
and not just their employees but
we're only talking about
essential workers so we're not
talking about every employee in
the state which frankly I think
we should be we're only talking
about essential workers so when
people start talking about how
this is going to be a burden on
business business has a choice
we're not mandating that they do
anything and with that madam
chair I will turn it over for
questions.
Thank you Representative now we
will go to the polls and conduct
poll.
And we will have those in favor
or opposition of the bill and
vote on the poll.
Ten more seconds to vote in the
poll.
And we have eighteen in favor
and twenty four against we will
now go to public comments and we
will begin with individuals who
are in favor of the bill please
raise your hand we will begin
with Michael
Good morning madam chair
committee members thank you for
letting me speak on workers
compensation attorney
representing workers in the bins
working in that area for fifteen
years I'm also New Mexico trial
lawyers association member and
strongly support this bill there
is no bill I supported her in
other committees that employer
insurances said that there are
other bills laws that would
protect workers there's no such
thing the way the law works
without this presumption is that
insurers can deny anything in
the worker has the burden of
proof those workers that may not
have money can't get health care
can't get doctors to support
that burden of proof and us that
we come wards of the state and
the state and taxpayers have to
pick up what insurance companies
should be paying for this bill.
Does have a care in the state
for both workers and and and
poor insurers I think it's a
fair bill and strongly supported
thank you for your time.
Thank you next we have Jack van.
Madam chair I'm gonna speaking
be speaking on against this
bill.
Thank you were taking comments
in support of the bill.
Right we will go to John to.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with the New Mexico state
federation of labor AFL-CIO we
represent tens of thousands of
workers throughout the state
a number of these workers are
frontline workers these are
workers that are put their lives
on the line during this pandemic
they all went to work every
single day to help all of us
during this pandemic they are
some of them got sick during the
pandemic and unfortunately even
a few of them passed away
because of this pandemic and for
them to be denied the right of
this presumption would be really
just a tragedy for our frontline
workers and for that reason and
for many others we very much
thank the sponsors for
supporting this bill and hope
that you will as well.
Thank you next we have Condit
and associates.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Brian Condit
die Representative New Mexico
building construction trades
council are we fully support the
federal state assistance being
provided to our business
community are we also support
are essential workers who has
been said before our our our our
construction hands our teachers
are health care workers and
strongly support a balanced
approach to providing them
protection under New Mexico
workers comp loss I A. strongly
urging appreciate the committee
supporting house bill two sixty
eight thank you.
Thank you next we have Stephanie
Welch.
Thank you madam chair my name is
for the big about and I'm
standing in for Stephanie Welch
today I'm an attorney at the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and we send a strong support of
HB to sixty eight all Senator
employees working outside of
their homes deserve workers
compensation benefits the
contract COVID nineteen how many
workers are super COVID nineteen
by working from home Senator
employees are far from X. are
far more exposed to continue to
risk their lives stateLee
essentially police such as
grocery store workers home
health aides and janitors also
to to be low wage employees
earning less than the
recommended wage meaning that if
the contract COVID nineteen
they're at high risk of
suffering severe financial
hardship unless these workers
have kept the country on Cheney
during one of the most difficult
public a pandemic syndicates the
least we can do is provide all
essential please a contract
COVID nineteen a simple pets
workers compensation benefits at
this time many states have
created legal presumption of
workers compensation statutes
like the presumption that H. B.
two sixty it's up to create
we're not alone doing this and
Mexicans central place to serve
more than justice we strongly
support HB to sixty eight and we
encourage committee passed thank
you.
Thank you next we have actually
long.
Good morning chair members of
the committee actually long with
the American federation of
teachers New Mexico we echo the
comments of previously stated by
our fellow proponent proponents
of this bill to to
Representative Ely is point
definitely support the notion
that if we believe essential
workers to be heroes the same
ones as as my fellow proponents
said before the ones that keep
New Mexico and the country
running then this is the least
we can do to prepare them with
that we think the Sanchez we
think representative Ely and we
support the bill and hope you
will as well thank you.
Thank you next we have Josh
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
asked me Council eighteen that
we represent public employees
and some private sector
employees across New Mexico many
of which are essential workers
and frontline workers we just
want to thank all the sponsors
for bringing this bill forward
and representative Ely for
presenting it today we strand
and strong support and urged the
committee to also support House
Bill to sixty eight thank you
madam chair.
Thank you next we have the map
so are just.
Madam chair that is what is with
the corporation here in New
Mexico the competition supports
the intent of HB sixty eight
which to ensure that workers
receive the workers compensation
benefits that they need to
quickly as possible we will
strongly advocate for amendment
to address all concerns raised
this ticket for partners at the
bill may affect OSHA recordable
injury reporting this would have
major downstream impacts on the
procurement of federal another
contracts OSHA currently has
procedure which considers the
specific events leading to COVID
nineteen exposure rather relying
a rebuttable presumption this
procedure already achieved the
goal of worker protection laws
putting cases where transmission
is not work related and then it
clarifying that this present
district related intended for
the purpose of strictly
administering the payments for
workers compensation benefits
and not been to affected poor
safety record seizures with
leading our.
Great concerns eighty two to
sixty eight thank you.
Thank you next we have Clarissa
Duran.
Thank you again madam chair
committee members my name is
clear if the data and lifelong
member of Espanola and Rio
Arriba County I am in support of
house bill two sixty eight as
amended.
I feel that the essential
workers in my community are
deserve to be honored as heroes
and that means fully supporting
them when they get sick with
COVID without them my parents
and I would not not be able to
access food from the grocery
store access any other types of
services that we need basic
things like electricity natural
gas etcetera to keep our homes
level we must ensure that are in
honoring our heroes we
give them the support they need
when they get sick and thank you
to the sponsor and everyone
who's supported this bill.
Thank you next we have Robert
Robert.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and committee members my
name is Robert and I'm not good
enough finish locally twenty
three.
on behalf of our members of the
central workers statewide and
not for the reasons previously
stated we do support house bill
two sixty eight thank the
sponsor for building this
forward and Representative
enough for a present thank you.
Thank you now we will go to
public comments in opposition of
the bill please raise your hand.
And I will begin with.
Rende Gillian Lopez.
Rhonda are you there.
Okay let's go to Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
respectfully oppose this bill we
appreciate the sponsor taking
the time to talk to us on
several occasions about the
business community's concerns
however as written the bill
inserts many ambiguities and new
discovery requirements for the
workers comp process first the
presumption is wrong as has been
said by Dr Scrase and the
governor most of the COVID
spreading New Mexico is due to
small family gatherings in the
community not work related
infections it is important to
note that the bill purports to
cover only essential workers but
the definition of essential
workers under section one B. is
so broad that it would include
any worker that is not a remote
worker in New Mexico including
workers at clothing stores
restaurants or golf courses.
This expansive definition the
number of claims for workers
comp claims will skyrocket
across the system impacting the
overall efficiency of the
process and funding of the
system.
According to the FIR and the
workers compensation.
Okay next we will go to Jerome
rops.
Thank you madam chair committee
members storm robs the executive
director of the New Mexico Chile
Association and while we
appreciate the thought behind
this bill we respectfully oppose
this legislation our businesses
are struggling including our
food processors manufacturers
and farmers for all central
businesses.
Ross's you to manufacturers
spent millions throughout this
pandemic keep their employees
safe and continue to put food on
our tables these businesses are
followed all employee protection
guidelines from the state had
little community spread of COVID
nineteen in the workplace but
rather than seeing that their
employees are contracted buyers
outside work this legislation if
passed will open up our food
processing businesses to
liability issues and increased
costs in our rates.
The amendment excludes
businesses that it here to an
agreement between the business
and NM Environment Department is
not a financially viable option
most of the struggling
businesses.
The process and finance our
state imported eight hundred
more employees in the chilly
season that's at least an
additional hundred twenty
thousand every two weeks that is
not feasible for these companies
are battling increased business
costs and you.
Thank you next we have grant
more.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Roy
Moore I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American property and
casualty insurance association
we stand in opposition of the
bill first what I would say is
the system is working members
and insurers are paying claims
in those claims are coming in
and being address of the current
system is working the next thing
that I would point you to is
that the definition of essential
workers is very broad it's not
just heroes and just for example
other professions that are
included within the definition
the public health order include
investment managers bankers
accountants dry cleaners and
even my profession lawyers so it
is very very broad the last
thing that I would point you to
is the provision at the end that
excludes data from being
considered by the superintendent
that provision may have the
perverse impact of protecting
businesses from bad claims data
and if you're focusing on those
bad claims.
Thank you next we have Tiffany
Rivera Riviera.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning we stand and respectful
opposition of house bill two
Sixtyeight my apologies to me
Rivera with New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau
this bill creates a presumption
of eligibility and requires the
employee to first prove
substantial noncompliance by the
employer before there is
presumption of eligibility this
legislation could lead to many
false claims by employees of
employer non compliance as
mentioned in the FIR this
presumption significantly
increases employers potential
liability and uptick in workers
compensation claims due to
infections of the COVID nineteen
could result in additional
expenses to employers including
increased insurance premiums
interruptions to business
operations and other associated
administrative costs our culture
operations are price takers who
could not be able to absorb
these increased costs further
delays in business operations
could potentially threaten the
production of the crops and food
products that you and I can see
we.
Thank you we have Jeremiah
Richie.
Thank you madam chair Jeremih
reaching on behalf of New Mexico
mutual we are the largest
workers compensation insurance
carrier in New Mexico and our
experience has been that we have
accepted the vast majority of
our COVID nineteen plans we
respectfully oppose this bill
because it would shift.
Workers compensation from a no
fault system quickly compensate
workers for workplace injuries
to now be a proxy for litigating
enforcing public health orders
runs a risk of excluding workers
who are actually injured at work
and analyzing businesses for
workers who are not actually
injured at work this is unlike
any presumption that we've seen
anywhere across the country and
I would also like to think of
the sentiments that the
definition of essential employee
here includes any employee the
business that has been permitted
to operate with limitations that
is every business and every
employee it presents as much to
prop thank.
Thank you next we have JD
Bullington.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington with the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
which understands the well
intended objectives with this
bill but the presumption that a
person's comment contraction
occurred in the work place if
the employer has not done
everything possible to mitigate
spread is a bit of a stretch
especially with COVID nineteen
numbers falling rapidly toward
the governor's key benchmark of
about eight cases per one
hundred thousand people how was
an employer going to assemble a
preponderance of evidence
relating to an employee's
personal life and activities
outside of the workplace this is
an impossible evidentiary burden
to overcome without running into
serious invasion of privacy
issues so those reasons madam
chair members the committee the
greater Albuquerque chamber
urges opposition to this bill.
Thank you next we have ed rich
rich rich more.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee and was not
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative association.
I would like to thank the
sponsors for working on a crisis
such as this pandemic we
respectfully oppose bill to
sixty eight for the following
reasons.
At this time this legislation
has been indicated is overly
broad specially at a time when
community spread of COVID is
ongoing.
This legislation also conflicts
with the workers comp
administration statutory
provisions for the workers comp
provides exclusive remedy for
both employers and employees.
This legislation puts employers
in a difficult position to prove
that the essential employee
violated one of the council.
You should be very challenging
for an employer to take on
investigative role to prove they
are not liable.
And for those reasons we stand
in opposition thank you.
Thank you next we have merrily
Dan.
Hello can you hear me.
Hello yes okay thank you okay I
have written a memo to all the
members of this committee I am
completely in favor of the
intent of this legislation which
is to provide of COVID financial
relief and medical care to
injured essential workers
but I think this let particular
piece of legislation is very
awkwardly written and it it is
contrary to the principle of
workers comp in that it requires
the parties to assess blame to
each other which is exactly what
the workers compensation system
is intended to skip over so that
you do not have to litigate on
all of the issues that previous
commenters have mentioned so I
have written to the committee
members with suggestions for how
to revise this bill so it is
much simpler.
Thank you next we will go to the
panelists Cerro.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is tanu
Cerro and I'm the administrator
of the food industry self
insurance fund of New Mexico and
adjusting alternatives I have
twenty years of experience in
the New Mexico workers
compensation system this is an
air strongly opposed to HB to
sixty eight this legislation is
unnecessary as coverage for
contraction of the virus in the
workplace is already provided
under the New Mexico workers
compensation act as we have
heard from many carriers
throughout this process the act
is working as intended and
claims were COVID is being
contracted at work are being
covered what we completely
understand everyone's earnest
desire to support our work force
in these trying times this
legislation as proposed will not
do that.
It is not been appropriately
vetted by stakeholders familiar
with the workers compensation
system it will cause great
confusion and increase the
litigation that will end up
doing care and benefits as well
as costing employers during a
time when they are struggling to
keep their doors open thank you.
Thank you next we have Kelly you
report.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am Kelly wrecked
your seo agency New Mexico if
you see New Mexico respectfully
stands in opposition to house
bill two sixty eight I won't
reiterate what's been heard
today but I will share that
while this bill X. explicitly
prohibits insurers from using
COVID nineteen claims arising in
the course of employment in
developing rating plans
insurance premiums will increase
for all employers as a result.
And as you heard from total is
there just a moment ago we are
also concerned with the
implications this will have on
self insured workers comp groups
this legislation fails to
differentiate between commercial
insurance coverage and
independent workers compensation
cover claims because exposure
caused by a presumption like
this one could never been
projected to the solvency of
self insurers either group or
individual could be put in
jeopardy by its implementation
we also noticed a potential
alternative suggested in the FIR
by the workers comp and
ministration which is to create
an emergency fund for essential
workers similar to the nine
eleven emergency workers fund
that could provide essential
employers relief without
imposing a burden.
Thank you next we have Walter
Bradley.
Thank you madam chairman members
the committee a moderately.
Representing the dairy farmers
of America.
And the outcome of the labor all
the things have been said we've
we've thoroughly and explore
this whole issue.
A couple of points that the I
will make that has not been
brought up yet but one is this
was never vetted by the to my
understanding now or never
vetted by the Advisory Council
for workers comp.
Once again the the industry was
was not included in the Goshen
ations nor was the workers comp
advisory committee which is that
was set up many years ago to vet
these things it was also of
course for our staff and and our
members it's it's totally
impossible to prove
preponderance of of how this
works in the state of New
Mexico.
Guidelines continued to move
every quarter so for those
reasons we oppose the bill.
Thank you next we have Jason
Espinoza.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director of the national
federation of independent
business we stand strong
opposition to the legislation
this presumption significantly
increases employers potential
liability and uptick in workers
compensation claims will result
in additional expenses to
employers including increased
insurance premiums interruptions
to business operations and other
associated costs such as the
testing and tracing plan
presented in the proposed in the
amendment adopted last in the
last committee the mechanism set
up by this legislation runs
counter to the quick and
efficient delivery of benefits
that workers compensation is
really built on additionally I
just want to clarify to
essential employee is the term
used in the legislation however
in the last committee essential
employee was broadened to
include any
any business that has been
permitted to operate within
limitations pursuant to the
public health order services
really brought it will cover any
employee of any business in the
state thank you.
Thank you next we have run the
Gillen Lopez.
Good morning madam chair can you
hear me now.
Yes thank you I apologize madam
chair members of the committee
running alone Lopez executive
director of the MCA and smacked
of New Mexico we please ask the
committee to oppose house bill
two sixty eight workers comp
compensation claims are being
covered at this time and if this
will place costly actions
against employers and looking at
the FIR it does state that the
WCA reports current statistics
indicate insurers are paying
COVID claims we appreciate the
opportunity to be heard thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you next we have Cammy
Denton.
You madam chair representatives
and county detention I'm the
workers compensation claims
manager Representative with New
Mexico counties as a worker's
comp insurer for most of the
counties in the state of New
Mexico and we respectfully
oppose H. B. two sixty as
written.
COVID nineteen has been deemed a
pandemic and any member of the
general public can be exposed at
any time and any place even with
safety measures taken.
To put the burden on the
employer to prove where exposure
occurred would be inequitable
the definition of essential
workers is so broad and much of
the language in this bill is
ambiguous or insurers to be
unable to use the data in
determining contribution as a
poll this could have very
significant negative monetary
impact on our county members New
Mexico counties are greatly
appreciate your consideration
and I thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you I don't see any more
hands graced so now we will go
to the committee.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair in
Representative Eli are the.
Our current points not being
paid by through workers comp.
madam chair and representative
will allow me at hello we have
Mr Curtis answer question I
don't do any workers comp Mr
Kurdish you know.
Madam chair representative green
we have heard from several of
the opponents to this bill that
the bill is unnecessary because
they are being resolved that the
insurance level which is the
first step in the process were
claims made in the insurance
size whether or not they're
going to cover it if that is the
case then the presumptions that
has been discussed at length do
not come into play because those
are when they're in the educate
twenty process if a claim has
been denied and moved up to that
step
So I know from experience that
the unions that represent that
there have been essential
workers who have had claims
denied and would benefit from
the presumption if it will when
when those denied claims move to
the aging process
which is the second step in the
in the in the in the process.
Representative Eli one of the
things nights the.
Why mandating.
that it is presumed You received
it at work.
R. I think it's going to cause
businesses to assess what their
workers comp insurance is and by
that our assessment they either
say well we're going to close
down or we're going to limit the
number of employees and limiting
the number of employees is not
what we need right now we need
to yes the work force back to
work R. I think that worked on
already has the flexibility to
do some of this but we go
through a couple things I've
got.
Questions on and madam chair and
Representative Ely let's go to
page two winds eight nine this
is so effective until January
thirty first twenty twenty three
why did we we should out that
for.
Madam chair representative
respond a couple things so that
you said all answer that
question first of all remember
what we're talking about.
An employer cannot be sued in a
third party case sure they
already have that protection
rights that's number one
projection for any employer
because there's a social
contract where the employee now
is limited to workers comp by
the way pretty are minimal
budget medical bills are paid
for once approved by some
percentage of the person's
wages.
That's denied so long as this
there is no presumption because
if the insurance company through
their good graces state now you
got to prove it came from work
they get nothing they get no
medical bills paid they get no
compensation for employments
when I hear the employers say
gosh our premiums will go up.
Remember the other side of the
equation is nothing and we're
not requiring employers to do
with anything we're simply
saying to employers if you're
not going to follow the public
health orders and the employees
can prove that.
Then they get the presumption of
the employee first has to prove
that the employer did not follow
the public health orders and
then they get the presumption if
the employer that point as well
all higher west people we're
talking about a scofflaw anyway
you're talking about an employer
that is in following public
health orders so with respect to
your question this bill is so
limited we're not talking about
pandemics into the future we're
talking about the Corona virus
nineteen and they stretch it out
to two thousand thirteen because
our two thousand twenty three
because we don't know how long
this virus will be with us but
it's limited to this virus and
to essential workers and one
other point that I want to make
sure to make everybody's talking
about how broad the definition
of essential employees as but
I'm reading essential employee
means any public service
employee or school employee or
an employee declared to be an
essential employee pursuant to a
public health order the governor
or the secretary of health
provided that employee was
required to work at the physical
location employment at any time
up to twenty days part of the
diet diagnoses of Corona virus
disease and what concerns me is
the business community wide been
very supportive of we did the
small business loan we're doing
two hundred million dollars in
grants everything's loaded on
the side of helping businesses
including small business we are
doing nothing for various
nothing and the idea that
somehow gosh employers are going
to have to pay more premiums if
they don't follow the law
frankly I don't know much about
the poor and I'm kind of
surprised the business community
isn't frankly in here saying we
support this we want to support
our employees that's what they
should be doing and they're not.
Representative Eli there's an
amendment the came out of the
labor committee it says.
Any employee of a business that
has been permitted to operate
with limitations pursuant to the
public health order so we are
employee definitions lot wider.
You've brought up a couple
different questions here.
And you know when we look at
page two and wanting seventeen
has not strictly complied.
I didn't find a definition for
that you it is a definition
and this is thank strictly come
all eight.
Our.
Madam chair representative now
that's going to be not not every
raised in a statute is going to
be defined some of that's going
to be left to the judge's but if
Mr Curtis knows of a definite
statutory definition I'm wrong
I'm happy to turn it over to him
madam chair representative.
And I'm gonna turn down the
volume suddenly we're getting
classical music music loud
speakers so hang on just a
minute.
Madam chair representative Rehm
there is not a definition in the
statute it is a common sense
term and again at the way the
process plays out is if the
claim is denied by the insurer
and the first step then the next
step in education and it would
be up to the workers comp judge
determined that however that is
not in any way a term of art or
anything that
Would cause anyone any
consternation I don't believe.
Madam chair representative side
I think that the you have
shifted the burden quite a ways
towards the business side and
the when I look at the tone of
the legislature this year is
really to close business down
but what let's move on
Madam chair representative Ely
and I hope you're back
one of the things that I think
is is.
One with this let's assume that
I am an employee and I'm working
at a business and that's open.
It is assumed that I got Corona
virus at the business.
In fact my roommate is the one
that has Corona virus.
So Madam chair representative of
let's take the example of that
let's let's play this out let's
say the person is a hospital
worker trying to save lives
right and they're working at a
hospital that's decided you know
what we're not gonna follow any
the governor's public health
guidelines respectful.
And they contracted the virus
and your example
the employer shows that there is
an employee of the employee goes
home to somebody exposed to the
coronavirus.
In that situation it's not as if
the employer doesn't win it's
not a strict liability statute
it means that if the employers
improve through a preponderance
of the evidence that they got it
from home they went but the
burden of proof is on the
employer in that situation
because it's a the employees in
essential workers and be the
employers not public follow
public health guidelines so the
employer comes in and says Hey
we've got an expert that'll say
the person got it from home
because they were exposed there
and there was an outbreak here
whatever would be or they were
not around people and yet they
can prove it it's not a strict
liability statute but the burden
is on the employer because they
have an all of the public health
guidelines that's correct but
it's not that they lose they
just have to prove it.
Representative you all right so
I am a business owner and I'm
not following the public
guidelines what is gonna happen
to me what's the governor going
to do to me.
Madam Madam chair representative
nothing I mean you don't have to
follow that there's nothing in
the statute there is I I can't
speak to what affect the public
health orders have that I don't
know but dispatch it doesn't
tell you have to do anything you
want to follow the public health
guidelines in this statute you
don't have to but if one of your
employees get sick it seems to
me grossly unfair in that
situation where you got to say
well yeah I didn't follow
anything I got a bunch of plays
you're the guy Corona virus go
ahead and prove to me that they
got it from my workplace well
then the employer US employee
has to go out get
epidemiologists do all the stuff
that would be more expensive
than the budget then the
employees going to travel
receive so they just give up and
they get nothing this this this
issue about how the employer's
gonna have been more in premiums
leaves out the fact that
employees will not get their
medical bills paid will not
receive any worker any kind of
compensation for employment they
get nothing they are totally
wiped out and I have to tell you
Madam chair representative when
you say gosh there's been a lot
of anti business legislation
waves hitting the floor I'm not
seeing it there's been a lot of
pro business legislation as far
as I can see and and responsible
and stuff that we have on a
bipartisan basis supported
including a small business loan
including the two hundred
million dollars for Lita so I
really take strong objection to
the notion that somehow we have
not as a legislature strongly
supported business watch white
in this list in this legislation
is why if an employer decides
not to follow the law we're not
talking about what happens to
them criminally or civilly don't
care but they shouldn't be able
to put it on the backs of their
employees and state yeah well we
didn't follow law now prove to
us that you got Corona virus at
our business that's just not
fair.
Thank you and Representative the
light would be rephrase my
question so if I'm a business
and I'm not following the
governor's guidelines is she
finding my company or me
personally Madam chair
representative that's not this
bill and I don't now that is
nothing to do with this bill.
Madam chair representative I
think all you have to do is just
look at the newspaper and
there's been several where she's
taken action against them.
Representative that may be
correct I'm not saying it's not
I'm just saying to you what's
that got to do with this bill
nothing if they don't want to
follow the guidelines all this
bill says is then they should be
able to take advantage of the
workers compensation system as
well and say even though you're
essential workers even though
you've been exposed to the virus
your by business and even though
we haven't followed the
guidelines you go ahead and
prove to us that it's related to
business and that you got here
that's just it's just in my mind
grossly unfair.
Chair and Representative the
light let's go to page three
walling well it just says that
the
that the location of affirmative
up to twenty days.
Is diagnosed as our Corona virus
what is Dr Scrase the state the
isolation period should be if
you're exposed to Corona virus
and wire reuse in twenty days
instead of his recommendation at
madam chair representative would
you do me a favor because I was
looking the original bill I'm
looking at the amendment context
now would you get me to the
section if you don't mind yes
I'm sorry Representative Madam
chair representative Ely so it's
page three it's going to be
section the.
Where it speaks of the twenty
dates.
Okay well I tell you what while
I'm looking for that Madam chair
representative I'm always timely
turn it over to Mr Curtis and
I'll see what we Fund.
Madam chair representative I
believe the twenty days is to
capture the fact that the date
of diagnosis and sometimes
ambiguous as to when it was
caught
and it's good looking back from
a period of twenty days of the
diagnosis because it we don't
know if it was the fourteen or
not it is it is a part of
purpose of the overall purpose
of the language that you're
pointing to is to make it clear
that we're not talking about
employees such as myself that
has the luxury of being able to
work from home.
I am very blessed in that regard
I'm an attorney with modern
technology I can do most of my
work from home but we're talking
about employees who don't have
that luxury and who has been
exposed at the work place.
Won't.
Representative I I do see that
we're not following what Dr
Scrase C. is said of the ten to
fourteen days we've expanded
quite a bit so madam chair thank
you that's all the questions I
have it is to provide.
Thank you and next we have
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair to follow
up with the build very last
question that's the twenty days
is all paid for the amendments
that context about the maybe it
winds down.
Through Citrix.
Nine line spell.
Yeah and I am madam chair
representative I see it I
appreciate that yeah that's what
I've been looking at.
There
question I have is very.
We're at a point now.
With respect to this fire is
that there are.
Thank the governor reported last
night that the New Mexico is
doing very well and in terms of
getting vaccinated impact the
I'm hopeful and I think she's
hopeful but there we do begin
that are getting
for the general population
vaccinated.
In the upcoming weeks M. and so
what what question
Representative or Madam chair
representative is.
What happens to your
presumptions.
If you have.
Employees who have the
opportunity to receive the
vaccination.
But did not wish to receive the
vaccination.
Is there any burden on those
individuals.
possible for their own conduct
Madam chair representative
that's an excellent question
returner Mr Curtis but I don't
think so I I I think the answer
is no but let me make sure with
Mr Curtis it would have madam
chair representative my part I
would agree the and lesson until
the public health order mandates
it now because that what we're
talking about in the this is a
rebuttable rebuttable
presumption has Representative
Hochman Vigil like to refer to
it the last committee we're
talking about is a situation in
which it claims been denied
we're in front of the need to
contort body the employee is
able to put on evidence to show
that the employer failed to
comply with public health orders
and then we turn to the employer
to put on evidence to show that
the employee failed to comply
with public health orders I do
not believe that any of the
public health orders in place
right now mandates
Mexicans so Representative are
chair representative of the
answers now.
That's.
I guess that's kind of a concern
because
you're you're putting.
Your regular presumption and
you're putting the burden on the
employer.
And you have an employee who
has.
Cited for whatever reason.
To not.
think of the program that would.
Most likely are prevent them
from contracting the disease
and yet the you're you're you're
putting that burden on the
employer to
Not only prove but but to and
I'll go through the entire
process and it it does seem to
me that at this stage.
Okay.
Representative.
We are getting to the point I'm
at and I truly hope that we are
at the point.
That this so pandemic is winding
down in fact our state I don't
think can survive another year
like what twenty twenty
we need to get back to work we
need to get our people are back
to a more regular routine are
not only in terms of employment
but but in terms of just living
life are we're we're seeing uh
the dramatic effects on people's
mental health and we're seeing
results but that are are
certainly not the I think that
any of us those are our due to
very to our this pandemic and
and so I'm very hopeful that
we're at the point where we
start doing that but.
Four we're going to have a bill
it gets an emergency clause that
it will be are effective here in
the next month or so M. M. for
the two years following we're
putting this burden but but yet
that same slide the.
If indeed we're at that point
where people can get vaccinated
and then employee doesn't want
to do that
seems made up but presumption
for that employee ought to be
different than the heroes that
you're talking about that get it
as a result of their having to
be on the front line are being
exposed to the virus and and
the.
getting it out there at their
workplace and I just see a.
In the upcoming months.
Even if this is a really great
idea I just see that that that
the entire issue shifting M.
that that we ought to get back
the more in line of our our.
The employee are there some up
bear some of that
responsibility moving forward
Madam chair representative if I
could
answer that question Madam chair
representative I think I can
answer that question is that I
don't think it's a good idea for
the state to start to weigh in
on whether someone should or
should not our reserves are get
a vaccination I've got lots of
calls from people saying no the
state should be involved in that
blacked employer could certainly
require nothing against the law
they were in the employers
saying this if you're gonna work
here you gotta get a vaccine so
the employer was concerned about
that the employer could
certainly as a condition of
employment unless of course if
violated the collective
bargaining agreement or some
other kind of contract the
employer could required and
would protect the employer in
the event the employee didn't
get it and say well yeah you're
fired you're not getting a
vaccine I'm not to let you work
here they can do that.
Your R. Madam chair
representative in light of your
presumption.
You might have a retaliatory
firing in that in that case
which is going to cost you
lawyer a lot more.
It all I.
I just think that at this point
in time this this this bill
may be going into a fact
at a point in time where it's
it's really not the the and you
know I I do think that.
In fact I think the state has
already.
I thank the governor but all the
TV quite a bit I think the Dr
Scrase has been on the TV quite
a bit encouraging people to get
vaccinated where.
It's time for for their category
to to to be that so whether it's
the.
The frontline health care
workers initial way of yeah and
then the elderly and and now
maybe we're getting down to the
school teachers and staff you
know I I I I think the state has
done a good job and in
encouraging of the vaccinations
so that the we can our state not
only in pockets but see
statewide that.
This virus is running its course
and that the it's no longer
going to be
to the point where we have to
take such draconian measures of
shutting down society to to to
protect ourselves so that all I
think state already has this
bill I'm I'm concerned that with
the timing Representative but
it's really
You know coming at the end that
I certainly hope were the but
but I am concerned about the the
employee who.
Does not take advantage of the
vaccination and then putting
that burden on the employer to
to prove that they got it the
the the virus someplace other
than that the workplace are
particularly with that employee
Most likely could have avoided
of be all facts of of the virus
that they got vaccinated
some some other things that but
our concern
but were pointed out in some of
the
testimony was the you know I
don't think the.
Workmen's compensation
administration
Really wait in all this and is
supporting that I think I have
some concerns
there's a term serves raised in
the FIR and yeah
Were creating public policy.
my overarching.
Concern is what we're creating
public policy based upon what I
sincerely hope is a one time
Once a century Representative M.
yeah I'm not sure that the
opening the store it is a good
idea because you know you could
do this for every flu season.
It out every four season we know
that there's going to be a
strain of flu come around the
world and there are we going to
reserve but the flu is is
contracted at work and then
authorizing the workmen's
compensation our insurance to
cover of those illnesses.
Right we have other things that
can happen
You know I.
I've been meeting with the a
reductions disease the doctor
doctor for months now and the.
You know frankly they don't even
know where where I contracted
but buyers have no idea.
And I really can't pinpoint
where
Yeah it's rather ironic that the
are we haven't been able to
discern that I have.
Impacted anyone else are
everybody that I've came in
close contact with during that
period of time.
Has not contracted the disease
and and there's a lot of stories
of the infectious disease
doctors have that the.
Just show our complete lack of
understanding of this virus and
how it affects people and some
of the data that I was
discussing with the doctor
yesterday was that the there's.
Possible certain genetic markers
that the
you know make one more
susceptible than maybe others
and you have people within the
same household.
certain family members are are
contracted it others are not and
it's not because they're not in
close proximity it may be
because of this some natural.
Our.
The
ability of certain people to to
I did or withstand that other
people are become acutely our
secretary and they have we've
saying half a million people or
more it here in the United
States died because of so
they're they're still studying
it but get all the I think
Representative bring bring it up
to twenty days is probably our
ask your because it's not a
twenty day window it's probably
a five or six day window if you
drive the budgets to these
doctors of and so there are I
just don't think that house bill
two sixty eight the it is
something that we need to do.
At this point in time and I will
be supported at but the I
appreciate the discussion thank
you.
Thank you Representative Nibert
next we have Representative
Chasey.
Thank you very much you madam
chair and representative
you lie on behalf of the other
folks I I guess what
What I what I wanted to talk
about the evidence that might be
available to
The employer.
About where else an individual
may have contracted
Corona virus in you brought up
the issue of.
Gathering at a bar with friends
are being in a family
celebration.
Is it because.
On to.
Find a lot of social media posts
that went be available to the
employer.
Yeah madam chair.
and share Chasey
This for the because I don't
want to mislead anyone on the
committee what representative
Nibert just pointed out is
exactly right it's exactly the
problem we don't know enough
about this virus to know what's
going on so who ever has the
burden of proof is going to be
spending real money.
So that becomes the issue so
presumptions shift the board
member.
So if the employee has to come
in and prove that they got the
virus from the workplace at the
they're done they can do that
even if there's an outbreak
there there has been anywhere
else you got to get an
epidemiologist and and as I say
the the benefits from the
workers compensation system is
so meagre anyway that you could
possibly justify spending money
on an epidemiologist could
employer who has the resources
or their insurance company go
out and try to prove it yes but
I'm not going to say it's going
to be easy what could they do it
sure they could say we haven't
had an outbreak here nobody has
COVID here this is the only
employee that that got it and on
social media we see have in a
bar with masks off and then they
were but that presumption so
what could happen but I'm not
going to get anybody and say
it's not expensive it is why the
presumption becomes so important
and Representative Nibert is
right and I sure hope yes there
were on the back into this and I
agree with him that we are that
we're talking about very limited
impact as a result of this bill
and the idea that the sky is
falling is just not me just nuts
it's not if we're on the back
end of this we're trying to
protect the remaining employees
were essential workers who are
working in places that are not
following the governor's public
health order it's that simple
sorry for the long explanation
madam chair madam chair.
Well Madam chair representative
I I I appreciate that because
you're getting up and what the
essence of the bill as but.
My mind meant went immediately
to the fact that most of the
Folks have been arrested in
insurrection
and the assault on our capital
on January sixth simply posted
pictures of themselves doing
what they're now being indicted
our.
Are potentially indicted for so
I'm.
I not suggesting that there's
Dever that there will be no
expense but people who actually
are violating the orders
themselves and are out in public
very often will leave.
Such this evidence of it and if
I were an employer and I wanted
to rebut that
One
hundred presumption would go
straight to the social media or
for that particular employee was
making the claim but I just want
to bring up for all.
Those of you who did hear that
testimony on the sick leave bill
in the house Judiciary last
week.
Where I heard I heard stories of
workers.
Who actually had been diagnosed
with COVID.
Which they thought they may have
gotten at the workplace and
we're required to come to work
at it was a food preparation
operation
they said as long as your mask
you've got to work and they are
actually do go to work and.
That was absolutely frightening
because we're counting the
people who are preparing their
food to be healthy.
And.
We.
This is to me these are linked
they have different outcomes and
so forth but they're all.
Aimed at public safety.
So I will be supporting thank
you very much madam chair.
Thank you Representative Chasey
at their committee members.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Two passed.
Thank you we have to pass thank.
Hi Representative Chasey and a
second by Representative Eli
what the court please take role.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night perch so
sure Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm no thank you
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
And madam chair blue is excused
madam chair with that we have.
I in the affirmative to the
negative to madam chair.
Madam chair if I can
Representative Zamora is having
trouble with his computer areas
that money now.
Thank you.
Representative somewhat.
No.
Thank you.
Changes to one excuse I in the
affirmative and three in the
negative.
Thank you Representative Eli you
have it you pass on house bill
two six eight as amended.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members the committee.
Thank you we have about thirty
minutes for House Bill two one
seven is representative Cadena.
Available there you are good
morning madam chair I'm ready
thank you please present your
bill.
Good morning members and madam
chair I am incredibly honored to
be here today on house bill two
seventeen madam chair I I I
first just want to say as I
heard happening in other
committees that today I'm I'm
showing up with some incredible
incredible students of NMSU but
so many of us from down south
and really across New Mexico
are sitting with some emotions
because we lost an incredible
leader yesterday and
superintendent Dr Karen Trujillo
who was in NMAA you grant and
who unfortunate was killed in a
tragic accident yesterday when
she was walking her dogs
our community.
Held up drive through he'll as
such a hero she was an
incredible to gonna leader mama
and elected official for a short
time who is on our county
commission before she was pulled
to be the secretary of public ed
and the early days of governor
Lujan Grisham and then when she
came back home we got to bring
your home as our superintendent
where she was doing an
incredible job navigating our
students and educators and
families to the COVID crisis so
she is near and dear to NMSU she
was a research director there
for many years and.
Just wanted to get a name and
honor who she is and her memory
and her legacy and of course
hold in prayer.
Her loved ones as they work to
navigate these terrible times
also madam chair again I'm here
on house bill two seventeen
today I will turn it over to my
ASMS you experts if we might
have them presented I mean
included as presenters I have
today I expect Gabriel run Kiel
now based yet all and Matthew
Madrid.
If we can have them promoted as
panelists please.
Okay I think I see them do we
have everyone sure Reese.
Madam chair representative I
could not find the gentleman you
Mr chairman Mashilo okay.
Okay yes.
Thank you thank you and if
needed will also bring on
Ricardo rel later the government
relations
VP for NMSU in case we have
technical questions madam chair
us simply H. B. two to seventeen
amends the requirement for
eligibility for a student to
receive the legislative lottery
lottery scholarship over the
course of a public health
emergency around here I'll just
share with you that we have
presented an amendment today
that adds an emergency clause to
that so just you know when we
get to committee I have that as
well but madam chair if we can
please send a SMS you now to
explain the bills.
Thank you Representative Cadena.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Gabriel
wrong key on on the director
government affairs for the
associated students of New
Mexico State University someone
explain this bill a bit further
on as Representative is that
it's going to be making some
modifications to the
requirements of our scholarship
during a public health emergency
so we understood that a lot of
students right now are
struggling during the public
health emergency and this
pandemic I wanted to find a
solution to help them right now
and also be prepared for any
future emergency that are
unforeseen so our main objective
here of those bills to keep
students on the lottery
scholarship and they cannot take
a certain number of classes or
their GPA begins to drop because
of the public health emergency
they'll lose all their
scholarships this is an
important thing to know because
we just students have other
scholarships other than the
lottery to help us graduate on
time on and these scholarships
also have requirements tied to
them so if students are not like
as I mentioned are there
educators are dropping or then I
will take a certain amount of
classes and they'll lose those
other scholarships but we as a
state have the power to at least
help them to keep the lottery
scholarship and it's key for the
students to graduate with
Something important to know
right now is that these changes
are only temporary they're not
permanent it's from a semester
to semester basis only and
cannot go beyond the public
health emergency so the
requirements will go back to
normal after the public health
emergency.
Another thing that would like to
mention is that there are some
questions mention in the
committee about who's gonna be
benefiting from this bill and
it's gonna be qualified students
so in our bill we have a
qualified student and it's those
that qualify for lottery
scholarship before the public
health emergency so if a student
lost their scholarship before
the public health emergency for
the wrong reasons or maybe they
weren't even eligible to get the
scholarship then they will not
be benefiting from this piece of
legislation because they lost it
from there on purposes on not
because of the public health
nurses the so it's for students
who were impacted by the public
health emergency itself.
Lastly I'd like to mention that
there is no appropriation tied
to this bill as much as we'd
love to add additional funding
for the lottery scholarship
there's no language in this bill
that does that on and so I want
to say thank you for hearing us
I and I have nobody here to
explain things a little bit
further.
Thank you again and
Representative Kevin on madam
chair members of the committee
my name is so they fear the
assistant director of
governmental affairs for a
estimates you in our
department's efforts on house
bill two seventeen we work the
secretary Rodriguez and the
higher education department and
they support our efforts to
ensure that students across the
state in New Mexico are being
heard so we understand that
students can individually file
to keep their lottery
scholarships on a self me
basically however giving the
secretary the power to amend
these lottery requirements would
create a clear powerfully for
students to understand how to
keep their scholarships without
filing the necessary paperwork
and reduces the added stress of
financial aid offices have to go
through these cases individually
of most importantly this would
act as a service a blanket to
students and eliminate the need
for them to put their situation
on display hoping that the
school was understanding of
their situation this also
reduces the variability that to
students with the same situation
could receive different outcomes
are based on the higher official
that they talked to at their
institution House Bill to
seventeen would create a
collaboration between the
financial aid offices and the
secretary to implement these
changes during a public health
emergency an estimated twenty
four thousand plus students in
the state of New Mexico rely on
the lottery scholarship as means
to pay for their education and
if they lose funding do this.
if they were to lose funding
because of these reasons being
job loss having to help family
members struggles of online
learning or other for and for
seen circumstances caused by the
public health emergency they
face not graduating at all some
students need the scholarship
now more than ever and I'm John
estimates you releases survey at
the beginning of the school year
to leave feedback on how the
pandemic has affected them and
over seven hundred students gave
their testimonies one city even
responded by saying students
have gone through a lot of
financial emotional and academic
pressure and stress this
semester we deserve a second
chance to increase our grades as
representatives for our
university we just students are
asking unit so for your support
and continuing the opportunities
the waters lottery scholarship
offers to students but they did
not have access to before thank
you for giving us the
opportunity to present to you
today and we hope you'll have a
good rest of your session.
You madam chair thank you and
we're ready for your committee.
Great thank you Representative
are we appreciate that so now we
will go to comments and before
we did have actually let's go
ahead and pull the audience that
would like to participate if you
would like to vote in favor and
house bill two seventeen the
poll is now open.
Great so we will close it now
with seven in favor and two
against.
So if you would like to speak in
opposition of the bill please
raise your hand.
Seeing none if you would like to
speak in favor please raise your
hand.
Okay we have one of our
panelists I believe Ricardo rel.
Madam chair members of the
committee Roddick are lower in
New Mexico State University and
also represented in the council
of university presidents on
behalf of mark Senator who is
justified in the another bill at
this exact time but we stand in
support of the bill for all the
reasons stated by our students
COVID has placed a hardship on
many individuals and in
particular our students here in
the state of New Mexico
lottery is very beneficial to
our students and has some very
positive results students in New
Mexico State University are
graduating at a rate of sixty
four percent when they have
hello and lottery thirty nine
percent on those students that
just that only have hello but I
stand in support and thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward and for your
consideration thank you.
Thank you and we have marks a
major your now unmuted.
This morning madam chairman
members of the committee I
market at the New Mexico County
university presidents and we
stand and support this
legislation we want thank
Representative Lara Cadena for
bringing this to the committee
into the legislature as we just
experienced last spring with the
pandemic we had a number of
students in terms of had to drop
out and then in order to back
qualify this would allow them to
be able to continue the lottery
so with that but thank the
sponsor the members committee in
New Mexico County university
present stands for this
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I see no other hands
race we will go to the committee
now.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair yes the
one consistent the COVID I'm
going to baseball on this bill
Over on page six
One twenty one it says based on
a public health emergency the
secretary of higher education by
include that of a.
And then on page.
Seven winds eighteenth or twenty
the five what a public health
emergency years and I just note
that that the.
I think what we're talking about
our statewide public health
emergencies and again I would
suggest that the sponsor
afterwards at the end of up one
twenty before the period the
words affecting the entire state
or something to that effect
those there can be public health
emergencies are declared for
very limited geographic areas of
the state that would not affect
the entire state and certainly
I don't think it's intent up
step work to go through all
these procedures if there's just
a public health emergency
declared in and one particular
community or a portion of a
County all particularly I'm
related to the our university
that's a wall so I would suggest
that I'm not going to make
Marshall wace the Representative
will drive but I I would put the
words affecting the entire state
after the nineteen seventy eight
the wind twenty all grade seven
thank you madam chair.
It feels helpful for the
committee or the representative
we would consider that a
friendly amendment if you wanted
to make that motion.
Madam chair all make the motion
them all eight seven.
One one eight.
After.
The word or number all my team
seventy eight MP for the area
insert the words affecting
that's what that I yep that B.
C. T. I. N. G. the.
The entire state.
Thank you Representative and
Representative Cadena you said
that's friendly so is there a
second.
also be.
Okay great we have a second is
there discussion on this
amendment.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
Seeing and hearing none we have
adopted that amendment
representative.
Thank you madam chair and before
you joined us I also named that
I brought an emergency clause
amendment to your committee as
well so we haven't taken action
on not just for your information
item check okay great I will
Moved to adopt that amendment.
Committee members is there just.
And we have a second by
Representative Chasey.
Is there discussion.
Is there any objection to
adopting that amendment.
Madam chair.
That I involves the sponsor to
basically tell me what it is by
the fall would by capital outlay
of I have no idea but it's us.
Certainly madam chair
representative as we brought HB
to seventeen through the house
Education Committee.
Presented them with this key
question in figuring out the
timing to make sure should this
legislation passed that it could
show up in support of students
currently working to navigate
the COVID nineteen pandemic so
they'd suggested that we do we
should indeed and bring on an
emergency clause on to this
legislation so should we get
this through the chambers and
signed by the governor that
would mean that we could apply
HBs provisions in these
considerations for
qualifications beginning the
academic semester right now the
one the one that we're currently
in and have begun so the
academic semester spring twenty
twenty one.
I guess my real question there's
nothing other than the emergency
clause madam chair and
representative there is not this
is.
Very straightforward and
amendment amendment at an
emergency clause on to HB to
seventy our our got that thank
you.
I thank you.
Action I hope we get the votes
needed on the floor to keep this
emergency clause in place.
And is there any objection to
adding the emergency calls.
Okay seeing and hearing none we
have adopted including that.
What is the pleasure of the
committee madam chair all move a
pass on house bill.
Two seven.
As twice amended.
Great thank you we have a motion
by Representative Nibert it.
And I'll second that is there
further discussion.
Is there any objection to the to
pass.
Okay seeing and hearing and
Representative you have a due
process twice amended on house
bill two seventeen.
Thank you madam chair committee
have a great day.
Thank you.
And representative Ely are you
still with us.
Not seeing him.
Just take a quick couple of
minutes and I'll see if I can
contact representative Ely.
Yeah.
Right now.
So I'm getting information that
representative Ely got
disconnected apparently folks
are experiencing
internet issues here at the
capitol all right you are all.
Having any issues but apparently
some folks are yeah got kicked
off and I don't know why.
So what sorry about that Madam I
don't know where we are because
I we are ready for you to
percent on house bill two thirty
so this is.
You madam chair so hurry
thank you catch your breath.
I have been running around the
building all right so thank you
thank you all right so this bill
is to create a recovery fund for
people of suffered financial
loss from the fraudulent
activities or broker
we have
Ellon we've increased the fund
from ten to fifty thousand
dollars and could try to
eliminate a lot of the hurdles
that would make it difficult for
people to apply for the fund
lawyers have a similar funded
this lawyers Trust Fund and
frankly I wish we do some
changes on that to make a little
easier but Kirsten Johnson is
with me and if you could elevate
her I know she can talk briefly
about the bill.
I hope this in the way the rest
of my days going to go.
Great I'm.
Kirsten Johnson you are now in
muted.
And remote your now panelists
actually I believe.
Thank you madam chair.
Kirsten you have to meet
yourself there you go I'm so
sorry I know you guys are just
about done and and you'd like to
get out here so thank you madam
chair and members for taking a
moment to listen to our bill
this is an important consumer
protection amendment to
statute that already exists
which is to protect members of
the public from being damaged by
people with real estate licenses
and it allows people to apply to
the real estate recovery fund
for reimbursement as long as
there's been a judgment by a
reputable court and this is an
effort that commit realistic
Commission exists to protect the
public from licensees and the
only thing we can do is sanction
revoke or suspend a license we
have no authority to actually
force the percent that the
licensee whose damage the public
to reimburse the party that
they've damn hope that who
they've damaged so this is our
very important attempts to give
those members of the public who
have been damaged by real estate
licensees an Avenue to try to
seek reimbursement for the
damage and with that I see I
stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair will stand
for questions great thank you
Representative let's go ahead
and get the pulled for the
audience.
And we are now on house bill two
thirty if you elect to vote for
or in favor.
And will close at in about five
seconds.
Okay great we have eight people
in favor and zero against so we
would like to speak in favor
please raise your hand Steven
Anaya you are now in muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee up my name is Steven I
am CEO The New Mexico
association of realtors we stand
in support of this we think it's
easier make it easier to file
and lose increase the amount and
now we want to thank the sponsor
representative Ely and also the
New Mexico real estate
commission thanks for your
support.
Thank you Kathy Colvin your now
unmuted.
The COVID.
Realtor here in Albuquerque for
about twenty years highly
involved with the real estate
industry.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I speak
in support of house bill two
thirty this bill helps make
funds accessible to those who
have been harmed by real estate
licensees this is a very
important consumer protection
and I encourage and request your
support of house bill two thirty
thank you.
Thank you Craven's you're now
animated.
madam chair and members thank
you so much
many generations CEO greater
Albuquerque association of
realtors and we use speaking on
your behalf or what else number.
Bernalillo county counties or
counties.
Well as our jurisdiction she
won't support this bill hill RD
and just for the efforts of the
commission as the administrator
of.
This measure so association of
realtors stands or thank you so
much.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment so now we are
going to the committee members.
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair for about comments
all make a motion to do passed
house bill two thirty.
Thank you Representative.
We have a second by
Representative Chasey.
Is there any discussion.
Is there any objection to the
past motion.
Seeing and hearing you have a do
pass on house bill two thirty
Representative thank you.
And your muted thank thank you
committee and thank you for
thank you madam chair somebody
could send me a little money
trying to buy a heart monitor
that would be great.
Thank you Representative thanks
to everyone that participated in
the committee today thanks to
the committee members and we are
not meeting this weekend but we
will begin again at eight AM on
Monday morning so I wish
everyone a great weekend I hope
you get some rest and the
meeting is adjourned thank you
madam chair.
