Representative black.
Here.
Representative.
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Montoya.
Presenting.
Representative she's
Representative excuse yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Here.
Okay.
One.
We will proceed and I'd also
like to introduce our staff if
you would turn on on your videos
so they can introduce all the
staff that's with us here today
are Committee director is
where is he he was on here
earlier over there is fun while
taking in nineteen recognize you
without your hat on Manuel and
of course we have Christina
McCandless who is our community
assistance and Molly has been
really assisting us from that
house Education Committee thank
you Molly for all that you've
done to help us and and I don't
see Carl foster on he is the
minority a committee assistance
of Carl if you come on let us
know and we we certainly want to
recognize you and thank you for
your work.
Okay with that will begin and
I'd like to Representative yes
madam madam chair Representative
Lujan just put that thing in the
chat he added to the panelists.
Okay.
Well wait for that to happen
thank you.
Representative for heart of.
Okay.
I see representatives terror
Lujan.
And I also see Carl foster R. O.
can you turn on your video so we
can see it would take a look and
say hi thanks for your work.
maybe not with that we're going
to go straight ahead we're gonna
call on Representative Matthew
McQueen to Representative house
bill eight thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's a pleasure to
be here I think house bill eight
which is the Land Grant
assistance fund is the perfect
first bill for this new
committee and I'm please present
it.
House Bill aids
provides funding for our
traditionally grant recipients
these are political subdivisions
of the state of New Mexico.
Many with no income.
So no tax revenue no property
tax no G. R. T. nothing no
revenue the public revenue any
revenue the they have is revenue
they are so you know maybe they
own the building that they rent
out for parties or maybe they
have some of their traditional
lands intact and they sell
firewood permits you know it's
all hard earned money and I've
talked to a representative for
land grants and I'm on the list
the interim Land Grant Committee
it's amazing what they do with
so little.
In with this bill would do is
provide the basic funding to
carry out their government
functions.
So house bill a creates the land
grant percent assistance funds
is going to it puts point zero
five percent.
So not five percent or point
five percent point zero five
percent of the tier T. receipts
which is about one point five
million a year into the fund if
the land grant is audit
compliant so if they're in good
standing the auditor will notify
the lingering Council lingering
Council will ensure that the
land grants are in compliance
with their the requirements and
if they aren't Land Grant
council will notify the state
treasurer and DFA in the.
The total fund will be divided
by the number of
Eligible land grants which we
think will be about thirty and
will be distributed to them
based on shares so a full share
would be in the neighborhood of
about fifty thousand dollars if
the land grant is earning other
income.
There sure may be reduced.
Ending on the amount of income
income and I understand for
example there's there's a land
grant that the turning some
income from a a cell tower
lease.
There's another with that with
the pipeline or something like
that that you know they they
they have some funding coming in
so they're getting a reduced
share from left Land Grant
assistance fund and then any
leftover funds at the end of the
year will be reverted back to
the general fund.
In I would note that the version
of this bill passed the house in
twenty twenty it wasn't acted on
by the Senate so we're trying to
get in joining joining me today
is our Turrell Archuleta.
Who is the program manager of
the land grant council and madam
chair if I may I'd like to allow
him to see if you were.
Thank you Representative
certainly would love to hear
from our total.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee report of a claim
again my name is our department
the and the program manager for
the New Mexico land grant
council this is a very important
bill for our communities kind of
been a priority for them in two
thousand four land grants became
recognized as political
subdivisions most land grants of
those that were under article
one of the general region
statute chapter forty nine.
and since that time on the beach
you know struggled with the
requirements to
You know the government so you
know they have to comply with
the meetings act to finance
reporting there's certain things
that they must do they are
eligible for capital outlay but
even that's been a challenge are
largely because they don't have
of operating budgets to be able
to actually do the projects on
so it creates a bit of an
administrative burden you know
for the department of finance
administration to disperse funds
in advance of an actual project
with the reimbursements with
this fund would allow is for the
land grants to have a guaranteed
operating revenue stream which
would be able to conduct sort of
just the general business highs
Representative McQueen said no
land grants to serve a function
many times are the only
government entity within the
region on somebody small rural
communities on the often times
right services such a senior
mill sites or community center
you are you are functions use of
leadership functions and we do
this at their own expense almost
like grant border wall and of
course she's a volunteers and so
like you during the
legislature volunteer your time
except they don't even get
mileage and per diem and so you
know it is a challenge for them
often times it's out of their
own pocket to to to keep the
lights running we have land
grants and bake sales or that do
you know anything that they can
to try to generate revenues to
provide the services they
provide and so this would be a
tremendous help for our
communities to be able to sort
of take the next step in truly
functioning as the units of
government that they are I'd be
able to continue to invest in
services and other needs of the
community.
Will stand for questions.
Thank you Representative McQueen
did you have other witnesses
that you wanted to test.
Madam chair I couldn't quite
hear you.
I'm sorry can you hear me now
yes sometimes I speak a little
softly I apologize I remember to
speak up to everybody I do you
have any other expert witnesses
said that you'd like to
recognize madam chair no just
the starter of.
Okay
with that I see
I see
Brian Cologne on the on the
on this computer and I'd like to
recognize him Brian state
auditor Stacey thank you madam
chair and thank you members of
the committee and let me just
say I want to echo the honorable
representatives comments about
this being a fitting first bill
for this committee I am very
pleased to see this committee
seated and I think that the work
that you do is really central to
what we talk about all the time
in terms of preserving and
promoting our heritage and
culture here in the land of
enchantment that makes this one
of the most special places in
the world I see I stand in
support of this legislation one
hundred percent and to provide a
little bit of context ours as
you know in order for each of
the members of the hundred
twelve to be able to support
these land grants of the aspect
is another a political
subdivisions it's in its require
that they comply with the audit
act and work with our office to
be in compliance with the on an
act otherwise you're funding can
get where you intended to be.
As a result many of these
political subdivisions have been
in eligible for that capital
outlay in order to preserve
promote and continue the history
of agriculture in our state and
the history of our people of New
Mexico specifically as it
relates to the land grants it's
really been an honor to watch Mr
to let the grow up as an
advocate for these political
subdivisions even from the time
before they were recognized by
our state in this manner what I
will tell you is that that.
A couple of my predecessors have
the visionary thought to
actually establish a small bit
of money where these public
particularly political
subdivisions could actually
apply for grants from my office
so they could come into
compliance with the audit act
meaning that they have either
agreed upon procedures depending
upon the cash flow for that
particular organization they
would have to have agreed upon
procedures for their audit to
come into compliance with the
auditor Act.
That fund has not been very
robustly awarded dollars by the
legislature in overtime it's
seen its high of about a hundred
thousand dollars and we very
humbly ask for thirty thousand
dollars for the year to come.
The fund is always burdened by
more requests than we can afford
to actually provide capital to
but this would certainly provide
a consistent revenue stream for
these very important political
subdivisions so they can
continue to do the work that
they do as volunteers and as
community leaders when I look at
the members on this committee I
know in particular really I
don't need to say much because
when I think about who's on this
committee I know it's the it's
the members that so often are
the advocates for those small
entities that do the most the
list of New Mexico and tell our
story and I can't think of a
better way to do that then
embracing and supporting our
land grants and and those
political subdivisions that are
recognized and supported by this
legislation so as the state of
New Mexico I just want to say
the burden is on these are it on
these entities the need is great
and this would provide that
consistent revenue so too can
provide the capital required for
them to be able to do the work
they do on a daily basis in our
communities that are so often on
the margins that is rural New
Mexico so thank you for the
opportunity to stand in support
of the bill madam chair members
the committee and the I'm always
available to you and yours and
I'm honored to serve
concurrently with each and
everyone of you thank you madam
chair.
Thank you
Mr auditor and I'll turn this
back to
Representative McQueen and I
think we're not going to
recognize we have thirty five
participants on the.
On the participant list and
we'll see how many want to stand
for public comment and I guess I
would ask a those in favor of
that in favor of this bill to
raise their hands and I think
you'll be promoted to.
To speak before this committee.
Okay that chair directed nine
hundred Padilla.
Yes good morning thank you madam
chair my name is on the up on
the on and I am the current
president of the New Mexico Land
Grant receptacle chuckle I am
president of some of the men
Land Grant.
And I am also a member of the
land right council and I stand
today in full support of this
bill.
As the president of the land
grants that doesn't have a lot
of income coming in it is very
difficult to do the kind of
things that we need to do for
our communities without some
kind of financial support.
Well as I was saying we hold all
we do a farmers market that
helps bring in some money we
have a lot of yard sales all
those kind of things to bring in
money and it's difficult.
This would go with this money
coming in every year would help
us to so much more for our
community all we do things like
get would so that we can
distribute to committee members
need.
we provide the farmers market we
you know there's a lot of things
that we're trying to do for
communities and we are starting
to move forward in helping our
youth well we were locally
faster we were able.
All ships.
to two of our community.
Large that and and move forward
on being able to help more
students so I stand in full
support and I thank you for
listening to this and for taking
this role in your committee to
listen to this and hopefully
move forward.
Attendees so we can continue to
do the types of things that we.
Thank you.
Thank you and I just want
members to know with their
public comments first and then
we'll go to the committee to
recognize you for comments and
questions I just want everybody
to know that next I want to call
I'm gonna thank you very much
and thank you for serving as
chair of the Consejo
for those of you don't know
she's a real leader in the state
and has been for years an extra
constitute a lack of state.
Yes can you hear me we can.
Good morning thank you very much
madam chair and members of this
committee welcome to the New
Mexico land grants the the
series our caller is here is
because it is a series and we
take it very seriously we are
all I am the president of the
Cambodia land grants they're
sending money via I also sit on
land grant council and on behalf
of who are represented as the
heirs of the tournament Act
grant we all stand in favor of
this because we all do voluntary
work we raise money by
membership fees we're starting
out kind of on the ground we
raise money through Raffles.
We need to to do you have this
money it's very important for us
so we get our jobs done and
everything that Andrés says is
true we do a district would to
gain monies that lot of
donations that come in we're
we're lucky to get those
donations I want to thank you so
much for listening to us and
bring us to this point four or
at it's a monumental for us and
our our people and our heritage
and our history of we do support
this very very much we needed so
so much that you would be got
sent thank you so much.
Thank you Steve good to hear
from now I wanted I'd like to
now call on I'm gonna pass you
all of us is.
When you.
Hello good morning can hear it
good morning we can hear you but
yes thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is body fossil
Bosque is on the president of
this info over land grants.
Thank you for giving me the
opportunity to address the
committee on house bill number
eight.
We the members of senator Land
Grant strongly support House
Bill number eight.
The land grant research
assistance fund would be
extremely helpful helpful to
offset operational costs all
land grants and other expenses
of our organizations.
A guarantee revenue stream will
help us become more effective
and efficient so political unit
so the state of New Mexico.
Having a state appropriations
will enable us to manage and
develop future plans and reach
short and long term objectives
it would also mean that we would
be able to serve our communities
better.
I can find a good example of how
this assistance program will be
helpful to the cell door Land
Grant the last two years we have
been working with the
communities in our open a square
area on the far would project in
copper mountain near and below.
One of the biggest challenges in
managing this project is coming
up with the revenue to pay the
liability insurance required by
the state another US associated
administrative expenses on the
project most of the
administrative expenses and
income in our personal block as
a highly dedicated for members
or more board members are
volunteers who on their own
resources and time to make this
type of community projects
successful.
Chair and members of the
committee revenue a guaranteed
revenue stream is much needed
and very portal and grants will
appreciate your support on house
bill number eight subject to
questions thank you for your
time.
Thank you see on now we
recognized Jill many of John
this.
Your me.
Giovinco is here.
Hello hello this is that many.
We need to all and madam chair
members of the board
Representative we thank
presentation who are to that as
well and our state our
loan I think with a presentation
I am the president for setting
and it the land grant.
We are located on the proposed
river community it's the land
grant that has many many
communities associate with the
land grant and we do on eight
community center at thirty five
hundred square foot community
center they would currently use
for giving mills out to the
seniors in in the valley.
The deals are with the
agency an agency.
The.
Let's just say the other thing
that is the fiscal agent for
the.
Agency INEGI they do give us a
small amount of thousand dollars
a month cover expenses and most
needed to kill these are
insurance is in excess of three
thousand dollars it's just the
insurance.
We struggle to make ends meet we
have no source of revenue other
than maybe Ingle once in a great
while we support house bill
eight and I do want to thank all
the sponsors that that were
involved in that.
The fourth of bills.
I'm making sure because I know
you have a lot of other.
Other persons one out
communicate with you I just want
to thank you very much for your
time in line we can speak.
Again we support Representative
house bill eight.
Thank you so much and now
Mr Chavis and and now seeing
actually no further public
comment there's a lot of people
on but the people who wanted to
speak hello spoken so I'm gonna
turn this back over to a
representative it clean and I
understand Representative that
you have a few amendments to
this bill is that true.
Thank you madam chair you know I
appreciate the daughter being
here today the others office to
patch with the think is an error
in the bill
cage.
Four point fifteen.
it to discuss is the land grants
being certified by the state
auditor that's certification
should actually come from the
land grant council.
so we will fix that we're
actually looking at
trying to clarify the rule of
the land grant council because
there are other requirements
that the land grants must comply
with.
Within chapter forty nine of the
holding their elections and
other governmental duties that
they must be in compliance with
in order to to get a share so
it's not just the audit
compliance.
If it's acceptable to you madam
chair and this committee we will
spell that out in an amendment
for the next committee.
Because we don't have that
language ready at this time.
This that's fine with me
Representative McQueen and and
I'll give you time to get it
just the way we needed to
serve the land grant council
since the land grant council and
are and are more said so I
appreciate you taking care of
that and with that I'm going to
go to
and it to the members of the
committee for their comments
your questions to Representative
McQueen and I will recognized
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward I know that this is
a this is the fourth time that
we've brought this to to our
committee and the state two
thousand nineteen two thousand
twenty two thousand twenty one
two thousand nineteen it died
and approach twenty twenty at
that instant finance and twenty
twenty one is science Senate
finance so my only question to
you is what we gonna do.
To get this through it seems
like the whole that the Senate
finance
and so what we're gonna do to
get this through I know in
twenty twenty one it was
justified expel that started in
the Senate she's still couldn't
get through Senate finance so
what's the plan.
Mr chairman and madam chairman
Representative.
Madam chair representative for
her to I appreciate the quick
that question and I appreciate
your past support of this bill I
I think you know we've seen
sometimes in the legislature
takes a few times to get
something all the way across the
finish line.
The challenges the this year in
particular being being that's a
short session is always time
you know the challenge of Senate
finance.
I think it's going over there
and lobbying the centers on
Senate finance and and I am
hopeful that that this is the
year that they recognize that
this is
in unbelievably worthwhile
investment yeah these basic
funds again for talking about
fifty thousand dollars per Land
Grant not a lot of money and he
can do so much with it.
that's you know that's the pitch
and I'm actually pretty hopeful
that that we can we can move
this along and that's part of
the reason why I I hope I can
amended for the the next
committee rather than have to
having to come back to this
committee just in the interest
of time to move it forward.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative as yeah I
would really encourage you know
all the stakeholders and and
everybody supports.
To start calling the members of
Senate finance because that
seems to be the hold up we seem
to do very well in the house we
seem to except for one exception
we seem to be able to get out
here quite smoothly with a lot
of support but that seems to be
the big hold up and so which you
guys are the best you know all
support this again
but yeah good luck to you guys
hopefully I want to this again
let's get this done.
Thank you Representative for
higher than I'd like to call on
that Representative black.
Thank you madam chair
and Representative McQueen do
you know how many currently how
many land grants are currently
up to date with their on it.
You
madam chair isn't like that's a
good question in okay I'll give
you my answer and then maybe
defer to Arturo who probably
knows more we we think the
number would be in the ballpark
of thirty in part
One the number might increase to
get to thirty partly because
this will be an incentive to get
in compliance you know this is
this is really something that
could help the land grants.
If they are currently struggling
with those audits
because they don't have the
resources to pay for them which
is a could you know over
recurring problem this this will
help them not only get over the
hump but getting compliance and
stay in compliance.
so our tourism anything you'd
like to add to that.
Madam chair representative of
black so of the land grants that
are political subdivisions that
would be eligible there's
reportedly twenty five and we do
have all those land grants the
majority of them fall within
either to one or two here to the
reporting system so for them
it's really just a certification
to the state auditor's office
that there annual budget is less
than the ten thousand
where we do have some issues at
times as where the land grants
when we do have two people that
have received capital outlay
dollars it wants them into a
tier three category that's the
required to do an agreed upon
procedures for those capital
expenditures and because you
can't use capital dollars for
that that's where they sometimes
have a challenge and so often
times they may fall behind on
reporting because they don't
have the resources and so what
they end up doing is applying to
the state auditor's list and
sometimes it takes more than one
trying to apply to get funding
to to complete there are a very
and so that's really the reason
challenges so this would
definitely help in that regard
because it will provide them
with the revenue stream for
which they can automatically put
in their budget that U. P. and
be able to actually get those
done in a more timely manner but
for the most part most of them
are within that church
certification so it's just a
matter of getting those
certifications and.
Thank you for that I'm a manager
and
Arturo so I guess I'm confused
on on that you said that you're
for the audit so with if they
qualify for the these funds
would that then bump them up.
To require more stringent audit.
So I'm right now the miss madam
chair Representative like the
way that the bill was right in
is the when we can start getting
the distributions the
distribution won't count towards
either general revenues coming
of age in the certifications so
it won't automatically bump that
in that area
And because the funding varies
and it depends some land grants
because the funds tied to the
annual gross receipts collected
by the state.
You for the gross receipts taxes
revenues hide the need to
receive a little bit more from
the fund but in the years when
it's when you know we going to
recession the gonna receive less
so even with their distribution
plus what they make it they make
us something thousand beaming
they're not likely to go over
the fifty cap on the bottom into
a chair for so I will just
depend on the amount of
distribution per year.
Okay thank you thank you for
that and madam chair I guess my.
One other question I have is.
F. I am I understand this
correctly this would be.
The state auditor's office that
would this distribution I'm
assuming would happen DFA so is
that going to require any
additional staff or
you know implementing this
program with the affair the
state auditor's office.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna miss you if you wanna take
this we wanted to get.
Madam isn't black there is some
additional staff time it was
mentioned in the FIR it's not it
is fairly minimal it's not like
into that TV or anything like
that.
Okay thank you for that
I I think it's.
It's a good bill as far as you
know the the land grants to
needs and funding and we need
to.
To help them anyway we can I was
just I was just concerned on
that you know to the pros out
weigh the cons so I appreciate
answer my question thank you so
much.
Thank you representative will
not now go to Representative
Roger Montoya.
Madam chair and members thank
you so much Representative
McQueen for bringing this
forward.
I want to start out by also
thanking former chairman Miguel
Garcia for his hard work over
many years.
Our food and state auditor thank
you for being here I appreciate
the comments of my colleagues
many of the questions that I had
were answered.
and thank you Representative
Fajardo in black I just like to
see how emblematic and historic
this is that we start with this
bill.
I'm.
Obviously a signer I supported
so very much.
I think it's time that our land
grants are foundational lies and
legitimized with reverence this
must happen.
Wherever there is a clog in the
estate yeah in terms of getting
this across the finish line we
need to be proactive in clear
about advocating and ensuring
that it happens if not in this
one in the next but now's the
time in closing.
Big sales in the the local
struggles you know the things
that we do with I come from
nonprofit.
So I know that you know a grant
of a thousand dollars or five
hundred dollars is a gift that
we stretch with great love and
reverence.
But with the incoming
infrastructure dollars to the
state of New Mexico in rural
equity up front and center this
bill is a portal for the very
goodness that our land grant
communities and.
All those who support deserve on
that note I yield back to you
madam chair and thank you for
your leadership.
I thank you Representative and
now I go there Representative.
Castellano thank you madam chair
thank you resembling for
bringing this bill forward being
part of the decline of the land
grant I see the struggles that
the board has to go through and
how they they try to make money
for their the cause of the
people in and I think this is
something like our version one
yes that is a long time coming
and I just thank you guys for
bringing this forward and I hope
that we get more land grants are
on board with the auditing
process and stuff that we we can
be able to monitor and make sure
that the.
There's a land grants are
Representative well so I thank
you for reading this is bill
for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative going.
Thank you Representative
Castellano and seeing now for
their
Hands up for questions our
debate on this bill I am.
It seems to me
we're on violent agreement that
at having said that I'd like for
the Committee assistant
Christina to take role
would you do so please.
Madam chair could we have.
Wording for what they're taking
goals for okay
this is for the passage of house
bill eight.
And would you like to note that
an amendment is on the way.
No they will take care of that
the next committee thank you all
right.
Okay.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Fajardo.
And madam chair just as I'm I
got disconnected for just a
second who did they need to pass
motion just for my own
knowledge.
I'm sorry I forgot to get a
motion excuse me it's like to
make a motion that
Representative R. I think it's
also okay I actually I'm not
like and do passed motion for
house bill eight
The
you so much is there a second
I'll send in that chair.
Second by Representative yes yes
thank you very much this part of
Representative Fajardo okay with
that a motion on the floor and
seconded with the Canadian
assistente grow thank you.
I'm sorry.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Montoya.
Absolutely yes.
Your woman hi.
Yes.
What what.
Seeing.
Unanimous consent there are
other copies.
Raul I mean not throughout the
the vote count but we have a six
in favor.
Okay with that house bill eight
is that now passed I think all
of you very much I totally want
to say that I appreciate the
former work of the.
Representative Miguel Garcia and
everyone else on this on this
web site all of you have
contributed to this over the
years and let's hope that this
year we put a full court press
on US Senate finance and get
this through thank you all thank
you madam chair.
And now I'd like to recognize
Representative Patricia Roybal
company info or the presentation
of house memorial I.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning to you and members of
the committee and members of the
public and let me just say that
it definitely is very fitting
for this committee to on have it
and also meeting with both of
these pieces of legislation and
I'm proud to stand together with
my land grants sisters and
brothers.
Over fifty years on in the land
grants trouble as well so thank
you very much I just wanted to
make that acknowledgement and
and congratulations to you and
to this new committee everyone
on the committee thank you so
good morning again I'm here to
present
House memorial I and I take a
deep breath because it is for me
Our.
Honor
to be presenting anything and
the name of the lotus economic.
What this memorial does is it's
requesting the General Services
Department and historic
preservation division of the
cultural affairs department to
study and make recommendations
on ways in which we can more
allies and preserve.
First place of the lotus west
which many individuals in our
state do not know she was born
in Dawson on New Mexico.
And I'm from the madam chair
from the memorial I want to
highlight just a few things
this year will be celebrating
and I have to do my math
thanking the lot as well as
ninety second birthday she was
born April tenth nineteen thirty
in Dawson New Mexico and for
many individuals that are
missing today are that's the New
Mexico doesn't use in New Mexico
and it's located about seventeen
miles northeast of seem out on
and it also has other to
historical significance because
it is the site of to
separate coal mining disasters
that occurred and organizing
efforts in the coal miners and
Senator has literally been
closed down and ghost town since
nineteen fifty and I will note
madam chair members of the
committee that we took a lot of
right and I wanted to get.
I wanted to get as close to
the village of the town of
Dawson as possible and so to try
to get out of this comment.
seclusion we took a drive and it
was an absolutely beautiful Dr
and I was crying the whole way
because I thought areas that
I could.
Asian the coal mines in the
workers and the effort to in the
labor putting in but in my
many of our families many of our
of the we're descendants of
those families and
and then I was very disappointed
because when I actually got to
the point where we could have.
Can you further in it was
actually blocked off because
it's still on that I'm not
really quite sure who am I.
But then I was nonstop tears
madam chair because then.
That was open with the cemetery.
And I remember the words what
they're telling me about making
our regular visits to the
cemetery
and.
You know I I couldn't get I
couldn't pull myself away from
the cemetery because I was
standing on such.
Historical and significant and
sense and ancestral lands.
That
it was just.
I knew I had to do this I knew I
had to manage the promise I made
to the lotus not only to
memorialized and preserve the
first place but the significance
of the labor movement that took
place in our state and and
preserve that historically so
I say all that because as we
were leaving I was blessed even
further madam chair and members
of the committee.
Because we were stopped.
On the road.
By literally herds.
family of elk.
We were there for probably I
would say about fifty five
minutes because just as we saw
but we would the road with
clear another family would come
and then another family would
come and at the very end I don't
know that the terminology but
there were several moments to be
and they regard it.
and and before they would even
attempt to get cross the road.
Then we didn't even make.
I'm a bit of an any kind of
knowing.
R. because we wanted to honor
these moments crossing and it
took forever but we were willing
to
take in that moment and by we I
mean my husband and I so it's
very significant because as an
all of us know how significant
deer and elk are
also to our ancestry so.
I say all that you madam chair
members of the committee
to support why it is that I
think that this needs to pass
and to get into the hands of the
administration as soon as
possible I understood prior to
coming and madam chair that
there are certain steps that
must be taken I used departments
in order to coordinate efforts
with the national register and
state register and all the other
related
you know administrative steps
and processes and so I'm hoping
that with the support of the
current administration and with
these departments that we can
get this done as soon as
possible in order to give of the
lotus with that good birthday
present this year and on because
I'm sure she's going to be with
us for a very long time madam
chair I hope I hope and pray she
just Department.
Thank you madam chair with that
I stand for questions.
Thank you thank you
Representative and I I would
just like to say it's it's
amazing that I am sitting in
this chair and you're sitting in
that chair because of for those
of you on the committee who
don't now when I was at a young
staffer in Washington and had at
the congressional Hispanic
caucus I'm married my husband
who would work for Cesar Chavez
at La Paz training training the
training you workers and
For all of those who don't know
there is a strong you you
background in southern New
Mexico around the mines and that
the first the first director of
the congressional Hispanic
caucus what also like to
recognize a recount Frank
earliest memories earliest
memory speed data and for five
years of age we're dancing in
jail the at due to the miners
strike and they gathered up all
the all the families and all the
kids and they all put him in
jail and so the instead of
instead of being sat in jail
they decided to party so they
were dancing and singing in jail
protesting the strike and I
dollars worth and Caesar we were
just young staffers on the hill
in our early thirties sent and
they would always come and stay
with us you know everybody's on
a budget and so they'd stay at
people's houses that's how they
traveled around the country in
those days so it's always an
honor to have to Laura's family
or.
Are you know the former K. state
with us and
and then Caesar is over and I
will go on much longer but when
she's there it come over at that
time there were only ten
Hispanic staffers on the hill it
was very small a small group and
they would all coming up in
state season Tennessee staying
at your house and I'd say of
course they said coming over for
dinner tonight so I would know
when to user isn't out but on a
dinner in the morning because
the group was going together
that night that's just a little
bit of history about to Lawrence
and and and Caesar and and
Patricia was such a large part
of this movie and I think it's
fitting that we're recognizing
device today and
with that are the do you have
any witnesses that you'd like to
bring up
Madam chair now I'm I I'm not
quite sure if anyone I am in the
attending.
Does not recognize them all
right if I may madam chair just
you brought up something very
significant
and and that is the role of the
United farm workers in our lives
and as many of you know and
thank you for recognizing that
that's where I got my start I
was a young you've organized
with the United farm workers
some fifty plus years ago and we
you and I have told stories also
to each other about our
Being our home because it our
homes being opened and money was
also open to suspect this on
many occasions from have to
prepare special meals because he
was always and delicate Health
cause us and the deterioration
of the body so in I I would
invoke his memory and spirit
today on in this piece of
legislation as well and thank
you for bringing that up thank
you madam pole thank you
Representative now come on I'm
Mr wan Sanchez
he's extending was requested to
speak in favor of this bill.
Mr Sanchez.
I guess not.
Thank you madam chair.
I.
But his hand went down that's
been important on the attendees
as we also have the on demand
Padilla.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee I would
just like to say that I would
support anything that would
honor people like the lotus with
the who if it wasn't for them.
We women that are sitting in
these positions of presidencies
of land grants committees we
would have never been able to
make it she is an outstanding
woman who fought so hard for our
communities our people.
And anything to commemorate her
for what she has done is a
fantastic idea it's something we
need to do I support this
wholeheartedly.
And
you know I I have to by my hat
to her for all that she's done
thank you.
Thank you and now I'll turn it
over to members of the committee
for questions or comments I'll
recognize the Representative
Roger Montoya.
Madam chair and representative
come by cover gyro much are us
yes but A. state that are lawful
it's more we more important day
the word stated earlier by
others I will add just a bit.
Any time that we can honor a
living treasure before they pass
especially one.
Who is decidedly an unsung hero.
I respect so very much the work
of system Chavis.
But the lotus with the latest
significant role.
And never fully received in my
opinion.
The honor and reverence that she
deserves.
In telling New Mexico story and
the story of this nation
accurately I believe that this
house memorial will add to that
menu.
And we can claim a beautiful
part of her start in the world
in closing just thank you so
much for bringing this forward I
absolutely support it.
And I will in their I yield back
madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative trying
now recognize the Representative
Lujan.
You called me yes you have your
hand raised I wanted to speak
and they are ask a question
about this memorial I appreciate
it thank you I just want to
speak in high favor of this in a
really appreciate the work that
and in the store or factor and
dedication that Representative
recovery it has I was done with
this memorial and I can't speak
you know well enough about about
Torrez work that the end and
she's which user.
I'm here for us for women for
for
all of our let me know if
elected communities and and then
working families and labor
movement and everything that she
is next need to my family and to
the people New Mexico and across
the United States and so I want
to just take I want to commend
the Representative and thank you
for bringing this board thank
you.
Thank you Representative I is
there a motion from this
committee.
Session I make a motion that we
passed a due process for this
post mortem.
Is there a second.
Madam.
Thank you Representative
Castellano okay with the
committee assistant take Rowe.
Yes Representative taken the
boat boat yes ma'am.
Representative black.
Representative Castellano yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
You have six in favor and not
unanimously.
All right.
It is with that
house memorial I has passed
congratulations Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to all of the committee and
we move forward thanks so much
have a great day.
Thank you all for this committee
meeting we hope to get these
bugs worked out by next Thursday
at a higher yes.
I just wanted a clarification
this internet hitting up
Representative black loaded past
this you need to pass the bill
to judgment to pass on the road
passed on the vote so that was a
test on her part.
No it was a past it was the path
and and you come back to me did
you want to I'm sorry
Representative okay would you
like to would you like to vote
again yes.
Okay all right it's unanimous
that thank you thank you
Mr take in enough for bringing
that up thank you all and see
you next time.
You guys I.
