Just a Senate on your.
And by this.
Also madam chair
the royal on the lottery level
then grant was granted by the
Mexican government in nineteen
twenty three.
the heirs of the land grant
madam chair were recognized as
fee simple owners of its common
lands by the eighth judicial
District Court in nineteen
fourteen madam chair.
Chair of oil in the U. R. is
following the same process.
That other similar land grants
have pursued.
In being granted political
subdivisions status.
The two men Land Grant.
Came to us the legislature in
two thousand seven.
Under the distinguished
leadership of the late don
Sanchez one of our finer
Republican line grant leaders in
our state.
Then madam chair the at the
school and grant came to us.
in twenty eleven for the same
status as we're doing with this
legislation.
And madam chair the takealot the
land grants came to this
legislature in twenty thirteen.
Which is south of Las Vegas also
in pursuit of the saints that
status.
And madam chair the son Antonio
that Rio Colorado also known as
the quest a grant.
Which is just up the street from
our oil and you are.
Came to us in twenty thirteen
for similar status and the last
Land Grant manager to come
before this legislative body
seeking the same status that
we're asking for a ride in the
reason was Monsanto which is in
these mountains and that was in
twenty nineteen.
Madam chair that are under your
community has been at the
forefront.
Of protecting our traditional
Spanish communities.
Front gentrification.
And devastation of our agrarian
traditions.
By specifically.
Stopping a large scale
condominium development in the
nineteen seventies.
The infusion of hundreds of
newcomers from the east coast
and the west coast of our
country would have decimated the
landscape of the centuries old
Madam.
And madam chair I like to yield
to my experts that'll further
elaborate on the significance of
this legislation first of all.
Thank.
The turning title for.
Yes we know this is built on
Madam chair representative
committee members everybody here
in the audience and and my
community back home that's a on
webcast when I was walking to
the US will just use I'm.
Recently
You see the honorific in
challenging role of being named
president of our land grant
taking over from my father and
my aunt will who both serve to
twenty to thirty years in this
role
And you know want to be honest
in that transition me and and
all of us mid life crisis board
members that are now taking over
for our elders where we're doing
the best we can just like today
I hope you allow me some grace
with my clumsiness of of what
we're going to try to present
Because it is an interesting the
number we have to try to meet
your needs and and this needs of
of of this formal process
however the our reality is we
try to always function in a
traditional way of everything we
do and I want to be clear about
that in terms of my role here
with our land grant in with our
community and with our culture
that we feel has allowed us to
not just survive but really
thrive for the last couple
centuries we believe in what's
called collective leadership
right where where there's always
a group of us we're always
deciding together kind of like
maybe you know this committee
you know we all have different
positions but we all have the
same goal in in that I've been
meeting and and talking and and
like we say that the way that
lot of conversations by phone
and in person with each one of
my board members with each one
of our elders with our youth
with our our community at large.
And and so today what I was
hoping to do is take you through
a little more to maybe take
maybe two three minutes and and
tell you a little bit of stories
about who we are and and how we
function to really help support
you all and making a good
decision to help us in our
future generations.
so with that I can I can tell
you you know as you see before
you with these pictures
you know we're we're located in
the Dallas area if you know the
tell sherry on the north side of
the house right you have on the
northern border that tells
pueblo which drew a lot of long
term history and back and forth
federal and state there's all
kinds of things happen with all
of our villages including this
cycle of one of my grandparents
from fault is this month is all
those little communities
conceito some crystal on.
You know through the generations
we've had to really find a way
to be true to what are
matriarchal culture of land not
land position but living in
relationship with the land
living in relationship with land
and water and I also want to
highlight that up although I'm
here formally representing them
I said we have no separation
between number seven are sick
yes a lot of our board members
in our families were also
percent is what else on the
commission of our sick as and we
what we always want to say that
we have been together for so
land there's no water without
water there's no now.
So in this pictographic
Presentation I share with you
all you can see the historical
pictures of our valley what it
looks like
We've always really focused on
Fagner cultural sustenance
unfortunately in the last you
know two three generations
because of the emphasis of.
Economic development away from
agriculture in the North Bay and
in our community it's really
hard to maintain our land that's
really hard to maintain our
animals and that lifestyle but
we've been able to do it not a
hundred percent we have a lot of
our families who still live in
our community that still not
just have that as a hobby as you
see a lot of social media but
it's something we can't live
without I think especially
during the COVID right
especially during the pandemic
and through the hardships of
economic times in the last few
years our families have really
been thankful that we've been
able to maintain our livelihoods
through our relationship with
the land be it through you know
the hunting fishing the raising
crops and really sharing all
those resources that's what we
do is an interchangeable most
our families and our friends.
So when these pictures you can
see we have you know some
wonderful pictures around people
some of those some of our elders
when they were kids some of our
generation's I personally did a
genealogy for a money trail
exhibit last year the year
before and we went back fifteen
generations and that's a whole
mixture you know some of my
family arrived here from Europe
to Ellis Island some of them
came up with this plane and some
of them that were Italian French
married into the local
indigenous women who own the
land the by law family some of
them came up for medical.
I have one grandfather that was
from Africa he was a drummer for
that I guess and he was
accompanied with indigenous
people from the last time a
families from Mexico who came up
with soldiers and founded the
pots and we came down to second
bold as to have a wonderful
history of mixed blood and and
part of what we're doing here is
is trying to make sure that our
make sure our livelihood of of
taking the European Hispano into
the spinal and and and Chicano
any sort of reality and in
maintaining that for the
generations on page two you can
see here this is our our
campgrounds our church and our
school health our our main
meeting places along with the
land where we do a lot of our
work a lot of our harvesting of
medicinal medicines and purpose.
from the.
Next page there you can see a R.
mora we had a.
Very.
Very special place to us for
prayer and for family gatherings
for protection for hundreds of
years unfortunately because of
adverse position we lost that a
lot of our lands on forty years
ago and by chance when the
person will not passed away the
lawyer contacted our our board
who are elders now instead he
they never registered it you
guys never lost it so several
years ago we learned that we
actually still had even though
was in disarray as you can see
the pictures and one of our
elders in the top right hand
corner who's in it monal on mono
and month orders got us
community together to to put a
few years from donations and we
we started
last summer in August we hosted
of the interim committee we went
over there and had a tour of in
there have to see how we were
able to bring it back and have a
fully functional again so that's
one example of how our community
comes together and with very
little effort but mucho
Khorasani i'mma we're able to do
things
on the next page is there you
can see the the caption talks
about the annual cleaning days
and regular work these of the
couple sample are traditional
graveyard which is available our
village RSX yes which as you can
see the picture sometimes we're
doing that in April when it's
snowing right and then some of
our work crews this is a great
gathering of our youth when we
were cleaning up the the what
are there with a four Wheeler.
the next page you know it talks
about the intergenerational work
these and I really want to point
that out at the bottom left to
see a picture of my well I mean
I will the former president he
was ninety five years old in
that picture sitting there with
a five month old baby right we
always have three four
generations that are involved
when we do things.
It breaks my heart today that
they couldn't be here because of
inclement weather but we have an
online account for you to hear
someone speak and share some of
their heartfelt stories and and
their heartfelt pleas for you
all to please support us
so these pictures I hope really
helping capture what we do
because we have a work day it's
not just a working we get
together and have meals break
bread tell stories catch up we
work for several hours we come
back and have a luncheon that's
when everybody comes the baby's
the grand kids we fish we have
fun we play when we talk about.
How are we going to maintain
this.
And that's my biggest challenge
for me in front of you today how
can I convey to you.
Everything.
All the generations have done to
get us here today.
That's something I can I can put
that into words I can't put that
into pictures I hope you can
maybe think about your own
family is your own journeys.
What you lived in learned
yourselves to maintain your
families and and and see that
and some of these pictures and
and listen to that in the words
that that me and and Committee
members will share when when
they get to speak to you too
soon because it's it's something
to me that
The emotional I was teary eyed
on the tribal today.
I'm not out of fear but of
happiness I got to tell you that
I'm so happy to hear from you
today and and and with that I I
hope you see that we're trying
to invite you to be part of our
community of our legacy of our
future that we we we need to
define we need to formalize to
make sure we have the resources
to continue living the way we
all want to.
With that you know turn to some
of the other pages if you go to
our office page five or six it
has some caption there about
cadence yeah.
this was some of the use that
we're being walked around and
taught some others and some of
the healing traditions we have
into a cadence yeah really means
a place of belonging right it's
not just well I love it here and
I ski inTaos I want to be here
it's no we've been here so long
we sweat we bled we buried
ourselves here we've we've read
the dust of our ancestors this
is the place we belong to in a
way that we have to give
everything we have to protect
it.
That's what NCI is it's it's
it's a spiritual connection be
it to church be through the land
or the water.
The salon I something I think
I'm trying to do my best to make
here today it's it's a
reciprocity of knowledge because
really I don't know anything
about you all and how this whole
place works but if you guys are
gracious enough to guide me and
guide my community will learn
from you in this process and how
to move forward to protect our
landing and you'll learn from us
what the budget will be from you
all supporting this from you all
guiding us through this process
and and however turns out to do
we would love to host you all
like we did last this for the
interim committee up there so
you can tour how much until with
the fish with us here are
stories here some of the funny
things that happen in in some of
the heartbreaks and that's one
thing I want to point out here I
have a lot of pictures and I
mean the silo like five dollars
a copy for you all but
You know I put them all in there
because some of the more answers
for the past you know some of
our elders that have taken this
for a long time some of our
youth that have even million
people the past trying to get
home to clean the LESC just you
know trying to take care of
their families.
In the last conservationist here
where the mutually beneficial we
hope today which will help us
with you'll see not just helps
us because we're not here just
for us we hope everybody and
that's one of things I want to
highlight you know in the last
couple years we've been able to
really participate in secure
some green corridor funding and
some water monitoring the river
in the watershed and although we
don't come right out and say
we're environmentalists we we
actually say well we we we
really care about the ecology of
everything and the people and we
hope you know that supporting us
also helps us support that
process monitoring the river in
the water the water sheds the
animals our relationship with
the for service and everything
else.
So in the last couple pages you
can see our our visit there by
the last couple committees and
then you can also see of the
seven angle forced council and
that's something very important
I want to share with you and
what is a few pages on that we
started that project and we avid
structure around the traditional
collective leadership of our
secular myth says lasted for
three four years we do wonderful
job with youth scientists
researchers we did fire
mitigation for standing on a
little three four hundred acres
of our land grants however.
We had just and the project
because our land grant doesn't
have the status we need to
receive the funding to continue
doing fire mitigation on our
land grant or on our bears
private lands around the LESC as
an around the villages so voting
yes today in supporting this
bill will help us receive that
status and help us move forward
with wonderful projects like
that.
and after those things you can
see there I can have a picture
on the fire nineteen ninety
seven you know we learned that
lesson the same lesson that we
learned in the hermit's peak
fire and and that's why we're
really hoping you guys can see
that we really need to move
forward with this type formal
protection the last two pages
you can see there's our
newsletter that we put out
through the phone settled
explains our history there's a
map there are different enough I
can get into more details if you
guys have any questions about
that about which lands we loan
on which lands we've lost and
lastly I'll conclude for the
last ten seconds or so thank you
so much for listening to to up
to meet her today is a brief
timeline I put together of our
our land grant if you have any
specific questions on whether we
have the dates although our
village was founded in the
seventeen hundreds you know
seventeen oh six that was
documentation seventeen forty
five our families are in the
valley building houses farming
the church is being founded the
village eighteen thirteen right
that's right here in the
document through undergrad was
granted eighteen twenty three we
actually receive the independent
status as a separate self
standing may said you know from
the Mexican government eighteen
ninety two right the court
private land claims approved
grant nineteen oh eight the
patent nineteen fourteen we have
the
very important date right with
the court case that really said
we're fee simple owners
and then also want to know which
I try to run around and catch
you on the hallways in the last
three or four weeks and show you
the document that in twenty
fifteen we took all the
historical means and and we got
an affidavit we consolidated
them so all of our legal
documents all of our tax
documents everything that refers
to who we are now has our sole
singular purpose name that's
registered with the state the
AG's office and everything and.
Two and that historical timeline
out of the twenty three hundred
acres we only have about a
hundred and fifty left and and
we're really asking you to help
us protect that.
So yes because the last part
right what we us because of the
gentrification increasing land
prices and everybody wanting to
live the Yellowstone dream I
think we're more likely not to
be filled for getting beat up by
Yellowstone in my opinion no
we're asking you to help us pass
this bill because we have some
very urgent matters that we
can't fend off on our own we
have no revenue you know we
stock up we still owe taxes can
you do that anymore because
you're not you know life and so
this legislation will help us
receive some legal support some
survey support if there's a
revenue stream in that then
we'll figure that out and maybe
we can start getting some of our
Smalling is back for example
that one up we only only twenty
feet on one side and thirty feet
on the other right be great with
getting as around that to
protect the watershed above it
New Mexico above it.
So with that all all yield to my
other expert I believe I don't
know what the next processes and
I'll be ready for questions from
you all thank you thank you time
thank you looking for the very
inclusive and profound
presentation
next we have a recruiter to let
that the motion also to to
address the committee and the
significance on that legislation
madam chair members of the
committee good morning again or
direction at the with New Mexico
land grant council just would
like to just add that we've been
working with the folks from the
area on the body but Land Grant
myself personally for at least
the last fifteen years they
function like any other land
grant more said they have a
board of trustees at selected on
a two year cycle like most other
Londoners it's a really have on
acted in accordance with the
statutes even though they're not
currently covered by those and
so this legislation would just
sort of bring them into the fold
and give them access to the same
opportunities and resources and
other land grants percent this
have thank you.
Thank you met in the with that
we stand for questions thank you
representative Garcia and now
we'll go to the audience if you
are in support of this
legislation raise your hand.
Great if you're in opposition
raise your hand.
We're gonna go with the support
first please please stand up
here I don't know if we have a
Mike but if you get a little bit
closer possibly don't think we.
Give us a second we'll get this
Mike and and for those of you
who are the zoom if you're in
support please raise your hand
and we will get to you right
after.
One seven.
We have about give about two
minutes okay two minutes thank
you thank you my name is Loretta
set aside I am an air to this.
Wonderful beautiful amazing.
That I'm in love with Land
Grant.
First of all the I before I
proceed I want to thank each and
everyone of you for your service
and then especially today and is
that the other elements that in
this Valentine's day because you
know what I am going to speak of
straight from the heart.
Everything that my the more I do
need them to said is absolutely
true but I want to relate to you
basically a memoir I am way past
seventy and what I recall are
the true and most beautiful
memories.
Excuse me for my whole life.
So I want to let you know that
House Bill to sixty eight is of
utmost significance to me and to
all of my people.
You see the Arroyo on that even
Land Grant is precisely what I
spent my childhood along with my
parents my grandparents my yield
all of my P. most among so many
other relatives right along our
beautiful valley of this San
Antonio that by this.
As a land grant air how well I
remember my grandparents Juan
Bautista Cordova my properties
that and my grandmother my the
offenses get the brandy Cordova
told England toiling the land
with amazing orchards that this
land produced and I don't mean a
little comfort for fight trees I
mean huge orchards and huge
gardens not a garden patch huge
gardens which produce our main
St fruits and vegetables.
Certainly within have the
tropical fruits of oranges and
bananas but we have absolutely
everything else does became our
main St all year long.
My grandparents and Taos toiled
and advocated with the system of
a sick yes stemming from the
pristine waters of the little
river that started way up high
in the mountains where the where
guiding up peak and if we live
peak.
Create the skies.
And through that system.
Even the trout were abundant
chickens and sheep and cows and
horses dot at that landscape and
provided other assistance and
foods the men hunted for deer
and elk up in the higher
mountains the wood stoves were
fed from the top Linnea right
from our foot hills.
And enhancing this vivid
requests for where those deep
down in my heart is the ever
present native my native mother
language we have about that's
two more than two minutes but
thank you we from here your
heartfelt support of this thank
you for your support thank you
but.
Next do we have someone else
speaking in support in the room.
K..
We'll go now to the zoom miss by
the act.
Madam chair on the zoom is this
for.
Madam chair in this room there's
quite a few people at that one
soon okay so you'd be giving two
minutes to each of the people
that are within that ones in
which might be this which person
for under by the point Tricia
Martinez I believe the signed in
and has our elders and board
members there we have Augustine
you settle in and that by the I
think the manager I think they
went on to the wrong link I
think that on the web in our
links with the need to switch
over to this link okay but go to
the calendar they should be able
to find it above I for those of
you listening on the web in our
if you go to the calendar you
can go to the zoom link there
and then will promote you to
to participate as a in support
or opposition but we're gonna go
ahead and go to Andrea by the
air right now.
The key issue anytime you.
Okay yes can you hear me yes we
can.
Yes Representative of the LFC
I'm president of the New Mexico
Land Grant receptacle Senator
and as president of the concert
hall I am representing the
twenty nine land grants that
form part of that conceptual and
we are in complete one hundred
percent support of this bill
that will allow on the oil and
on the law to get their
political subdivisions status so
they can continue to do to find
work that they have been doing
for their community for the last
fifteen twenty years as a land
grant and and following all the
rules and regulations that are
required this is very important
to them and it's more important
to all land grants that you
support this bill and moving
forward thank you.
Thank you Mr Deputy the other
thing is that next.
All the same.
Okay work will go to.
Hello.
Okay I was in go ahead Mr set
of.
yes my name is on the news at
all and I'm the president of
this on when you realize what
this land grant
You know just like you all of
these deeply moved by the
statements that were made to
date and I am.
More than I than I ever thought
I would be I am definitely in
support of the passage of this
bill.
Thank you Mr Senator I think we
have a governance seeking gonna.
Okay Marty Marty chair.
Members of the committee This Is
Your working done up with the
borderland that we oppose this
bill more on that Mr Mr king
Donna we are on support of the
bill right now I'm gonna ask you
to wait to
to give your testimony after we
go through the support.
Thank you we have Tricia
Martinez next and I understand
that in the room with with our
doctor Martinez we have several
people is that correct
Representative Garcia.
Yes that's where our elders and
our board members are we will
grant each of those elders and
board members two minutes
maximum local we have to get
through this committee okay go
ahead at Dr Martinez.
The program yes I am this that
we not way out of the previous
president of the I really
learned a lot of our land
grants.
I wish I could be there in
person but at my house or thirty
seven state will thank you bye.
About ten inches of snow only
it's good to hear yes we chose
not to travel any how would my
point is first of all may twenty
seventh.
Twenty twenty degrees is going
to be our two hundred
anniversary.
So we have a we're not Johnny
come lately so we're fell off
then do we have.
Gold.
Through all of the years without
political subdivisions we were
able to create the forecast for
service council that might have
black beans Act about and we
were able to fire prevention
about four four hundred acres
but it was on the northern
boundary of our land grants.
In the Carson National Forest.
Ten feet away from that is our
land.
And that we have not had the
ability to get funding to do the
same kind of fire prevention
that we did in the Forest
Service.
Yes ten feet away go to
political subdivisions that is
for if you think critically
important so that we can of
access to the monies to do fire
mitigation.
Of the I'm not I guess on our
land grants and but get to
communities around this black
guy in the canyon and your mess
up thank you thank you Mr wealth
okay at first I hope you're
you're corralling everyone I am
looking.
We'll have more women yes this
is the US occupation Martinez
here I currently serve as
treasurer on the executive
committee from here I'll
provided by Land Grant and also
the committee said conservation
trust I am a UNM tells faculty
member teaching American studies
and you got all studies courses
and supporting twelve different
high schools is that across
northern New Mexico
like all of you in the various
sectors of our identity service
experience and work in our state
so this morning I emphasized the
significance of our communities
Kinsey up our love for our
homeland and sense of belonging
hoping that each of you Kerry
affording your important roles
and initiatives.
Today that availability by thank
you to board and members of our
land grant request your support
for H. B. two sixty eight.
When those are stories document
the breadth of our heritage to
land based experiences in our
history and livelihood remain
deeply intertwined with our land
grants as my eight year old
daughter faith stated in her
last presentation the land grant
is where she gets to play with
our P. Monty I'm not and where
she gets to learn about plants
that make medicine she
enthusiastically explains that
he's a proud New Mexicans I have
deep respect for elders and all
the time and energy they
invested protecting our land
grants now it is up to us with
important issues to still use
are working knowledge and do
everything we can to protect our
land grant community and
traditions so we stand before
you today as the United
community asking for your
support as we navigate the
legislative process he's become
a political subdivision of the
state and planning our two
hundred year anniversary
celebrations I recognize this is
a timely request that will
provide us with the necessary
support to preserve our cultural
landings practices and so that
we can continue to survive and
right here in our native lives
with us yes.
Thank you.
We have next there.
it's just that the wrong way on
I. here and I'm I believe maybe
there's some other elders at the
Iglesias the next door trying to
log in so I can't see on that
end but blessings and thank you
for your time thank you thank
you I think we're we're we'll go
to achieve it Montoya.
Next hi David or maybe her
husband.
Hi okay.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I mean that money
Toyota Land Grant air and I just
want to give my support for
house bill two sixty eight thank
you for your consideration thank
you so much.
I think that's all we have on
On the zoom for for support.
Then after yes.
Have your say on on like to
offered my support for
House Bill to sixty eight.
I and the secretary of the royal
Honda if I Community High land
grants and the passage of HB two
sixty eight will support our
initiatives in our community and
help us achieve our objectives
as a land grants I'd like to
thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee for for the the
consideration.
Thank you so much okay now we
will go to opposition any
opposition in the room I don't
think I saw on a.
Okay now we're gonna go to
opposition on the zoom.
Lower your hand if you are have
already spoken I think we just
have Mister king Donna.
Go ahead.
Houston you Mr king that you
have to on mute yourself.
If you'd like to speak.
Yeah madam chair members of the
committee additional working
done with modern address.
Once again we are here with the
same basic principle of.
Recognizing the true you're
going to be that goal yes
Representative makes the because
article four.
Of the the US constitution the
constitution of New Mexico and
numerous other legal laws that
make this law if it is passed
jeopardizing all Land Grant
County in New Mexico but
throughout the southwest and
jeopardizing that the water
treaties with the native
American communities we status
part of all our land grants we
must realize that we got
jeopardize all our land grants
with some.
Action that may be illegal and
have some consequence for all of
our people so today we oppose
this bill we would ask for the
land that interim committee that
Grant council to bring these
parties together from the the
overall to the mother and the.
The land grants from although
the idea together to see if they
can reconcile this Bob and I'll
bring the family problem to to
the greater community of the
state of New Mexico United
States of America so we started
opposition thank you thank you
Mr king gonna I have Nancy on
here is Nancy are you in
opposition.
Yes good morning.
I call these.
These bills the whole strategy.
The centers that they here that
is be you going different moment
okay they don't want to miss
more proposing.
So may.
At the school thanks for looking
Manzano I really your own bill
San Antonio reappointed out.
So on state land grants.
Guessing when done.
And it basically that it is in a
twenty eight B. twenty the
federal Yongle is not made of is
good but is it in is the and
this W..
So may.
At the school in months under.
Is that the most food US
Congress.
Federal you all those San
Antonio the vote and I'll have
no completion.
So there was this young for this
bill is because the that is all
constitutional issues.
That there will be a longer.
That they would do the work the
committee.
Is your.
All the people are from two
thousand one and the two
thousand eight you will find
that the commendations to
restore that used to or land
grants that are not completed.
Please more with the
congressional delegation up all
of it.
So I don't know how.
Whether they're wearing we.
I think thanks.
That that code for you the one
thing that the Senate U. S.
Congress not in the state
legislators.
Thank you thank you Nancy that
concludes our public comment and
now we'll go to response would
you like to respond to any that
public comments the managers
ready for questions from the
committee of one question so far
Representative out Maria.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative in and of my
experts here I loved your
presentation I've been doing a
lot of research I've there is no
it's no secret that when they
came into the side I knew
nothing about land grants so
I've been trying to soak up it's
the teacher in me as much
information as I possibly can
because I do want to make a
correct decision I have a few
questions what okay little more
last week we passed H. B. thirty
three what is the difference
between those land grants and
this one what is the major
difference like why why is there
such a a conflict between them
madam chair Cinemalaya this is
the a long piece of legislation
I'm not really involved with the
other legislation so I like to
yield to Arturo maybe elaborate
on your question madam chair.
Madam chair representative
the the main difference is that
the land grants listed in an H.
B. thirty three of those are
land grants that are already
operating this political
subdivisions we consider that
more of a clean up it's just in
order to name them so that
completely clear which ones are
governed by that statute the
difference with this land grant
Madam chair representative is
that these this land grant is
not currently operating it as a
political subdivision and the
reason being that they did not
receive the the confirmation
from the Congressional from
Congress or from the corporate
land claims as a land grant what
happened in their instances that
the claim in for with the claim
of the oil on the land grant and
that was confirmed these
individuals in this community
was a separate distinct
community that then went through
the process of getting the court
to recognize their fee simple
ownership of the property within
the boundaries of that larger
claim so when the United States
confirms as I mentioned before
in the presentation the the
under the treaty the United
States was obligated to
recognize private property
claims and when the issued a
patent for a claim that was
essentially a quit claim deed
from the United States
government saying we the US
government our day fasting any
interest we as a federal
government have in these lands
but they were still left open to
third party claims of any kind
of adverse third party claims
because the news we're just
saying we don't have an interest
but that doesn't mean that there
are not other interests that
vested under the prior sovereign
that we're not aware of and
we're not here to sort of settle
that that would be a quarter of
property restriction to to
evaluate those issues and that's
exactly what happened in this
case in eighteen twenty three
this community was established
and it had its common lands and
then when the grant it was.
When the grant was was
recognized with a private plane
was recognized by the United
States it was recognized with
the entire oil on the LFC but
exterior boundaries this
community then went to a quarter
property restrictions and no we
were separated in eighteen
twenty three we have our own set
of common lands and the court
recognize them however because
of that they don't fall under
the definition it's currently in
chapter forty nine section one
that talks about having to be
confirmed through a path and so
this is a way to recognize this
entity as a standalone entity
with political subdivisions
status which is within the
jurisdiction of the state is up
to the state to determine what
our local units of government
and this would just give the
status to this community was in
existence prior to eighteen
twenty three but was formally
established under Mexico in
eighteen twenty.
Excellent now correct of madam
chair representatives of correct
me if I'm wrong okay because I
kind of want to understand this
so early on though is the bigger
Land Grant and then early on the
eva is is your your lands is is
that kind of what that is madam
chair cinema you to looking.
For the lab right on yes hello
Madam chair representative yes
that's correct and that's what
the time line here establishes
right the eighteen twenty three
date and then the nineteen
fourteen is when we were given
the exactly what we needed
legally to say operate under
about is its own self expanding
free simple owner so that is
actually correct thank you very
much okay
madam chair I have one more
question so does this
designation if we were to give
you to go through the whole
course and get signed is this
does designation change or alter
anything as far as the land
grant as a whole is it is it is
it taking from someone else's it
doing anything like that or is
it just pretty much
recognizing something that is
already there Madam chair of
medicine when I yield to
working.
Yes madam chair representative
that's absolutely correct it is
the latter this is just
recognizing what we've already
done which is laid out the times
of the time line here and all
the court documents that we've
had that for generations for
example one of our elders
listening his grandfather went
on our back to Santa Fe to that
hearing right so we have all
that documentation we have all
that oral history and we're
simply asking this committee to
please help us and respect and
acknowledge that formally so we
can continue to move forward as
an individual cell expanding
entity.
That movie.
And if just to add to that so
that you can understand the
history of what happened with
this community the oil on the
whole land grant that was
pandemic confirmed was painted
to land speculators so it wasn't
actually patented to the
community it was packed into to
an individual claimed that they
had a interest in the common
lands in in the grant and so the
royal on the grant everything
except for what this community
fought for and said no it's our
separate common land is now gone
there is no more common land
there is no ownership there is
no entity that actually
functions as in that capacity
and so by doing this this body
is actually recognizing its
obligation under our
constitution which incorporated
the treated when we got a goal
which is to protect the property
interest of these communities
and this is a land grant
community who has common lands
who is the only entity within
the other on the exterior
boundaries that was planted that
still maintains common lands and
manage them in the same way that
they did in eighteen twenty
three when they were
established.
Madam chair representative in my
on.
The the the designation is given
to the existing acreage that the
land grant has.
That's not to say that if the
land grant.
Brings more acreage into their.
Portfolio.
those land grants those lands
will also be granted the
political subdivisions that is a
good example madam chair is
comment.
The agency our office as a as a
political subdivisions with two
acres.
Where the community center is
and the baseball field but then
to the process of struggle
negotiating with the valiant
promise of ciation they were
they were transferred.
No monetary value.
The two hundred thirty six acres
of it Madam the pilgrimage.
You know that that is the heart
of the pilgrimage of it Senator
at the NMAA so that added that
to.
To the land grants to their
comments and and and those lands
are under
the rule of a political
subdivisions status so even
though a land grant might start
off with minuscule acreage you
know as a political subdivisions
that can still grow and expand
and that's the that's the
purpose for this political
subdivisions that is is that it
gives it presents certain
opportunities for land grants to
win back those common lands that
were taken by hook or crook you
know and the time is a good
example of that hook and crook
you know so I just want to
elaborate on that to kind of
further clarify your question
chair excellent thank you very
much madam chair and
representative I think you for
that I'd that pilgrimage I get
to enjoy every Good Friday
because I live close.
But but thank you so much for
answering my questions because
it brought a lot more clarity to
all the questions that I had
thank you so much thank you
Representative I have
Representative Mason next thank
you madam chair the.
The.
And I'm just checking this right
out of our bill analysis the New
Mexico attorney Attorney
General.
The.
States that it might be good for
us to examine the final degree
of ownership of this so roll you
on the the land grants was that
is I don't know are we just
being made to make a decision
that homeless this should've
invited a quarter of law or.
Madam chair representative Mason
able to looking are are to to to
for a lab right on that.
Yes thank you madam chair
representative Mason.
What I can initially answer
before our expert witness talk
about the legalities of that is
that was one of the things for
the last two weeks I've been
running around with while trying
to show you a document that was
our document where we had an
affidavit along with the support
of the New Mexico land that
council on that show that all of
our former names for the last
two hundred years we went had a
consolidated into one name and
have registered on because
that's where all of our
paperwork is actually under that
name so for us that that isn't
the case it could have been that
they saw the different names
throughout history in English
and Spanish and the combination
of the two that they felt those
things might need to be
addressed and that's what we did
in twenty fifteen for further
legal explanations I'll turn it
over to our to our to let the
for an explanation.
Madam chair representative so
the in nineteen fourteen the
court recognized that the
community of oil on the ariba I
was the fee simple owner of
their common lands and at that
time I think that was a twenty
three hundred acres that
struggle mentioned and then they
had since since that time have
lost some acreage probably due
to encroachments maybe to tax
assessment delinquencies applied
to a variety of reasons that
same way that other land grants
of lost land to date they are
still the fee simple owners I
believe of eight hundred and
five at least a hundred fifty
acres of land that is mistrust
will mention if you went to the
county records today that eight
hundred fifty acres is in the
name of the Arroyo on the
community of oil on the lottery
but community land grant and
that is so they are the card is
already determined that they are
the owners and the simple with
doing it was a passing a bill
today what it would do is it
would essentially recognize
their entity as a political
subdivisions and it would give
them more authority in terms of
their management so you wouldn't
know ownership changed hands but
it would would do is it would
recognize them and give them the
opportunity to apply to this
body for capital outlay it would
make them entitled to get a
distribution from the land
Representative assistance fund
which is provide their statuses
unity government so they could
actually do government to
government work with the local
counties with the state of New
Mexico so really would just be
recognizing their body and
giving them more tools to manage
of the eight hundred eight plus
acres that they already owned in
fee simple.
Thank you madam chair on
Representative Mason the
attorney general's office has
been at all these hearings.
Dealing with the this type of
legislation since twenty
fifteen.
They've been madam chair resumes
and they've been at the hearings
that the land grant interim
committee has had in the by this
area.
The reason for that dubious
statement in the in the
The fifth in the FIR is that we
have a new Attorney General on
board that is just barely coming
up to par with this particular
issue I think that's why that
statement is so dubious and kind
of brought in in in perspective
madam chair and representative
Mason but the the attorney
general's office has two hundred
percent behind this type of
legislation and the nuances
having to deal with the land
grants that are bringing this
legislation forward Madam chair
representative in these thank
you representative madam chair
you know with the it just gave
me a little pause that the
Attorney General would question.
You know this will ownership.
You know and the you know what.
I don't know where to go from
there I mean they're not in the
audience today I think it.
Anybody from the I don't believe
so Mason thank you for your
answer.
So thank you Representative SS
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for this
Legislation and and you know.
I'm a very blunt honest person
you this is the way it is my
first time and Land Grant and
learning a lot.
There's a lot to learn in the in
the legislature and I'm not
gonna pretend I knew everything
about it and so when and and
I've I've kind of talked to my
colleagues and other people in
France and and those of you are
full proposing it and against it
and all that.
You know what happens is is very
simple I I if I.
If I don't quite understand
everything for I don't get a
clear answer.
I feel obligated to say wait a
minute something's wrong and
I'll stand back and I'll say no.
And so as we've been going
through this committee in this
and and and I've been listening
to this and they have some sort
of related issues and and and
and and the bills are all state
cousins of each other I I get
that
but madam chair.
As I've been understanding of in
the beginning I was like I was
afraid to break our constitution
that's very important to me.
And so I don't want to affect
that and I don't want to go
against that and I don't want to
adversely affect any landowner I
want to we I I think I stand
speaking for myself and my
colleagues here I think we want
to help you
and and in understanding this I
can I can see madam chair
Representative that in the
eighteen hundreds this is messy
I'm sure is pretty messy as far
as them trying to figure out who
was who had
ownership of these lands that
were that that are in question
and I can see the government we
didn't have communications like
we do today we didn't have the
tools that we have today in
keeping things clear it could be
about as clear as mud back then
and and trying not to get in
these disputes you I can see
Madam chair representative where
there could be people that would
take advantage of this and take
land that didn't belong to them.
Possibly claim things that work
didn't belong to them adversely
affecting other other landowners
I can see where
possibly madam chair people that
work as maybe educators a fluent
couldn't stand and protect their
lands and maybe others took
advantage I can see a lot of
those things happening Madam
chair representative and so I I
mean I to did a lot of homework
and I and I we've dug and.
Asked and through our analyst
and read I don't see were we are
affecting the constitution
myself and so in my in my it's
it's not that I'm changing my
position my position will be I'm
solid I I I always provided in
that matter of of how I feel
that I'm serving the people the
best and if I feel that this is
going to hurt them I'm actually
going to stand against it I am
not at my questions are answered
that gives me a feeling of well
madam chair I don't know about
this this seems a little
squirrelly and I'll run the
other way and I'm gonna say no
I'm gonna be cautious going
point out that.
So madam chair I I just.
After reading and doing a lot of
of of homework I see that this
Madam is just another way of.
Thank you know we have our
government is in his is in
pieces right we have the federal
it covers everything we have a
state that covers another piece
and we have our counties are
covered another piece and we
have a municipalities a cover
another piece and see just all
it's doing is localizing our our
abilities to to understand and
serve our people better and so
we do it in all kinds of ways
Madam chair representative we do
it in our school districts we do
it in our county districts we do
it in our perspective
Representative districts and so
the more I I start digging and
understanding and an on
I understand more of this it
makes me feel more comfortable
so I can tell you that that I
the only thing that I see at
this point out through all the
work that I've done is that this
is just going to give up.
Your your your your Land Grant
those people that are in this
other land grants the
opportunity to
break that barrier of not being
able to to get the funding that
they need and that's difficult
when you're having to to do
infrastructure madam chair
representative in all I think
uses eight hundred fifty three
families or whatever in in this
in this land grants for
everybody to pitch in and build
a bridge or to come up with a
million dollars I got a whole
and so I don't know if you guys
know in the north equipped and
get back at home means.
In the salt that's tough you
know so madam chair I just I
wanted to explain my position I
don't know if customer that
that's what
madam chair I just wanted to two
to see express my my support for
this bill and why I I have
changed it's not so much
searching position I'm
understanding and I feel more
comfortable thank you madam
chair Representative access
Representative Castellano thank
you madam chair thank you guys
for an association board I know
on house bill twenty again
supported I think like with
centers that also madam.
Madam chair I think US house
bill two is a little different
because in all sentence by the
court to District Court just of
that's where I had my issues I I
see here in this bill that
there's two land grants that are
not that were not confirmed by
Congress as well already so
thank all residents losses and I
think that'll be an issue but I
just walking I really want to
thank you for your efforts your
persistency is is something that
you know I think a lot of people
maybe especially when it's
something that they believe in
it and something that comes from
the heart like Mister less I
said you know this is something
that really comes from the heart
when you hear the testimony and
stuff and I just you know like I
say if something being part of
the to go to the land and myself
we are political subdivisions
I see what they're doing so with
that madam chair I just want to
come to think reinforced page
four thank you before we before
I entertain a motion I just want
also weigh in I'm really honored
that you brought this here it's
it's it's time this is in my
district this land grant I don't
think there's a more beautiful
place in New Mexico involved as
me I hope I'm not offending
anyone on this committee by
saying that it is really
I think when in this beautiful
parts in in of our nation with
the with the valley in the river
coming through
it's it's so it's so important
that we maintain the heritage
and what what the land grant has
done without the status to the
more data in and you know the.
Just all the incredible work
that's happened so far I I'm
really grateful to be caring
this legislation as well and I
just want to point out it in
just a moment going to hear from
the Senator on prescribed burns
and I want to know what this
land grant has done to prevent
catastrophic fire in the in this
in this region it is remarkable
and hi it's it's a tragedy that
you have not that you don't have
the funds to continue with this
Madam are forced council I I've
been working with J. are looking
for a long time on trying to get
funds and trying to get support
for for this forest thinning
project that really bring Stuart
back to the land and I I really
I commend your efforts on all of
that so I would love now
entertain a motion made a motion
to.
Two passed on the for service.
I let's uh.
Motion let's go ahead and call
the roll Representative Lujan.
Yes Representative Mason.
Yes.
Representative Mirabel million
yes.
Representative Sweetser no.
Representative Terrazas yes.
Vice chair because they on this
and share or tennis yes it is
six to one of a vote of six to
one you have a do pass on madam
chair members of the committee
Representative Garcia and one of
the act thank you thank you in
the.
Senator graves.
Members of the committee please
the go to the back of your
finder for this bill I was I
made a mistake earlier couldn't
find it but it is here.
Very bad is in.
Thank you senator as you make
you may proceed when you're
ready.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I have
with me Mary Kay route who
has been impacted by the the
results of prescribed burns you
got out of control
We're here to present to you
committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one as three times
amended with an emergency clause
but I wanna let you know those
last two amendments one of which
to corrections in in the title
and the other one was to add the
emergency clause such not maybe
is as a liberation change.
But the under this bill.
Prescribed burn shall not be
conducted at any time when a red
flag warning has been issued by
the National Weather Service.
For the area the prescribed burn
is to take place.
As we all know last year New
Mexico's ravaged by wildfire the
hermitage PKF canyon fire became
the largest ever in our state
and it was partially the result
of prescribed burn that got out
of control homes were lost
property was destroyed thousands
of people.
Fifteen thousand five hundred
health officials had to evacuate
not knowing what was to become
of their most valued asset their
home.
Current law defines exactly
what a prescribed burn is and
identify certain agricultural
exceptions United States for
service and the state for sure
are working on improving
procedures involving these types
of burns.
But for those caught up in last
year's fires it is too little
and too late.
And actually even those
procedural changes happened
there's no guarantee this type
of fire worker again and who's
to say the next one will
commission major fire.
Cloudcroft for silvercity Cuba
or even larger communities such
as Santa Fe.
In addition the eastern plains
are not exempt from fire.
This past summer and so we were
there.
We listen to people from Las
Vegas more in the surrounding
area described would happen to.
The fire was only the beginning
to the challenges they face.
Then it continue to face now
this bill gives the legislature
the chance to weigh in.
And let the people know what
those people knowing what the
people of New Mexico now.
That we stand with them.
But to be clear the bill does
not ban prescriber.
It only clarifies that they
can't be conducted when a red
flag warning is in effect it's
simple many straightforward.
I want you know I couldn't
brought this bill to where it is
today without involvement of the
Ag community.
Wildland firefighters Secretary
witty in state forester
McCarthy.
They've all played important
roles in finding the best
approach for this bill to take
right now let you know that the
that community is not in
opposition state for sure not in
opposition they've bounced
around a little bit but they're
not in opposition today show I'd
like Mary Kay do just give you
guys a little bit of her
thoughts about this bill.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
right I'm a resident of the guy
in this canyon in San Miguel.
And the fire that was started on
a red flag day.
That was the Herman speak calf
canyon fire that is a fire where
I lost my home.
Okay.
My sister lost her home.
My mother lost all of her
belongings so.
Like a good one in your family
we take care of her mom and she.
Sure thank you so much
we share care for her but her
primary place was with my sister
and so on my sister's home for a
bit my mother's home but.
In addition our family owns the
property western life camp and
the guy in this canyon and we've
had those since nineteen sixties
westerly count has been well up
till now in continuous operation
since nineteen thirty five.
And is something that's that's
been a benefit to to children to
families to people who've and to
the community which feels like
it's there's two and we agree.
I'm also a volunteer firefighter
with the Placita volunteer fire
department in a point And thank
for love plus internet by the
association so as a firefighter
we if we try to protect are
forced to protect the watershed
to take care of of our
surroundings I felt that
coming they're coming back there
as a grown up and being able to
find move there full time
meant that I owed I owed a debt
to the community to help and to
take care of things and that's
what we try to do so it was with
great sadness to see that
someone who.
Who doesn't live there and who
didn't check on local conditions
they don't have any
responsibility to tell the local
fire department they don't tell
us they don't ask us what
conditions were on the ground.
So prior to the.
because of the high winds and
extraordinary truck conditions
the fire department had been
telling residents up and down
the can you to please don't
bring your brush right now it's
not illegal it's just delayed by
and because we care about one
another in our community.
Then people do that
I wish the US Forest Service
felt any of that.
But sadly that's not the case so
that the fires displaced so many
of us.
We all.
We'll evacuated April twenty
second.
And very shortly after that when
the fires combined that's when
we lost our home.
Our family property with
certainly count we lost our
largest cabin but the majority
of the damage was not from the
fires for the family property
with the floods.
So the fires were one thing then
the flood started so before the
flights my little bridge across
the guy in this river.
Kind of made it through the fire
exit for the wood parts of burnt
but the still girdles garter set
all that up and and the pads
those were still in place but
they didn't find the flights I
had animal pens the survived the
first floods but not later
flights
Our our family property.
Yes a kit kat filled with silt
of course scraped out filled
with silt we did our very best
and we requested National Guard
to come in and put in Sam Tax
which they helped with we had
neighbors helping dig huge
trenches so that it would come
from if some on the second side
and then also we're we're the
floods and other damage without
water could go and pass through.
And the result was we didn't
lose captains to the flood they
were.
Filled with much but but they
weren't they weren't lost
completely of course we can
operate because it's dangerous
not because of fires but because
of so we can't have people out
there
so it it's more than just the
fire it's the aftermath and then
like at my little place so I
had.
No it had.
Raised garden beds and.
It's a sand bar now
and I live on the health side
about the guy in this river and
so now we can't build we were
closer to the river will.
That's all washed out and then
and then it's just carving out
more of the stream bed and so
we'll have to go further up and
what that means presses more
expense because.
What was built there was built
you know a long time ago and not
carefully and to code it wasn't
fancy in New and all those
things we saw the protein line
it sent a really old well that
was really a cistern which can
help now so rebuilding will be a
lot more involved for us
And I just wanted you to hear
from someone who'd been there
and part of it and so for us
it's just knowing Hey we're
going to go back home we're
gonna rebuilt but I would like
to know.
The force won't burn down again
through somebody's ill advised
efforts to light a fire in a red
flag day so thank you so much.
And of thank you Mr and members
the committee will stand for
questions thank you so much
Senator an expert I appreciate
your story we have about
nineteen minutes before we have
to go to the floor so we're
going to.
Going to go as quickly as we can
so I want to take this public
comment first are those there
are those in the room who are in
support of this bill raise your
hand.
Great and any in opposition.
On this new if you're in support
raise your hands okay will do
support if you can keep it to a
minute that be great thank you.
Madam chair committee members my
name is broad support
Representative Mexico covers
whatever this bill was first
introduced we did have some
issues with that but the good
Senator allowed us to work with
them we come up with a language
that works for everybody we do
want to stress the importance of
fire
and you know some of the
argument that was being held
against in opposition was the
lighting of fires on wind high
wind days needed to carry brush
but
I'm glad that that was work
through you don't have to have a
red flag warning day to burn
brush thank you.
Thank you so much faster
we'll go to a at Caitlyn.
On the zoom.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee can you hear me
OK yes we can.
Perfect thank you my name is
Kate once probably and I'm a
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we're the oldest and largest
agricultural organization in the
state representing more than
twenty thousand member families
we do stand in support of Senate
bill twenty one we appreciate
the work that Senator Griggs has
done to address the concerns be
originally brought we do believe
that restricting prescribed
burns recurring on days when a
red flag warning is issued by
the National Weather Service is
a practical approach that will
still allow for the continued
use of prescribed burns
throughout the state we ask that
you support Senate bill twenty
one and thank you for your time
thank you so much Caitlyn are
there any questions from the
committee a good representative.
Thank you Mr thank you senator
thank you for coming forward
with her story thank you Senator
Griggs for read this very
important piece of legislation
it gives us more sure Ince's it
gives us
something to have a place to
protect our state and our people
that have been.
I have just gone through the
worst of the worst over this
past year and you know just
coming out of.
Endemic of then chair I
personally spoken with Mary Kate
and many many others that have
suffered through the fires in
the the floods and.
I get I get a little of
emotional too because that that
is very real very alive and it's
affected our families I want to
commend also Representative our
vice chair members Castellano
and and.
Representative Sweetser and
senator Campos ring for more
legislation to address the
funding in the needs
for for for provisions.
Of those who have suffered
through these fires so this is a
huge issue
I think we need to do more
because unfortunately
Mr madam chair Senator and Mary
Kay we can look forward to
possible
Fires coming forward because of
climate change in because of the
changes in our climate and
bringing this for just just give
us one one piece one more tool
in the toolbox so to speak so
that we can address how we are
we're looking at what is what is
here what is changing our
climate in New.
I don't see I see more types of
this legislation
Coming for to be more effective
in in this area but I want to
say.
K. into all those families to
all the communities out there
that we've heard you we're we're
here for you we are we're really
moving things one of the things
I did madam chair was I put
together community meetings and
some of these areas for the
local governments to our federal
government so that we can you to
understand where some of early
on right what was happening and
what the needs were of those
communities
We need to a better emergency
plan in place and better
communication as well and I want
to thank you for your service as
a volunteer firefighters
And Mr and Senator Griggs again
thank you for this very
important piece of legislation
we need thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative family
thank you madam.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward of I think it's
something after the devastation
that my community with the you
know I kind of lost wages and
the more area I think it's
something that we really need to
take into accountability when
these things happen I know the
federal government has committed
to paying for damages but you
can never replace the damage
that this latest fell for
families of felt you know that
that was gonna be replaced no
monetary.
At all but also I really want.
Say that maybe this bill should
be about maybe ten years ago of
twenty
might be a little too late but
thanks for reading for because I
think like Representative on
seven chair we're taking the
steps forth to hopefully protect
our communities and protect our
our forest so I really thank you
I just have a question just for
clarification.
This bill.
To to control FIR cannot control
on reflect that please that's
all it says.
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
So does it say you can bring
your on your private property as
long as a red flag is enough you
convert.
Madam chair representative
that's correct thank you senator
hatch twenty clarify that thank
you thank you madam chair.
Representative Mason yes after
the Senator
but let us the and will support.
You know that I really thought
that you could not have red flag
that anyway.
And the so of a this of.
I called I.
In.
R. as in this of the girl of the
images that reflect that would
not.
That is.
Of the the little store for.
For the day.
This legislation for the.
Of I was applied at that and are
they didn't really have anything
to fall far with all everything
in general well as of all
regulations we have I think.
Thank you always have this
program but enough clothes for a
lot of that is that would
regulate everything we could
think of is that for once the.
The.
Think about all the.
But there.
Representative Mason thank you
very much I hope you don't have
a bill coming up.
In that Representative says
thank you madam chair thank you
senator Greg this is this is a
step in the right direction
you know.
I I happen to you know I fly
back and forth and and I saw the
fire that we have the black fire
you see the Dennis is just
heating up our forest and
spreading quickly
Because we live the hit in the
head the National Forest I've
been all over the years of
growing up we see what I can do
it how scary it can be and.
I can imagine how those those
communities felt to see their
homes burnt.
They're everything they work
for.
things that you can't replace it
doesn't matter how much money
you give him I think
Representative customer Lou to
that a picture family heirlooms.
Things that cannot be replaced
your home is your home and even
if you build the home you in all
brand new paint brand new
everything it's not the same
home you raise your children.
And so madam chair Senator
this is this is wonderful what
you're doing I know that you
know it's it's
It sometimes people get scared
of a you know this type
legislation like actually
Kimberly Traficant were my weeds
or whatever but we all have to
be responsible.
In what we're doing including
the for service.
And you know I I was just I mean
the the the the nothing against
them personally other than to.
The perception is that the
reckless that these these are
almost the of of the public is
the reckless.
And almost intentional.
And so that's just a perception
of of of the of the state of the
people of the state of New
Mexico the people those
communities of people in our
communities it's it's it's not
just you know well we made a
mistake there's a lot of
mistakes and aunts I tell my
kids real simple madam chair
Senator.
Their mistakes kids that you
will make.
You can correct.
And there are mistakes that will
live with you forever so be
careful of what you choose to do
and they say that they don't
stardom on on
I think that this page on
certain days and the food on to
that but you know unfortunately
we've we've seen the devastation
of what it costs of thank you
for bringing this legislation I
hope it gets a little bit more
expensive I know that it's not
this this legislation won't
affect any of state or federal
lands is that correct madam
chair Senator madam chair and.
Representative is that hello yes
okay to make it it says you
can't do it
That led to pass motion make a
new personal finance and
conservation.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one as amended
second that emergency the
emergency.
Okay I got to write that down
it's it's it's a mouthful
plus.
Just tell us just
complete Representative Lujan
yes.
Representative Mason.
Yes Representative more million
yes.
Senator Sanchez.
Representative Terrazas yes vice
chair because the ano yes and
chair for yes yes graduation
center you have a sanitization
unanimous vote on Senate
conservation committee
substitute FOR SB twenty one as
amended with an emergency
clause.
Alright everyone our meeting is
now adjourned thank you senator.
