Raul goes close we have a quorum
delayed from earlier percent of
Chasey.
Mr speaker I go to that we go to
that order of business committee
report seeing no objection it is
so ordered click to read Mr
speaker your rules development
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to miss been referred
house bill two sixty eight has
had it under consideration
reports it was recommendation
that it to pass and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Christine Ortez chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committee
point house within sixty eight
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose make the eyes of the
committee report up to Mr
speaker rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee to has been referred
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one as amended has had it
under consideration point I was
recommendation that it to pass
immense referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee respectfully
submitted Christine are yes
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption printed
option available committed for
the Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one as amended all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me just have a committee
board.
Mr speaker here AG our culture
the state gives a water
resources committee to is been
referred house bill three thirty
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation that
I do pass as amended and it's
referred to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
respectfully submitted Susan K.
and chair Mr speaker move
adoption printed optional
Federal Committee Portnow's with
three thirty of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was me the I saw the committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker and a culture as a
gas and water resources
committee to is been referred
house bill three fifty four has
had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation to
pass an answer for the taxation
and revenue committee
respectfully submitted Susan K.
and at a chair of the dust and
reduction of a federal committee
report on house bill three fifty
for all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Apple's name yes I have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee team has been
referred house bill one thirty
eight has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that I do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair to job reduction of fable
Committee put number one thirty
eight all those present
Representative I.
Was me the representative it can
record up to.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee team is been
referred house bill one seventy
seven has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation letter to pass
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair.
Mr job reduction of a federal
community port on house bill one
seventy seven all those in favor
saying but as a nine.
Was named the as of a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill two fifty
three has had it under
consideration forcing for
conditions to pass as amended an
answer for to the commerce and
economic development committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair moved to job
reduction of a federal committee
report on house bill two fifty
three of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Yes I have a committee reported
opted Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill two seventy
three has had it under
consideration point same as
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair fifty dot reduction of a
federal committee report on
house bill two seventy three of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me just have a committee
reported opted Mr speaker
consumer public affairs
committee to this been referred
house bill two seventy nine has
had it under consideration point
same with recommendation that it
to pass and it's referred to the
Education Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair to job reduction of a
federal committee report on
house bill two seventy nine all
those in favor CENIC signify by
saying aye.
Propose may just have a
committee report up to.
Mr speaker labor veterans
military affairs committee to
miss been referred house bill
one fifty one has had it under
consideration point a with
recommendations to pass
respectfully submitted and
certainly upon chair Mr speaker
move to a different for
reduction of federal committed
for the house bill one fifty one
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Couples may just have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee team
has been referred house bill one
eighty six has had it under
consideration point a with
recommendation that it to pass
as amended in answer for to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair.
Mr speaker move to about the
room for rent optional Federal
Committee port on house bill one
eighty six all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Google is a test of a committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill two
fifteen has had it under
consideration reports a with
recommendation to do pass and
that's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted on the
Silicon chair Mister conclude up
for adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
twelve fifteen all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Oppose the Islamic Committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill two
forty five has had it under
consideration point seems
recommendation that it do not
pass for that house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill two forty five to pass in
this referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Ellis American chair
thanks for coming to the doctor
for.
Yes yes we're Dr favorable
report I'm sorry reduction no
federal committee for the house
bill two forty five but a
favorable report on house labor
Veterans Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
forty five all the severity of
this and I.
Yes have a good record up to Mr
speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee team
has been referred house bill two
fifty five has had it under
consideration for the same with
recommendation that it do not
pass that house labor veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty I do pass and it's
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
respectfully submitted a state
of the art culture miss the.
Optional no federal committee
report on house with two fifty
five but a favorable committee
report on house labor veterans
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill ten
fifty five all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those may just have a committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
has been referred house bill one
twelve has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation to do pass as
amended an answer for to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair speaker move
adoption of the committee
report.
For that option physically put
in house bill one twelve all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose may have the as having
to reported opted Mr speaker
Education Committee Timmons been
referred house bill one eighty
one has had it under
consideration for same with
recommendations to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair speaker move
adoption of the committee report
production of federal report on
house bill one eighty one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Yes have a committee report
opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
term is been referred house bill
two ninety six has had it under
consideration point with
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair speaker move
adoption of the committee report
reduction of a federal committee
poured on house bill twelve
ninety six of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was me yes have a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house
memorial twenty two has had it
under consideration for the same
with recommendation that a D.
pass respectfully submitted G.
Andrés Romero chair the speaker
move adoption of the committee
report brand optional favorable
committee report on house
memorial twenty two all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Close
the eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too it's been
referred house bill two forty
four has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it do not
pass for that house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to
forty four do pass finance
referred to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair Mr speaker move adoption.
For that option.
Of no federal but unfavorable
report on house with two forty
four but a favorable committee
report on house health and Human
Services Committee substring for
House Bill to forty four all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
The I. seven committee reported
opted Mr speaker health and
Human Services Committee too is
been referred house bill two
forty seven has had it under
consideration point singles
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption for an
adoption of federal commander
toward in house bill two forty
seven of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Propose name yes have a good
reported up to Mr speaker health
and Human Services Committee was
been referred house bill two
forty eight has had it under
consideration point saying with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair production production of a
federal committee report on
house with two forty eight all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Yes have a committee put up at.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two forty
nine has had it under
consideration for same with
recommendations to pass and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair
reduction reduction of federal
committee report on house bill
two forty nine all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Was.
The I. Senate committee report
opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill two fifty nine has
had it under consideration point
in with recommendation that I do
pass as amended immense referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of a federal committee
put in house bill two fifty nine
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Was me the eyes of a committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee
too is been referred house bill
two sixty two has had it under
consideration point in with
recrimination that it do not
pass the house government
elections a committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty to do
pass immense referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption one
option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
two sixty two but a favorable
committee report on house
government elections Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to sixty two all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those may be a Senate committee
reported opted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Is this Mr speaker that order
business introduction of
legislation no objection it is
so ordered click to read.
House Bill eleven introduced by
Representative sodomy L. Kate to
Penske Chavez and Matthews and
act relating to families and
acting the office of child
advocate act providing for the
state child advocate creating
the office of child advocate in
establishing the powers and
duties of that office providing
for the establishment of the
state child advocate selection
committee amending and acting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight making
appropriation house bill eleven
introduced by Representative how
to meal kits said Penske Chavez
and Matthews house bill eleven
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee then the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill for twenty three
introduced by Representative
state us us Jones and Lente and
act relating to livestock
amending requirements and
procedures relating to S. strays
authorizing the gathering in
Salem mysteries by a person
other than the New Mexico
livestock board in certain
circumstances making an
appropriation house bill four
twenty three introduced by
Representative Terrazas Jones
and Lente House before twenty
three have been read twice by
title is printed and referred to
the house agriculture us and gas
and water resources committee
then so house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill four thirty three
introduced by Representative
Harry Garcia Representative had
this Martinez and Representative
Alcon serin Jana and Lujan for
the military and Veterans
Affairs Committee and act
relating to taxation of removing
the sunset date for an income
tax exemption for armed forces
retirement pay house bill four
thirty three introduced by
Representative Harry Garcia
Representative habia Martinez
and Representative Ezzell con
Cerny on a and Lujan.
House bill four thirty three AM
admit twice by title is printed
referred to the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee this house taxation
and revenue committee.
House bill four thirty four
introduced by Representative
Trujillo and Chasey and act
relating to children at any
basic rate for children revising
guidelines for inter
departmental collaboration
managing care of certain
newborns monitoring compliance
with plans of care amending
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight can appropriations
house bill four thirty four
introduced by representatives
Trujillo and Chasey house bill
four thirty four having been
read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill for thirty five
introduced by representatives
Montoya lane and and I part and
act relating to courts amending
requirements for venue
determination providing
requirements for determining
venue in cases involving medical
malpractice house bill four
thirty five introduced by
Representative Montoya clean and
Nighbor house bill four thirty
five hundred twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
fence the house Judiciary
Committee
house bill four thirty six
introduced by Representative
Lara an act relating to taxation
providing an income tax credit
and corporate income tax credit
for purchases of blended
biodiesel providing a gross
receipts tax deduction and
compensating tax deduction for
the sale and use of blended
biodiesel House Bill four thirty
six introduced by Representative
Lara.
House before thirty six have
been read twice by title is our
printed refer to the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee then the
house taxation and revenue
committee
This bill for thirty seven
introduced by Representative how
to meal and act relating to
taxation expanding the rural
health care practitioner tax
credit to include doctors of
oriental medicine natural Pathak
doctors speech language
pathologists occupational
therapists occupational therapy
assistants from the growth
they're pissed and physical
therapist assistants house bill
four thirty seven introduced by
Representative how to meal.
House bill four thirty seven
have been read twice by title is
a printer for to the house
health and Human Services
Committee then to House excision
and Revenue committee.
House bill four thirty eight
introduced by representatives
more mall Malaya mine toria
Jones brown and Duncan an act
relating to abortion and acting
the parental notification of
abortion act requiring
notification of a parent or
guardian one of the questions
deeper to be performed on a
minor requiring reporting house
bill four thirty eight
introduced by representatives
more ball Malia Montoya Joan
brown and Duncan house bill four
thirty eight having been read
twice by title is are printed
and referred to the house health
and Human Services Committee
thence the house Judiciary
Committee.
As bill for thirty nine
introduced by representatives
brown and Scott an act relating
to taxation changing rules for
reporting gross receipts and use
of oil and gas production
services hospital for thirty
nine introduced by
representatives brown and Scott.
House bill four thirty nine have
been read twice by title that
are printed and referred to the
house energy energy
environmental resources
committee this House accession
and Revenue committee house bill
four forty introduced by
Representative Scott Pettigrew
Townsend and brown in act
relating to taxation creating
the all cities and counties fund
to transfer a portion of gross
receipts tax revenue to
municipalities and counties
distributing a portion of gross
receipts tax revenue to the all
cities and counties frontier
house bill four forty introduced
by representatives Scott
Pettigrew Townsend and brown
house bill four forty have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee then so
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill four forty one
introduced by representatives
Joan mir balmorra Duncan
Townsend and brown and act
relating to child birth
requiring medical care for all
infants who were who were born a
life defining born alive and
infant mandated reporting and
acting penalties and acting
civil remedies creating the task
force to monitor born alive
births house bill four forty one
introduced by representatives to
Jones Baltimore a Dunkin
Townsend and brown house bill
four forty one have been read
twice by title is that our
printer for to the house health
and Human Services Committee
than the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill four forty two
introduced by representatives
Jones Armstrong katana and
Hernandez and act relating to
court sweeping the court fees to
file a motion for unpaid child
support house bill four forty
two introduced by
representatives Jones Armstrong
katana and Hernandez.
House before forty two hundred
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then to House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill four forty three
introduced by Representative
Allen of Martinez and act
relating to motor vehicles
amending a section of the motor
vehicle code prohibiting the
issuance of a driver's license
to a person whose license has
been suspended denied or revoked
in the three years prior to the
application for a driver's
license unless the person
provides evidence of personal
financial responsibility
amending a section of the
mandatory financial
responsibility act providing a
definition reconciling
conflicting amendments to the
same section of law by repealing
laws two thousand seventeen
chapter seventeen section one
hospital for forty three
introduced by Representative
Allen of Martinez.
House bill four forty three have
been there twice by title is our
printer referred to the house
transportation public works in
capital improvements committee
vents the house Judiciary
Committee
as for forty four introduced by
representative Thompson and act
relating to licensing amendment
enacting sections of the
nutrition and dietetics practice
act to clarify dietitian.
Information is in traditionalist
and a Christian is to licensure
requirements are changing
composition duties of the
nutrition and dietetics practice
board providing a by any or
licensure fee exempting active
duty military service personnel
and spouses of from the initial
application fee explaining
reasons for denial suspension or
revocation of the license
creating scope of practice
providing a grandfather clause
for current licensees providing
for penalties House Bill for
forty four introduced by
representative Thompson house
bill four forty four have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee fence the house
Judiciary Committee.
This bill for forty five
introduced by representative
Thompson and headed up an act
relating to human trafficking
revising definitions used in the
sex offender registration and
notification act expanding the
definition of sex offender
experiment convictions that are
considered sex offenses
requiring registration under the
sex offender registration and
notification act providing the
statute of limitations for the
crime of human trafficking
increasing the age of the child
for the crime of sexual
exploitation exploitation of
children by prostitution
amending the crime of human
trafficking find providing
mandatory restitution providing
for forfeiture expanding the
definition of a criminal offense
in the victims of crime act
expanding the definition of a
serious violent offence in
section thirty three dash to
dash thirty four NMSA nineteen
seventy eight well as nineteen
ninety nine chapter two thirty
eight section one as amended
house bill for forty five
introduced by representative
Thompson and that
House Bill for forty five
minutes twice by title is our
printer for to the house
consumer and public affairs
committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
Four forty six introduced by
Representative Serrato and act
relating to long term care
amending the long term care
facility madam training act to
update training program
requirements house bill four
forty six introduced by
Representative Serrato.
House before forty six amended
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then so house
health and Human Services
Committee.
Four forty seven introduced by
Representative day of the cruise
and act relating to higher
education in acting the graduate
student loan act providing
definitions providing for
student loans for certain
graduate students providing loan
terms creating the graduate
student loan fund required
reports making an appropriation
house bill four forty seven
introduced by Representative
daylight Cruz.
House Bill for forty seven
amended twice by title having
been read twice by title try
that again has been ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
This
is a joint resolution fourteen
introduced by Representative
Montoya Senator Gonzales Senator
okay here goes Representative
Harry Garcia and representatives
of pants keep the joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article four
section five of the constitution
of New Mexico to provide that
each regular session of the
legislature shall not exceed
forty five days and to remove
the restrictions of bills will
be considered in even numbered
years house joint resolution
fourteen introduced by
Representative Montoya Senator
Gonzales Senator Gallegos
Representative Harry Garcia and
Representative Sapan ski.
How's your solution for ten
minutes twice by title is a
reference referred to the house
government elections and
indifference Committee
then sells producer Committee.
House joint memorial I
introduced by Representative
Garrett and senator Tom in a
Joint Memorial urging the United
States Congress to pass HR three
three three nine the national
infrastructure bank to bank act
twenty twenty one to create a
national infrastructure bank to
finance and gently needed
infrastructure projects house
joint memorial I introduced by
Representative Garrett and
senator Tom.
House order five hundred twice
by title is are considered fair
to the house transportation
public works and government
prevents committee and that's
it.
Asked Joint Memorial six
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil the Joint Memorial
declaring February twenty second
twenty second twenty twenty
three survivors of suicide day
in the legislature house joint
memorial six introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil.
You're running my own.
There
right House memorial six minutes
was the title is ordered not
printed and please and speakers
table.
House memorial forty three.
Introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia.
And representatives Rehm Herndon
and mine toria Memorial
declaring February twenty eighth
twenty twenty three New Mexico
crusaders for justice stay in
the house of representatives
House memorial forty three
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia and Representative
Rehm Herndon and Monteforte up
house more forty three having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House memorial forty four
introduced by Representative
Lujan headed a lot a Garrett and
any on a memorial requesting the
secretary of public education to
convene a community schools
funding task force to study the
issue of sustainable funding for
community schools in New Mexico
to develop criteria for
certified community schools to
recommend funding be sent on
certification and to develop a
community schools a strategic
plan House memorial forty four
introduced by Representative
Lujan said at a flat a carrot
and Syriana.
Cause more forty four have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee.
House memorial forty five
introduced by representatives of
lord center and Representative
Harry Garcia the memorial
recognizing may twenty twenty
three as motorcycle safety
awareness month house memorial
forty five introduced by
Representative toward the
incident and Representative
Harry Garcia.
House more forty five minutes
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
about to read.
House memorial forty six
introduced by Representative
Lord a memorial declaring
February seventeenth twenty
twenty three Santa Fe Scottish
Rite masonic center today in the
house of representatives House
memorial forty six introduced by
Representative Lord.
House memorial forty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed in place on
the speakers table.
House memorial forty seven
introduced by Representative
Vincent Senator Burt
Representative sniper Baca and
the cell the memorial we're
recognizing one hundred fiftieth
anniversary of the establishment
of the Mescalero Apache Indian
reservation House memorial forty
seven introduced by
Representative Vincent Senator
Burt and Representative sniper
to Baca Andy's L..
House memorial forty seven
hundred twice by title is a
representative for to the house
government election and Affairs
Committee.
House memorial forty eight
introduced by representatives
Lara and guy Ecosse Memorial
declaring March first twenty
twenty three colonia stay in the
house of representatives House
memorial forty eight introduced
by representatives a Lotta and
guy Ecosse.
Cause more forty eight have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed in place on the
speakers table.
Senate bill forty seven
introduced by senator Wirth
Representative Chandler and
Senator Diamond and act relating
to driver's licenses changing
the penalties for the suspension
of a driver's license Senate
bill forty seven introduced by
senator Wirth Representative
Chandler and Senator Diamond.
Senate bill forty seven have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed.
And referred to the house
Judiciary Committee thence the
house taxation and revenue
committee on the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill nine an act relating to
conservation creating the
conservation legacy permanent
fund creating the land of
enchantment legacy Fund
including the conservation
legacy permanent fund in the
permanent funds invested by the
state investment council Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill nine.
The Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee then so
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill eighty one
introduced by Senator Hickey and
act relating to immunization
allowing physician assistants or
certified nurse practitioners to
certify that immunization is
detrimental to the physical
condition of the child Senate
bill eighty one introduced by
Senator Hickey Senator lady one
of been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order business messages in
addition is so ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill forty one.
Senate bill forty four Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate health of public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill eighty four as
amended.
Senate bill one of hello to as
amended Senate bill two nineteen
as amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted shady
Lujan Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Spitter request for members to
remove their jackets or coats or
sweaters it is granted.
Thank you
are right.
With.
What's.
Because I never know here.
That would be for yes.
Actually now I think about it.
Okay at PM I'm on the phone that
we have a little.
Are down.
And.
Four four thirteen.
I don't know how to go.
Generated from years of Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business third reading
of legislation see no objection
it is so ordered.
So we are across the board.
Right right.
Members we have a we have a list
that we've negotiated with our
respective leadership offices
you all should know those bills
We have had a conversation with
the sponsors of house bill
ninety five
the which was supposed to be on
the agenda tonight we're gonna
pull it back to committee into
that Subhan Committee and then
bring it back to the floor so
will only be doing three bills
tonight and I want to see if.
The gentle lady.
From Santa Fe is ready.
And I'm speaking really slowly
as she gets ready for item
number five.
Thank you Mr speaker would you
get me to that point that the
record reflect that election is
server placing House Bill one
sixty nine of final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker our house
bill one sixty nine
restores first amendment rights
to complainants who bring
complaints to our interim
legislative ethics committee
it it includes some cleanup
language to modernize the
statute.
And
And it removes the word
complaint from the list of those
prohibited from speaking about a
complaint during the interim
legislative ethics investigation
process Mr speaker.
one of the reasons I'm bringing
for this bill in addition to
bringing the practice of our
interim legislative ethics
committee process into
compliance with the constitution
and the first amendment is also
because it's been a long time
focus of money to do everything
I can to make sure this building
is as welcoming as open as
possible
and I firmly believe that when
New Mexicans from all areas of
the state feel comfortable in
this building and and feel
welcome and that our process is
better and it.
When I was a legislative
staffers and I personally had to
file a complaint under the
interim legislative ethics
committee process and that was
due to my role as a mandatory
reporter of harassment wasn't
related to my own experience
but it was regarding a situation
that I became aware of and this
law prohibited me from confiding
in anyone about that complete
even just a friend.
I'm so Mister speaker and
bringing this forward and set at
a technical change and also
changed to compliance with cons
the constitution.
And I think it's important to
also acknowledge that
complainants and respondents in
this process need support and
they need to be able to talk to
their.
Their family their friends
and get through the process on
both sides and I also think that
a lot of these complaints go
unreported because people are
afraid.
So with that Mr speaker I will
stand for questions there is
debate the gentleman from labor
percent of Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from San for you.
I yield to the gentle and
friendly.
Speaker gentle lady this bill
does is basically removes.
The gag order if you will on the
complainant that is the
complainant can now make public
with the allegation is made.
The nature of the complaint is
that correct.
That is that is correct Mr
speaker although
I generally I would say it
doesn't necessarily mean that
they're making the complaint
public it means that they may be
able to gain some professional
support some counseling be able
to speak with their friends or
family when they're going
through a difficult time.
You Mr speaker and gentle lady.
That would be a prohibition
against making this complaint
public in your legislation is a.
Thank you gentlemen for that
question no Mr speaker because
that would be in violation of
the constitution and so that is
what we are trying to address by
bringing this legislation
forward.
Speaker gentle lady I see the
potential
for.
If you'll call of political
mischief weaponizing these
complaints.
To could you address the
concerns.
Thank you gentlemen and Mister
speaker
There certainly is that
potential it with many different
complaint processes that exist
currently so this I don't think
changes that but what it does do
is create a balance between what
is acceptable behavior for the
complainant one of six
acceptable behavior to the
respond.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
you agree with me.
Only the accusation of conflicts
complaint.
The character of the respondent
could seriously detrimental to
the respondent's contention.
I'm Mr speaker gentleman.
I would add to that that
bringing forward a complaint
particularly against an elected
official also bears with that
high consequences for a
complaint so Mister speaker and
gentleman
the complainant may risk their
reputation same as a state
actually gave their livelihood
from working in this building
they may fear repercussions on
the job so I would say the the
stakes are high very very high
on the complainant as well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
there any consequences.
Your legislation for a complaint
on making public baseless
accusations.
Mr speaker and gentleman
One I would say the risk of
someone bringing for a false
claim is very low because we
know from research for example
and sexual assault that only two
percent of claims are actually I
have been found to be false
claims the stakes are very very
high for someone bringing
forward a complaint.
and the usual process would
apply to someone who had brought
forward a false complaint so if
you brought forward a complaint
you then go through the interim
legislative ethics committee
process which is arduous and you
have to find a sworn affidavit
of your claim so I I would say
that the bar is set very very
high for complainants
and the
the risk is actually that many
complaints don't get reported.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
The consequences.
The complaint conflicted
official by someone in the
private sector to be symmetric.
That is the electric elected
official his reputation
impugned.
And face those consequences in
the next election of a
corporation.
Allegations of that nature
economic honest previously in
this chamber.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would certainly be willing to
listen to the rest of the
debate.
This is true if you will does.
Los thank you Mr speaker thank
you to.
There's further debate delayed
from Los Alamos on the one of
Santa Fe Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
I will yield to the gentle lady
from us on us thank you
so I am pleased to be a co
sponsor on this bill with you
gentle lady and I'd like to
explain why.
Hi
for many years practice in the
employment arena and I worked on
many harassment sexual
harassment type place basis and
I have found that filing a
complaint is a very stressful
experience for the complainant.
Yes it is X. stressful for the
person or persons complained of
are there conduct complained of
but it is very hard on the
person we do not agree gentle
lady.
Gentlelady have been having been
through that myself I would
completely agree.
And so while I think the gentle
lady that and Mr speaker that
certainly there are rare
occasions when there are claims
that are not well founded
that's a very rare occurrence
would you not agree Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Gentlelady yes in the research
bears that out that it is very
rare for false accusations what
I find it a symmetrical about
this
the current state of the bill
without this and it is it's
asymmetrical in favor of the
elected official Mr speaker
gentle lady would you not agree.
I do agree gentle lady and what
we what there is potential Ford
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
for the elected official to
announce a complaint but maybe
skew the facts in a way or if
the the allegations in a way
that benefits him or her we do
not agree gentle lady.
Later from Los Alamos I agree if
if someone were to file a
complaint against me they would
not be able to speak about that
complaint but I would be able to
speak about the complaint free
Lee and announce to the public.
Proclaim my image in a sense if
I chose under this the way the
law currently is written.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
and in fact perhaps we've seen
that would you not agree gentle
lady.
Play would you repeat that
question please Mr speaker and
gentle lady perhaps you could
argue that that's already
happened and at least one
occasion we do not agree gentle
lady.
I I think we need to make that
argument I think at the you know
the other troubling part of this
is because the interim ethics
committee is made up of
legislators and so in discussing
the complaint as the respondent
I could be really influencing
some of my colleagues.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
completely agree and just
switching now to another concept
gentle lady and I think we've
established a good policy reason
but gentle lady at I just also
like to point out I think this
provision is the legal you know
to tell someone that they can't
say something in public Mr
speaker and gentle lady that
they believe actually happened
to them is unenforceable would
you not agree gentle lady Mr
speaker.
I personally from Los Alamos yes
this provision is
unconstitutional as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady I was
trying to understand what what
would we do with the folk the
complainant went public or
shared some information that
became public would we dismiss
the complaint what would be the
recourse gentle lady and Mr
speaker.
The lady for lows from Los
Alamos under the current policy
the complaint would still need
to go forward.
Okay so Mister speaker gentle
lady it sounds like essentially
it's unconstitutional
unenforceable and bad policy Mr
speaker gentle lady would you
not agree I agree.
Thank you very much I yield back
the floor.
There is a debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative the
agency.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
you'll.
Yes I yield to the gentleman
from Santa Fe
earlier in the debate you said
one of the reasons of this bill
was brought forward was to allow
that to complain to to talk to
your family or to seek help with
with whatever issue she was
going under current statutes.
That person is not allowed to
talk to their family or to go
see gov.
Assistance mental health
systems.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa yes of the.
Many complaints over the years
have struggled with whether they
could tell their mother for
example what they were going
through tell their family seek
counselling what what counts as
a disclosure and that has led to
a lot of folks feeling very
alone as they've gone through
this process Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
but the way the current statute
as written.
Would that person be allowed to
talk to somebody.
Talk to their family talked to
their mother talked to accounts
for on the way that the current
statute is would that be
allowed.
Mr speaker and gentleman no.
Interesting thank you Mr speaker
that's all.
The debate the gentleman from
years of Pettigrew.
The gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker doesn't
gentlelady yields by up to the
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe a.
I heard to testify to the.
There is a sworn affidavit that
has to be filed is that correct
I hear correctly.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
there any place in the
legislation that.
Provides a penalty.
To.
The complaining is.
The complaint is found to be
without basis for found by the
ethics committee to be without
foundation.
Mr speaker and gentleman the the
way that the statute is framed
right now is for is to
focus on accountability so you
can see in the legislation.
and starting at the bottom of
page two going to the top of
page three that they must have a
written sworn complaint.
Setting forth with specificity
the facts alleged.
Excuse me.
Alleged to constitute an ethical
conduct Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I.
I hear the answer you gaze.
But specifically Mr speaker and
gentle lady my question was is
there any repercussions any
penalty to the complaint.
The person is making the
complaint.
If the complaint is found to be
without foundation.
Without basis.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
say probably the embarrassment
of bringing forward a complaint
that has.
been found to be meritless they
may face other rapper cautions
in the course of their daily
life depending on what venue
they conduct their livelihood
and for example if they depends
on provided work to do their
job.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so if
I understand your response
correctly.
The.
Penalty would be an
embarrassment to the of that
person to the community Mr
speaker and gentle lady what
about.
The embarrassment to the person
that the complaint was filed
against that.
The complaint has been
determined to be without basis
or foundation.
In that point Mr speaker and
gentle lady my concern is that
the damage has been done.
And the complaint gets off of
being a little embarrassed in
their community.
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
have a response for that.
Mr speaker gentleman
the reason that there is such an
extensive process.
Conducted through the interim
legislative ethics committee is
to sort out which complaints
will be found with probable
cause which don't which may be
addressed.
Some may be addressed through
training some may be addressed
through a meeting
you know it's it's not a one
size fits all process because
the nature of some of the issues
that are brought forward are
also of a wide variety.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate the the dance that we
seem to be doing here but at the
end of the day.
There's not a of there's not a
repercussion for the complaint.
That is found without basis or
without foundation and so the
damage done to one person's
reputation.
Based on the answer Mr speaker
and gentle lady that you gave
earlier from the complaint is is
strictly potentially
embarrassment to their community
Mr speaker and gentleman for a
little bit.
As I read the.
The bill.
This is Mr speaker and gentle
lady of public the ability to
speak out in public Mr speaker
and gentle lady if if I
understand correctly our current
statutes.
There is nothing in our statute
that would stop a complaint from
having a.
A attorney client privilege
based conversation for a
therapist based conversation
where they could go and have
that depth depth conversation go
through therapy and it not be
disclosed am I correct in
understanding that the current
statutes do not for bid that
thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman the current
statute is not clear there are
no exceptions certainly a person
is entitled to legal
representation and the
protections that that may
provide however the statute as
written is incredibly broad and
has led to much confusion and I
would.
Remind
The gentleman Mr speaker that we
are also trying to fix a
constitutional issue as well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I hear you is there a place in
our in our.
Statutes in our constitution
that for budget Mr speaker and
gentle lady a person from
seeking legal counsel for from
seeking work with the therapist
with respect to the mental
stability.
Mr speaker and gentleman
The phrases shall not publicly
disclose which is ambiguous and
undefined in this law and so
Mister speaker and gentleman I
don't think you can it
distinctly state that someone
could feel empowered to seek
Services counseling discuss this
with a friend.
The lady at I I hear the
publicly this the specific that
I'm getting to do we have
caseload we have statutes
anywhere that stops us from
seeking therapist because we
have a medical privilege or
stick talking with an attorney
because we have an attorney
client privilege that is not Mr
speaker and gentle lady public.
Would you agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
the issue at heart is really
again going back to making this
law constitutional.
and I think that you know I
would again share Mr speaker and
gentleman that the language is
vague which means that folks
going through this process do
not know.
they can disclose this
information to.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
hear what you're saying with
respect to vague but typically
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
we have plenty of attorneys in
this room that some of the
things our constitution is too
vague there's a case lost
somewhere in it because
somebody's tried so Mister
speaker and gentle lady do we
have case law based on the fact
that.
This is publicly forces attorney
client privilege or with the
therapist or with a medical
professional.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Lee for that
question
and again we're dealing with
vagueness in a statute honestly
vagueness in the constitution
and we do have case law that
states the FBA the ruling states
that were public figures are
involved in issues of public
concern such as ethics.
The constitution contemplates a
bias in favor of free speech so
the constitution itself
encourages transparency and free
speech.
In this matter and Mr speaker
and gentleman I would point out
just ahead with regards to the
penalty for.
bringing forth a false complaint
there is a penalty for perjury
which does apply to a sworn
affidavit Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I I
hear that but I believe through.
different meetings through the
ethics commission in the past
it's been problematic to get
those for complaints Mr speaker
and gentle lady
At the at the end of the day I
appreciate the the conversation
back and forth.
I believe Mr speaker and gentle
lady we talked about vagueness
and then we went to
constitutionality and then we
went back to vagueness and and
so I'm Mr speaker and gentle
lady I really feel like I got
crystal clear answers for my
constituents and so I will not
be able to support your
legislation thank you Mr speaker
I about.
The gentleman there's further
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you Mr
lady from Santa Fe
the.
The constitution Mexico
constitution and practices in
New Mexico as I understand it
allow.
This body.
And the Legislature to govern
themselves and rules concerning.
This legislature.
I may not necessarily have to
comply with all of the aspects
of other law however.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think it's played out in recent
history.
That.
people who have broken.
This provision there's really
been no consequences is that
would you would you say that is
true Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and and gentleman I
would go back to
this sort of natural
consequences that come when you
file a complaint against
someone who is a member of the
legislature.
So Mister speaker in and gentle
lady the at least one of the
that's a high profile instances
the the entire system.
Was.
Worked around there was never an
affidavit filed.
public statements were made that
were not cooperated.
And the person who the
accusations came against no
longer a member of this
legislature VME vehemently
denied and.
The legislature never took up.
Even though.
Members members of this
legislative body actually.
As far as I'm concerned also
violated are processed and
confirmed to the media that
there was a.
A a complaint.
Even though the complaint did
not come with an affidavit and
the story later changed to.
That the legislature of
something is made public can
choose to bring something up
under our ethics provisions so
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
have rules in place and they've
been they have been blatantly
violated.
in the past so we what rules we
do have.
One convenience have been
ignored.
the speaker and gentle lady we.
We passed a.
Ethics.
A bill.
Forming
The forming of of ethics Mexico
Commission.
Part of that discussion.
Framed.
What could be.
Made public at least by the
commission.
And
It was assumed by that
commission the.
First amendment rights remained
in place.
But I understand the difference
being is that the rules for this
legislature we get to choose
those rules.
And it has from what I
understood.
In being one of the members who
helped negotiate that
legislation for the ethics
commission.
Our rules governing ourselves.
We have.
Wide purview.
To determine that.
I will let you respond to that
speaker gently.
Mr speaker and gentleman you're
raising is really good points
and it's a good it's exactly
the circumstances that you
describe led to the legislature
adopting the requirement for the
affidavit the sworn affidavit
in addition while the
legislature because what we are
named in the constitution around
that we that are the members of
the house for example are the
sole judge of the qualifications
of our members can establish
rules for example in house rule
we have a it an ethics process
of the rules in order of
business committee.
Must admit it comply with if we
have an ethics complaint during
the session this statute applies
to the interim legislative
ethics committee which
addresses complaints that are
brought in the interim however
we also do need to comply with
the remaining pieces of the
constitution as well.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Is it not true that if you are
in a court case that the judge.
Can put a gag order.
And say that you don't have you
you are not able to
sphere details of that court
case.
And there are penalties that the
judge can place on an individual
who then violates the gag order
is that correct Mr speaker
gently.
Mr speaker and gentleman
it.
The difference between the
scenario of I gag order in a
court case versus what you have
here in our existing statute is
that this is a prior restraint
which is a free speech which is
unconstitutional.
What happens in court would be a
narrowly tailored constraint
and still.
It also could also it also could
be challenged as
unconstitutional.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I believe this could be
challenged as unconstitutional
however you like the judge this
body has the ability to.
Police themselves and determine
the rules it could be
challenged.
But.
As once again as I understand
this.
and once again these were a lot
of discussions between both
chambers and both parties.
And we did review.
During that ethics commission.
Says what we had in both the
interim and during the session
within our legislative body.
So Mister speaker and and gentle
lady.
I'm not a lawyer for several
lawyers involved and part of the
discussion was.
What was.
What is public publicly
disclose.
And I believe it was
representative Ely who stated to
me that.
Publicly is very specific
publicly is to publicize.
Or as nothing would keep an
individual conversation with a
family member with a doctor with
a lawyer as a matter of fact
this specifically precluded.
So I mean for that reason I
don't believe that's a
justification for this there's
nothing that would keep an
individual from seeking medical
attention for
going to a counselor or talking
to a family member that is no
gag order goes that far even
when a judge places a gag order
on an individual.
What.
The gag order and what the rule
as it exists is meant to do is
to keep from coloring the jury
pool.
To keep from.
causing individuals to make a
decision.
In the court of public opinion.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
that is what I understand the
rules are supposed to do for
this body that exist here and
there is another venue for folks
who don't want to come don't
don't want to take part in that
provided the ethics process but
they can go to the ethics
commission and it's a different
process Mr speaker and and and
gentle lady the idea is as at
least in one case where
accusations were made just prior
to an election.
And it was a close election that
person is no longer here.
It is meant to keep from
weaponizing.
And using our ethics process in
an on ethical manner.
So speaker gentle lady
Because we have the ethics
commission in place.
Which took all this into
account.
And because we have the ability.
To police ourselves.
Outside of some of the rules
that exist in state law.
and because we Vigil doing this.
Most of us at cost I don't know
if you figured out yet what it
cost you to serve but I have an
I try not to do it right before
I decide to run for election.
Of the speaker and gentle lady.
we.
Having.
Political opportunism which can
take place I'm not suggesting
that that is even a high.
Percentage.
But the idea of being able to.
use the political process use
the ethics process.
In essentially coloring.
The voter poll.
I believe that and that was the
understanding as we look into
this why the rules are the way
they are.
I understand that someone could
re public and think incorrectly
that they couldn't talk to a
doctor therapist family member
but.
Once again.
Maybe that would just need to be
to provide better.
And and okay Madam speaker will
ask the gentle lady to respond.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
I would remind.
The body dead changing the
statute brings this complaint
process into compliance with the
process that we have during the
session and also into compliance
with the product or or that
compliance is the wrong word but
to me here the way that
complainants and respondents are
treated under the ethics
commission process so currently
if you were to file a complaint
to the ethics commission there
are no restrictions on
disclosure on either the
complainant or the respondent
the restrictions are on the
staff and the commissioners of
the ethics commission not on the
complaint under the respondent
in it you know I think that I I
I hear from the body Mr speaker
and gentleman a bit of angst
about is for the nature of
public service and and it you
know that all of us are
vulnerable to attacks however
a restraining one side
restraining one set of parties I
would argue is is less fair and
is not what we as a body should
be doing.
Speaker gentle lady if if
you're.
the bill were to restrict the
public.
member from.
Disclosing I think that would be
perfectly fine I think the
reason that is not in there is
because there's no benefit.
For.
A someone who serving.
In the legislature.
To go out disclose Hey I have an
ethics complaint against me and
here are the
that there is a natural
restraint on the official the
public official who it is not
going to do that
the agency speaker gentle lady I
think as it leaving it open as
it is now allows the public
official to respond when we what
we have seen.
Eight out is that we've seen an
entire campaign.
well waged against a a of a
legislator
outside of of this process so so
the speaker and gentle lady
They're very very few
protections for legislators as
it is.
and I do believe that we are
allowed to please ourselves why
we have a that's why we have
Legislative Council that's why
we are able to do things here
and those and that is allowing
us to govern ourselves the
speaker gentle lady I do believe
I do that.
Limited.
Instances with the ethics
commission have have proven out
to to.
Have similar.
That have similar concerns for.
and Mister speaker I would hi I
just in this fashion I don't I
would not like to delude this
there if if.
Someone for two.
Make an accusation against a
member as a had a file.
There's absolutely no way.
That that person survives that
because that will be a question
in someone's mind especially a
voter and so interim I believe
the short this stopping that.
Trying to keep that from
entering into.
discussion prior to election I
believe that's why the rule is
the way it is so Mister speaker
July I'd I'd appreciate why
you're doing this but I do not
believe that this is a course
that of action I can support.
There is prohibit gently from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
thank you Mr speaker will the
lady from Santa Fe yield I yield
to the majority of the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
maintenance from Santa Fe I I
was reflecting on some of the
conversation and
I'm wondering I believe that
these are the policies we just
put in place for the first
adopted an anti harassment
policy is that right.
Mr speaker lady I I think this
actually may even predate that
policy set by some here are
relying statutory protection Mr
speaker and limited from Santa
Fe it predates the formation and
adoption in and out of the
ethics commission right.
Yes he Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo yes.
Me just tell everyone who wasn't
following.
The legislature at that time
there were a lot of long time
surveying public
members of the Senate and house
who didn't want to affix
Commission because they said we
can govern ourselves we have
that ability.
And I think that public
confidence is.
Kind of a has kind of a contrary
opinion would you say
Mr speaker emitted from Santa
Fe.
Lady from Bernalillo Mr speaker
at yes I think that the public
has a very high bar for ethical
behavior.
Mr speaker and let it from Santa
Fe
One of those.
Quotes I just wrote down is
because of the way they are
because they are the way they
are
they were our first pass.
An anti harassment policy and in
nine years of experience here
we're always in a rush we're
always making improvements we
come back we look at something
we say you know this is an
unintended consequence we didn't
deliberately try to put one
party.
Unable flirting with another
party.
When that's not the case during
other times of the year would
that be correct Mr speaker lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo I I was just looking
at when the statute was enacted
and it was actually nineteen
ninety three.
Mr speaker and leader from Santa
Fe that was actually before my
time.
But I remember when we did the
policy change and that predated
the ethics commission adoption.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's correct.
So Mister speaker and lady from
Santa Fe I think we're hearing a
lot of
Kind of
Angst about saying well we can
certainly govern ourselves we
don't need to make any more
public disclosures and we don't
need to change anything this is
just fine the way it is what we
have here first of all we have
people on unable citing.
And we have essentially a gag
rule for one of the parties.
And then.
It's not a consistent policy
because it depends on when the
alleged incident occurred
whether we're in session or not
in session if there's not
something that doesn't call for
a change I don't know like this
if this doesn't call for a
change I don't know what does
and I think this is carefully
thought out and it's fair and
let me just say just in closing
Mr speaker lady from Santa Fe I
have served on an interim thanks
committee before
with my former colleague
colleagues limiting of with
Representative Torren G. Lewis
with representatives that coke
and I'll tell you we
Our enquiries were very very non
partisan and swiftly dealt with
and bogus complaints just left
so Mr speaker I move from Santa
Fe I think are really endorsed
this change it's fair it's
absolutely what we need to do is
honestly the least we can do
right now on this policy thank
you Mr speaker thank you lady
from Santa Fe there's further
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan thank
you
Mr speaker is the as a
gentlelady as a new member of
this body can you walk me
through how long it would take
for an ethics charge go through
the process be it in from or
while we're in session.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan there is no timeline in
our current process specified.
And I'm Mr speaker speaker and
and gentle lady I'm just
wondering why there is a time
line because people have a in
the laws I understand I'm not a
lawyer either they have a right
to as our charge to get through
that and I'm just wondering why
there isn't something like that
in in this.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
that's a great question and I I
think it's certainly something
that that.
As the lady from Bernalillo
mentioned this is been a work in
progress at least since nineteen
ninety three that we know of and
we have updated the interim
legislative ethics process of
various policies that that
process is there to enforce we
have updated the Committee
process that would occur during
the session multiple times over
the years so I I I'm afraid I
don't have a good answer to your
question I'm not sure why.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so that time during
this process then could I if if
I were the one that had the
complaint could I'd then go to
if it was illegal but I go to
the police department and and
file a charge against someone.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
from San Juan.
I think it's unclear if you've
become begun this complaint
process
however I would hate to imagine
that someone feel constrained
from going to the police if they
felt that they had been a victim
of a crime.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
In the and following that same
vein of thinking then could I
also get me an attorney and file
a lawsuit against the
individual.
Mr speaker at gentleman would
you repeat that question I'm
sorry thank you Mr yes gentle
lady I ask it any time during
this process if I thought the
process was too long taking too
long could I go get an attorney
and filed a lawsuit against
individual.
Mr speaker gentleman.
I I think I think you'd be
within your rights to do so
however you would be doing so
with the cost of hiring an
attorney and I also think that
people who are bringing come
complaints under this again
Representative a wide variety of
circumstances a wide variety of
circumstances and some of them
are not seeking
sort of a public
lawsuit or a public criminal
charge and they don't want to go
through that type of process
they just want the matter to be
addressed by the interim
legislative ethics committee.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
There is for the visually from
earlier present Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
does my good friend from Santa
Fe yield.
I yield to my friend from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
dimly from Santa Fe I first of
the committee for bringing this
bill I think that it's been a
long time in coming
I know that it's a tough.
One the legislature has been
dealing with for quite some time
and I believe in this process
and I believe in your bill
however I have a
concern that I would like to
share with you and the rest of
this body to ask that you give
me the
The assurance I need that this
new process will help to prevent
this type of situation from ever
happening again.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
it was two sessions ago an
ethics complaint was filed
against me essentially alleging
that I was trying to sell my
So my relationships with the
spaceport and relationships that
I had developed as an aviation
and space on attorney in New
Mexico and more concerning the
not Mr speaker gentle lady the
gentleman who filed the ethics
complaint against we work for a
very well known foundation here
in New Mexico partisan
foundation and he did sign the
affidavit claiming that
everything that he had stated
against me was true when in fact
it came from a deranged
gentlemen Washington state who'd
been stalking me for over three
years.
A deranged gentlemen Mr speaker
gentle lady who had been sending
pictures of me throughout the
state two other legislators to
other lobbyists and basically.
same thing about me and my
husband that were absolutely not
true.
Saying things about me and my
husband Mr speaker gentle lady
and my husband's off from that
were not true.
And it took me is still taking
me quite some time to re have
that we have billet Tate.
Why image after having to deal
with the ethics complaint Mr
speaker gentle lady and after
that explain complaint was come
was filed during the session and
what should of a group of my
peers got together look to the
complaint decided was
indecipherable and then
dismissed it that same person Mr
speaker gentle lady went to the
ethics board after the session
and filed the same exact
complaint again verbatim.
And so my concern Mr speaker
gentle lady is with this new
policy and if we are getting rid
of the gag rule which required
probable cause what happens to
people like me.
How am I supposed to
rehabilitate my image how my
supposed to feel safe that
someone Mr speaker gentle lady
can just make up the most
outrageous of claims put it in
an ethics complaint and then.
Just let it be there forever and
and yes Mr speaker gentle lady
it is still out there it's still
on a blog is still on this
foundation's web page and yes Mr
speaker gentle lady I still am
receiving threats from this
person who I now believe I know
he's mentally ill and I have
forgiven him.
But Mr speaker gentle lady what
are we building into this new
process to protect legislators
from something like this because
of as public as public officers
people in the public eye this is
the risk that we take I
understand that Mr speaker
gentle lady I never signed up
for anything like this in my
safety is not to be I'm.
Art and with.
So I would very much appreciate
your answer.
Mr speaker and and lady from
Bernalillo thank you so much for
sharing that story first and
first of all
and I I am really sorry to hear
of that the struggle that that
has cost
this bill doesn't change that
process the person who filed the
complaint during the session in
house rules could be public
about it and that would.
Also comport with the
constitution they could file a
complaint with the ethics
commission and that would also
comply with the constitution
Did this bill just brings this
into compliance with the other
process the into
parity with the other processes
that exist
I would say that because that
person had submitted a sworn
affidavit
eight you know that they should
they could have been subject to
penalties I don't know why they
those penalties weren't pursued
on them
But I think that that's a
a really regrettable incident
gentle lady and Mr speaker and I
would also say that this bill
doesn't.
Doesn't address the entire
process because there are many
venues in which to make
complaints
regarding affix and that has
been the case for quite some
time there is a process with the
secretary of state regarding
campaign finance reporting and
campaign finance violations we
have the ethics commission we
have the house rules in order of
business committee we also have
the interim legislative ethics
process and so there are a
number of complaints of
processes and as the gentleman
from San Juan pointed out they
you know people always have the
option to go in and look for
criminal or civil complaints as
well.
Thank you Mr speaker delay and I
appreciate that answer and I I
guess I leave you with this is
the person who actually brought
the bill that prevented
those who were the victim of
sexual harassment complaints
keeping them from being forced
into nondisclosure agreements
that was me I did that I believe
in this process but I really do
believe Mr speaker gentle lady
that we can do more for this
particular situation in
elections we know that people
weaponize information.
And as in this extremely
bipartisan atmosphere Mr speaker
gentle lady I do think that we
need to build something into
this process for those that we
know who are submitting false
claims are putting the lives of
public figures in danger thank
you very much there's further
debate the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker are with
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
field yes I I yield to the lady
from Santa Fe create a thank you
gentle lady I really appreciate
that we're looking at reforming
their ethics codes and and it
really addressing how we're
going to do that I think I just
have a simple question because I
wasn't in any of the committees
and I'm reading the fiscal
impact so thank you for not have
I'm glad it didn't have any
fiscal
he's attached to it
Mr speaker gentle lady but under
significant issues it says
existing laws governing
complaints filed with the
interim legislative ethics
committee requires that the
complaint and.
The committee and its staff
maintain confidentiality of any
information.
So I guess I'm just reaffirming
that during the investigative
process all confidentiality
remains in tact generally Mr
speaker and gentle lady are what
this bill would
continue to do that with this
law would continue to stay is
that the committee and its staff
shall not publicly disclose any
information relating to a
complaint.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generated but then both respond
to a complaint complaint may
disclose information Mr speaker
gentle lady is that correct Mr
speaker my friend from Santa Fe
that's correct thank you I
really appreciate it as a as a
as I approach this and and I'm
learning about this and what
this bill does a from an HR
perspective and having conducted
person investigations and and.
I see that there's there's a
just line item and this this
contest corresponds to the
process that I've of by did by
but I would always ask that all
confidentiality remain in taxes
during an investigation there's
a chance for a resolution and
insert Mr speaker speaker gentle
lady would you be asking to.
That of the complaint and
respondent as well Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
the complainant and the
respondent under this
legislation would both be able
to speak about the complaint.
Understood thank you Mr speaker
and thank you generated I
appreciate the answer.
So right now under our current
code.
Only the.
A complaint is allowed to
release information is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
actually it's the reverse so
under the current law only the
respondent may speak about the
complaint.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle at I
think this creates a base of
unfairness I think that this
this is
this is a fair process and my
last question would well I think
this is this is okay I have some
other questions but.
As far as where you're trying to
take those and and develop new
ethics code and our
responsibility in that matter I
appreciate what you're trying to
do here thank you Mr speaker
thank you gently there is it
over for early or percent of the
cruise.
Thank you Mr chairman the
gentleman yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Mr chairman gentle lady the fear
that I have a is based on some
experience I had at early county
is a county commissioner in my
second year as a county
commissioner we passed a very
aggressive transparent portal
and investigation process where
anyone could launch a complaint
against a county commissioner
and mandatorily had to be
investigated by a law firm and
consequently Mr chairman and
cost tremendous amount of money
the county in fact the sponsor
of the bill.
I had to it wasn't called the
bill of the ordinance that she
recalled it we voted to take it
down because it was become
solely Spence seven there were
so many frivolous complaints and
in this scenario while I
understand it is different Mr
chairman at the same time I fear
that.
As of.
Center how can we heal noted
that completes could be
weaponized in you know we're we
are volunteer legislators we're
here because we genuinely want
to serve the public Mr chairman
and I would hate to see
frivolous complaints or a
complaint that had no merit make
it to the side that then when
you're running for re election
somebody uses against you
because they weaponize it and so
I urge caution and I urge Mr
chairman that we really think
about what we're doing because a
little experience that I had it
was a terrible injustice to a
lot of commissioners I think I
was investigate like three times
there was no merit to it thank
you Mr chairman.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and he
noted a representative tells
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentlelady yields.
I yield to my friend from Eddie.
Thank you gentle lady I have
the.
Listened with.
a lot of interest to the debate
tonight and also the Bridger
bill and I.
I believe what we're doing.
Is problematic and let me tell
you one.
I think the person that is being
accused.
And the person.
That felt compelled.
to press.
The issue.
Are going to wind up whether
they like it or not being tried
by public opinion in the
Albuquerque journal or the Santa
Fe New Mexican or or whatever
other paper wants to report on
that.
And that is really troubling to
me because it could be in the
person in this chamber and
certainly in the person well in
person in the building.
And I I think we
I think we ought to take some.
We are step back the I would be
the first person to say that I
have been.
Sadly.
And and and quite frankly
Disappointed.
In our ethics commission.
I think it has been horribly
wrong.
Four billion fair.
And and I can give you a number
of instances I think back to
a representative from Santa Fe.
Who had a charge levied against
thing.
Publicized crucified.
Almost lost his job.
And nothing was ever.
an affidavit was never filed we
allow that to occur.
More recently.
We've had.
Of.
Charges where things have been
leaked.
Which was against the law
against our ethics commission
and there wasn't a darn thing
done.
Again.
It has been I hate to use the
word weaponize but I mean I
think I think in the last
election cycle and the lady had
charges against her.
Drag out for months.
I think a few days after the
election I got settled Pam went
away.
And I just I think.
I think it's out of control I
when I look at.
I see things come true that says
it's against the law for us to
use our stationary.
That's ridiculous we're left to
the professionals that's what we
do is represent our
constituents.
so.
The flip side of that is I think
we ought to hold ourselves to
high high high standards I think
when someone steps out of line
well a bitter family out here
and start over.
But that's not going to happen
and I don't think.
I really am concerned that
what's going to happen as both
parties are going to be tried
publicly.
And we're gonna take the system
so much that neither party will
get justice and it will be
unfair to everyone so.
There were no question in that.
I appreciate the the the time Mr
speaker gentle lady I know what
you're trying to do but I have
great reservations thank you
there is religion lady from
Santa Fe Representative role
metal thank you Mr speaker does
the gentle lady my neighbor
yield I yield to the lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you generally do I've had
the great honor and privilege of
serving as our house rules in
order of Business chair for my
second time and let me tell you
body.
I did not know necessarily what
this role would be like coming
into it just last year and I had
a great mentor I think we've
mentioned to him Representative
Daymon Ely who was my
predecessor in this role as the
chair of rules we take these in
these complaints forward session
and let me tell you body the
complaints that you've heard on
this floor some that have never
been disclosed to the public or
because we handle these
privately we handle these as as
the chamber as the committee of
rules in order the of business
we look at these complaints and
we evaluate them for their merit
we appoint a committee and we
have them look at them while
we're in session to ensure that
if they are of more we move
forward and we figure that out
while we're in session and we
look to the interim to to to see
how these play out we try to get
it done as quickly as possible
so what we've heard today is
some of this concern about the
expediency of evaluating some of
these claims and we as members
of this body want to ensure that
we look very thoroughly into
this objectively it's a
bipartisan group of people who
are looking at these claims and
making decisions and moving
forward on on those merits
Mr speaker gentle lady this
piece of legislation is it
trying to unpack the entire
ethics commission we've sort of
piecemeal that one fact we just
passed a bill on you know look
using our letter had properly Mr
speaker generally this bill is
about this one sided gag order
that we have for members of the
public moving forward and what
we've done unfortunately that
we've learned is that Mr speaker
gentle lady we impose just a gag
order a mandatory silence upon
victims of those who are
bringing forth claims can and
they cannot speak in the public
about these claims Mr speaker
gentle lady is that.
Very clearly is that what I
understand this to be about can
you please clarify that Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady the this
bill is only addressing that
specific mandatory silence in
removing that we are not seeking
to reform the entire process
with this bill it is just that
one piece.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
in you know as we look at all of
the potential for reforming
doing better as a legislative
body ensuring that we have
accountability.
We want to be in line with the
in this process City of having
our constitutional rights
embedded into what we're
allowing for the public to
participate in and for me Mr
speaker gentle lady if there's
ever a fear that somebody could
come forward with something and
not speak their truth and not be
able to move forward with that
claim with the for the full sort
of breath of the constitution
backing them and being able to
speak their truth Mr speaker
gentle lady my concern is is
being able to to uphold that and
if we don't do this we are out
of that line
and so Mister speaker gentle
lady I I thank you for you know
bringing this forward and for
protecting members of the public
who we engage with every single
day in these chambers now very
openly with you know the
opportunity to to see everyone
and and invite them in we want
them to feel safe and they we
want them to make sure that they
know that we have their back
when it comes to the rules that
we put in place should there be
any sense of of conflict there
Mr speaker gentle lady so I just
want to go back to the purpose
and I really just I'm grateful
for you clarifying why we're
putting this one piece together
to be able to ensure that those
who can come forward can speak
their truth thank you Mr speaker
this was the gentleman from
capturing grant to the local
representative Dennis us thank
you Mr speaker will generally
from Santa Fe please yield I
yield to the gentleman from
catcher grant and Hidalgo thank
you Mr speaker generally listen
I I I know this is been proprie
being than what you thought you
you dissipated and and I've been
listening here and and I just
might my sense of what I'm
getting is a I think you're
trying to do the right thing
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
what what I'm hearing here is
people have a little bit of
worry.
If you're falsely accused of
something and how that could be
used weaponized or whatever and
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
wanted to clarify for myself
is there any sort of.
Of.
Damages or or or any sort of
holding that person responsible
of if they falsely accuse can
you can you sort that out for me
please similarly generally
please.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that question
under this under this process
which is governed by six pages a
policy that the members will
provide in their handbook that
is in addition to the statute
that you have before you six
pages a policy when a person
goes when a complainant and
respondent go through that
process if the complainant
you know committed perjury in
that sworn affidavit that would
be a punishable offense
however you know I would
contrast that with if a person
sent a mailer in a mailbox that
that wasn't necessarily true of
a person went to the media with
something that wasn't true there
would be no process and so this
is about the integrity of the
process and fairness embedded
within that process that we as a
body have chosen to create.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I I
understand and I think my my big
of and I'm just like again I'm
just sorting this out and trying
to get get a good hold of this I
think it's very important
amendment the size as it's very
important that if there is
any sort of sexual harassment or
things outside of that that are
that are over the top and and
you can describe over the top
for yourself I'm not here to
describe that for you Mr speaker
gentle lady I think it should go
honestly should go beyond just
turning into the effects of
commission and filing a
complaint it should go further
than that it should be
possibly criminally or
maybe even a loss of a personal
lawsuit in my opinion
generally of Mr speaker
generally the only thing that I
worry about is sometimes if
there is not enough recourse on
that person that will let me go
back one question Mr speaker
generally are they all is every
person required to sign an
affidavit of when the file a
complaint and every witness and
anyone that has testimony Mister
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker at gentleman
gentleman yes.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
all of these individuals have
signed an affidavit of affidavit
of the system go back in the
last ten years they're required
to sign one.
In that way it's it's is an
affidavit sworn under perjury
they could be charged.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes Mr
speaker gentle lady and can you
just describe to me what that
punishment would be.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
it's both the state and a
federal felony so would depend
on the charges being brought.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
expand on that I mean is it is
it a is it a is it a financial
fine or is it.
Further than that.
Course to serve time in jail Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman a
felony is punishable by more
than one year in prison but it
would depend on what the judge
sentenced person to.
Thank you Mr speaker the only my
only reason for saying that is
this and I'm gonna leave with
this I really appreciate what
you're trying to do
and that helps me understand if
it if they are required to sign
an affidavit helps me understand
this the only thing I'm gonna
say is sometimes
My grandmother told me this
remember what you say Mr speaker
gentle lady if you don't know if
it's true don't spread it
because it's like glitter turn
it up in the air.
And then trying to recover all
the glitter the throughout is
almost impossible is impossible
not almost it's impossible and
can hurt someone tremendously
and so I appreciate you
answering my questions Mr
speaker gentle lady.
There is really from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
general
I yield to the lady from
Bernalillo thank you so
essentially Mr speaker and
gentle lady what this does is
level the playing field so that
the complainant and the accused
have the same rights.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
pretty much the extent of.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
and and I'm sure you don't know
the answer to this because I
don't even know the answer to
this but Mr speaker and gentle
lady I have been accused of
being a paddle file on social
media on multiple mailers on
blogs and I'm not there there's
never not that's not a thing but
so my point is that anyone can
say anything about us at any
time and then having the
complainant be silenced is it it
feels to me once again like
women are the lesser than I mean
and I know there cases where
things go the other way but in
general when I was talking about
affirmative consent on the on
the floor a few weeks after last
week whenever.
I found out the night before
that five of my six sisters I
knew had been sexually assaulted
I don't know about the other one
so it's not like it doesn't
happen to us it's not like it
took me forty years to talk
about my own sexual assault and
being in this body is what
finally gave me the courage to
do that and so all this we know
what if there's a false.
I don't know the statistics but
I do now but sexual assault
including mine go unreported
because women are felt to be
because we've been blamed for so
long we've been blamed for what
we where we've been blamed for
walking alone at night we've
been blamed for what you know
doing something at work flirting
with someone and so this makes
me really angry that we are that
and I will say at least with
what I it's only men who have
been in in opposition of this
and that worries me if you don't
do something you can be accused
if you do do something we want
to know that so Mr speaker and
gentle lady thank you for
bringing this this is this is
really important and it's one
tiny little change to level the
playing field thank you Mr
speaker there's a gentleman from
millions of under percent of
Kate's.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
does the gentle person from
Santa Fe of I yield to the lady
from Bernalillo Sandoval thank
you.
I wanted to read.
The difference between ethical
legality ethical standards are
based on human rights and wrongs
while legal standards are based
strictly on what is written in
the law.
Mr speaker a gentle person from
Santa Fe this is an ethics bill
correct.
Mr speaker and and lady from San
Santa yes.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentle lady from Santa it
says in our analysis that the
current statutes as written is
presumptively invalid and
unconstitutional because it is
one sided gag order preventing
the complaint and from speaking.
So we have already been advised
that our current statutes.
Is illegal.
Mr speaker gentle person from
Santa I have had a career in
public service as all of us have
here and it is uncomfortable.
I have gone through many
clearances.
It is very uncomfortable to have
to be completely transparent but
that is what is required by
public trust that is what we
signed up for.
And I think that this thanks
bill will actually protect
myself for my false accusations
for I want to make sure that I
am thoroughly and publicly
being able to go through that
process so that I will be able
to prove my innocence the the
secrets and
the lack of information to the
public is what causes in
security in is what
the roads are trust with the
public thank you very much Mr
speaker and and gentle person
from Santa Fe there's a division
leader from Santa Fe
representatives of local.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
I yield to the lady from Santa
Fe thank you Mr speaker and
thank you Representative for
bringing for this bill I wanted
to ask about one of the things
you said early in your when when
you're presenting this specific
bill I know a lot of other
concerns are brought up with the
ethics process and how we go
forward with that but in this
particular bill one thing you
mentioned is that it makes it
difficult for individuals to
talk to their friends about the
process is that is that together
quickly Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes and so it is it is it
illegal for them to Mr speaker
gentle it is illegal for them to
speak about it or just difficult
just so I understand.
Mr speaker and lady from Santa
Fe under current law they cannot
disclose any information about
the complaint and that would
include their personal circle
their mom you know and and they
have to make those difficult
decisions about whether they are
violating this law in getting
some personal support Mr speaker
gentle lady that that breaks my
heart because the thing that
these people are often bringing
four I can't say for every case
again there's a lot that's been
brought up that we can look at
in the in terms of maybe we
should discuss for further
legislation but on this
particular bill you're asking
people that have brought forth a
complaint whose names might be
out there who are unable to talk
about anything with their
families and this may correct me
gentle lady from wrong again I
haven't been in these
conversations as adept as you
have Mr speaker apart from wrong
but again this could affect
their careers this could affect
their marital status the case
could affect how even their
children are treated at school
is is that also included in this
in that sense.
Mr speaker gentle lady
absolutely yes so thank you Mr
speaker so in some ways and in
many ways an individual has more
ability to speak out publicly if
they don't actually bring
forward a complaint through this
process is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady yes they would not
be subject to this gag order if
they brought their complaint
forward in some other way Mr
speaker generally that I think
this bill is just incredibly
important before the
transparency in going about a
process that doesn't further
drag people's names to the money
it doesn't further along in this
process is but gets to the heart
of it and as we've heard from
some of the commenters that have
participated in these at the
goal process these they sort
they really dig in and
understand this better so I
appreciate that only bring this
forward and for being giving
this clarifying answers thank
you.
There's a gentleman from the
universe in a small thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe you I
yield to the gentleman from
Diana thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady I have just a
very brief sort of a quick
couple questions it's been a
great conversation tonight Mr
speaker gentle lady
I think we can all agree that we
want this legislature to be open
welcoming body for New Mexicans
were folks are welcome to come
they feel welcome they feel
protected would you agree Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman yes and in fact I
think we can all agree Mr
speaker gentle lady that making
sure regardless of who you are
regardless of what age you are
that you can come in here and be
protected thank god for bid Mr
speaker gentle lady some
negative action happens in here
again soon that Mr speaker
gentle lady you're not isolated
that you actually can seek
recourse you can go to your
network your family your friends
you can.
Maintain that autonomy the thing
Mr speaker gentle lady that that
would help make folks feel
welcome here feel protected and
feel like they can be part of
public policy in New Mexico Mr
speaker and gentleman yes Mr
speaker gentle lady I think
we've heard tonight that is
really the opposite economic and
in fact is true Mr speaker
gentle lady do you think that
there are New Mexicans right now
that if we don't pass this might
think twice about coming into
this building to participate in
the building a great New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman is
sadly yes because I think this
policy continuing to remain one
sided sends the wrong message to
New Mexicans about how we want
to welcome them into this into
this chamber into this body
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that's so important
to me and that really tells me
that I'm excited to vote for
this this evening thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady.
Senior for the debate gentle
lady to close.
Mr speaker I first want to thank
the body for this very robust
debate on my first bill
and I at I I want to ask the
body and the members to really
move towards fairness.
this bill doesn't fix everything
this bill does not
change the overall legislative
ethics process it does not
introduce new elements into the
interim legislative ethics
committee
Mr speaker but what this bill
does is it it makes the process
fair and it makes it fair for
both parties Mr speaker and body
there are a number of ways that
the public can file or bring
forward into the public
complaints allegations and other
things against members and we
can't control all of those we
can't control the public but
what we can do is make sure that
our interim legislative ethics
committee process is fair and
that it matches the process of
our standing house rules in
order of business committee and
that it matches the ethics
commission process Mr speaker
and we can also understand that.
Unreported sexual assault and I
think sexual harassment would be
even higher is at seventy
percent of sexual assaults don't
go reported I'm sure that the
members for sexual harassment
would be even higher so I think
we have to keep in mind the
fairness that we need to extend
to the members of the public.
As they confront the high bar to
bring complaints in this process
and know that if they're doing
so that they are hopefully
seeking justice and fairness in
the same way that we're seeking
justice and fairness for them.
So with that Mr speaker I now
move that house bill one sixty
nine do now pass final passage
of house bill was sixty nine the
vote is now open.
Close.
Who is a close member of thirty
nine in the affirmative twenty
eight in the negative house bill
one sixty nine has duly passed
this house.
Congratulations gentlelady on
your first bill.
Round of applause is in order
for this bill and we will not
make you sing.
I promise only we're gonna make
the leader of the minority
leader saying is there.
Appointed personal preparation
appropriation traditions clap
for the first bill even if you
didn't like it so will increase
timely and rewarding lady for
her first spell.
The generals on want to sing.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana
ready on item number eleven.
Yes Mr speaker we do get to that
point at the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill ninety three
as amended on final passage has
been taking it is now subject to
amendment debate for
substitution digitally to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker first
I'd like to introduce an
amendment to clarify the
pharmacist prescribing
protocols.
And it is point two two five
zero nine six point two.
The lady can you read the number
again please yes Mr speaker is
point two two five zero nine six
point two it is being passed out
cool way to make sure everybody
has it.
It is making its way down the
hall.
We'll also make sure it's on the
website.
It's already on the website.
The lady will live in a minute
to be passed out when you move
it formally.
I'm sorry Mr speaker you want me
to go and explain it move the
amendment.
Mr speaker I move do pass on the
amendment no no we're gonna move
house amendment number one to
house bill ninety three as
amended.
So that we can debate.
Mr speaker whose house
Floor amendment number one House
Bill.
To house bill ninety three as
amended.
Thank you.
As amended and passed out on the
floor.
Gentlelady to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker the
amendment removes the
requirement for approval by the
nursing board we did consult
with the representatives for the
nurses about removing this
provision.
And what it does is it cleans up
the process for approving
pharmacists prescribing
authority to require approval a
pharmacist prescribing protocols
by the New Mexico Medical Board
and the amendment removes the
requirement for the nursing
board approval to streamline the
process and the amendment should
cut the time for approvals from
close to a year or even longer
to about a third.
And pharmacists can prescribe
for public health conditions
through protocols approved by
the New Mexico Medical Board and
The New Mexico medical board of
pharmacy.
There debate on the amendment.
Is your projection to adopting
the amendment.
I see none house floor amendment
number one to house bill ninety
three as amended has been
adopted.
Thank you Mr there is debate on
the amended bill the gentleman
from Chavis and enough title
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady of.
Yes I will yield to the
gentleman.
Gentlelady gentleman in
In terms of health care.
Provided to New Mexicans what
difference will this bill make.
Mr speaker and gentleman it will
just mean that
We in the bill we also add and
increases the quality allowance
quantity allowance I'm sorry for
emergency dispensing from
seventy two hours to thirty day
supply and this will help
patients avoid interruption in
prescribed therapy while refill
authorization or new
prescription is obtained.
Mr speaker and gentle lady with
respect to rural New Mexico what
benefit will it.
Will it have Mr speaker and
gentleman it will make it so
that people who have to travel
to their pharmacists you know or
to get their drugs
prescription filled that they
won't have to go of four you
know just like get their
prescription their emergency
prescription and then have to go
back two days later to get it
refilled again it'll make it so
that they can get a longer
period of until there you know
like if they have from express
scripts or something
Made it so that they don't have
to do that or wait for it and
have a lapse in their
prescription.
Big Mr speaker and gentle lady
will it have anything other to
do with the pharmacists ability
to.
Prescribe or to recommend drugs
a drug.
Mr speaker and gentleman
no it just removes unnecessary
reporting choir requirements for
non resident pharmacies and it
has other provisions
It it kind of streamline state
haven't done this for a long
time so this helps to streamline
a lot of the different protocols
so that they can give better
care to their patients.
Speaker and gentle lady I just
the was informed that that part
was taken out
been amendment early on and so I
appreciate the bill and you
bring it forward thank you thank
you don't there's a full debate
the gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill ninety three as
twice amended do now pass final
passage for house bill ninety
three just twice amended the
vote is now.
Open.
Excuse.
Two hundred push a button.
What's what's close.
What is a close level sixteen
informative zero negative house
bill ninety three as far as
amended has duly passed this
house is generated from
Bernalillo committee on item.
The number of.
Ten.
Yes I am please take me to that
point Mr speaker the record
reflect that elections are for
placing House was seventy nine
on final passage has been taken
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill
thank you very much Mr speaker
so house bill seventy nine
basically means that for title
insurance and other insurance
matters the hearing that must be
held every other year gets
pushed off to every three years
because such hearings are
expensive time consumptive and
just generally not that much fun
with that all rest and take some
questions.
C. innovation leader because.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
the house bill seventy nine do
now pass.
Passage of house bill seventy
nine the vote is now open.
Hi how.
Representative.
Yeah is is what's about to
close.
What is a close my vote of
sixteen in the affirmative
during the negative house bill
seventy nine as we passes house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker and now being eleven
fifty nine AM EST move we
adjourn until twelve or one PM
the house will come to order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended in a journal so all
those present in this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session if there's
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approve subject
to revision and approval of the
rules in order of business
committee.
There's an addition it is so
ordered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker is now being.
Mr speaker I move out of the
business announcements and
miscellaneous business in
objection it is so ordered are
there on nose men's the
gentleman from.
Santa is Santa Fe receptive
McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee will
meet tomorrow morning at eight
thirty.
Please our agenda is changing we
will roll house bill ninety one
the yes resources trustee in
house bill two four three the
grid modernization act but we
will add house bill ninety five
which referred before the State
Land Office act and we also hear
house bill four one two the
electric vehicle tax credit
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen in in in in
consultation with the sponsors
of house bill ninety five as
well as a majority and minority
we've agreed to send it back to
committee to be subbed out and
then brought back to the floor
and that's a bill that will be
taken up tomorrow
By by the chairman
so house bill ninety five will
be referred back to House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee us so that they can
work on that substitutes that
we're gonna take up on the floor
tonight.
The generated from any of us St
fade how this.
In Santa thank you Mr speaker
here or agricultural seconds and
water resources committee will
meet tomorrow morning at eight
thirty in room three fifteen
members take note.
One of the gentle lady from
thousands of artists thank you
Mr speaker your house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee is
meeting in room three oh nine
tomorrow at nine and we've got
one bill House memorial forty
one members signaled delayed
familia thank you Mr speaker
your house consumer and public
affairs committee will meet
tomorrow afternoon at one thirty
in room three seventeen members
take note.
Members of an announcement house
bill one sixteen sponsored by
representatives Debra M.
Sariñana and Allen Martinez it
does not have any fiscal impact
it is a bill relating to
military affairs and authorizing
the edge adjusting to general
deployed active duty members of
the New Mexico National Guard
asset employees it does not have
an appropriation it is not have
a fiscal impact at the request
of the sponsors as well as the
chair of the house
appropriations and finance
committee it is been requested
that we remove the house
appropriations and finance
committee referral I've
consulted with the majority and
the minority leadership and we
all agree that that is the
proper course of action so
house bill one sixteen the house
appropriations and finance
committee referral has been
dropped.
Any other announcements.
Folks we will reconvene.
On the floor tomorrow morning at
eleven.
and it is active.
Fest tomorrow.
thank you by the way.
Thank you to the good folks from
access for pointing out that
tomorrow is access and the very
respectfully requested that we
not have an evening session
tomorrow so that members and
staff can enjoy time access and
we will honor that so we will
only have one session tomorrow
on the floor it'll be in the
morning it will be taking up
House Bill to.
House Bill.
Two zero five the meat
inspection act so be ready will
serve to one eleven on the
floor.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move house stand
recessed eleven AM on Thursday
the house or Senate races until
eleven AM tomorrow morning.
Thank you.
If
you.
This is
all of the the.
Right
is right.
The first
is.
Thank.
I see with my.
San.
Thirteen.
So we so personal.
Still.
We also.
Of the whole but it's a.
The space.
The motivation.
The motivation is.
This was
the
division's.
The bill is.
For you Representative.
Okay.
This.
Okay.
So.
There's.
This.
Thank you to be one.
Thanks for your drug.
If you meant to
in order to in order to get
more.
Together to get a.
Because if you refuse.
The process.
Well for one hundred four looks
sort of the work.
You don't need to.
The person.
Six eight.
The law enforcement affidavit
from the impairment observed is
consistent with.
Representative
is getting.
So if you do that in New Mexico
for.
To get.
Right what is.
Percent.
Thanks for the.
Really.
For something.
