Close we have a quorum.
Members please rise for today's
implications.
Courtesy of his Excellency
archbishop John C. Wester.
This pray.
Gracious and loving god father
of us all we give you thanks and
praise at the beginning of the
state confident that you've
called us once again to new life
in New.
Our praise that's nothing to
your greatness but makes us grow
in your love in for this we're
deeply and humbly grateful.
Conscious that in you lord we
live and move and have our being
we asked it to look favorably
upon us the state and the to
bless this house of
representatives as once again it
takes up its burden of
responsibility in serving the
public good and preserving the
good order in our state of New
Mexico.
Guider legislators minds that
they may perceive clearly
solutions to seemingly
intractable problems.
Are there speech that they may
reflect the truth revealed in
your holy will.
And touch their hearts that they
may show compassion and respect
to one another and to those they
have been elected to serve.
In all things may they be
faithful witnesses to your love.
Broken and struggling world.
Father in heaven conscious of
our profound need for your grace
and love help these honorable
women and men to rise above any
differences they may have had to
fashion sound legislation that
will promote the well being of
all.
Give them the fulfillment of
their aspirations the joy of
unselfish public service and the
piece of knowing that they have
been true to their beliefs.
They be faithful to our state's
constitution to give witness in
word and deed to the principles
upon which it is based.
Help us lift up our hearts to
you now we ask that you extend
your arms a benediction over
this assembly and support them
all the day through.
They always do justice love
kindness and walk humbly with
your god a man.
Now for the pledge of
allegiance.
I repeat Representative Joseph
sensuous.
In the school to New Mexico flag
courtesy of Representative Lord.
The flag in the state of New
Mexico disease symbol of perfect
friendship among United
cultures.
Able
to delayed from earlier.
Good morning Mr speaker I move
that we go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business to no
objection is so ordered members
good morning before they walk
off the rostrum I did want to
welcome and thank his Excellency
archbishop John C. Wester for
today's invocation she is joined
by the most Reverend about the
candle shop of the diocese of
Las Cruces and Mr Allen Sanchez
executive director for the New
Mexico conference of Catholic
bishops the most Reverend James
as well bishop of the diocese of
Gallup wasn't able to join us
this morning but sends his
regards.
Members we we've got
announcements we've got a nose
for their
just a quick run of show today
we're going to do some
announcements in some
recognitions and acknowledgments
and then we're going to move
forward with some introduction
of legislation and then we're
gonna break for the day so that
committees can get to work
throughout the rest of the day.
having said all that.
Announcement from the gentle
lady from the U. in Torrance
Representative Lord thank you Mr
speaker so on your desk you will
have this great box a little
goodies inside and I want to
especially thank these wonderful
people from lonely Marie's
coffee shop from delights from
the vine and the bank accounts
are all located in Albuquerque
and I'm really looking forward
to the pumpkin seeds with green
chili on them so thing I want to
thank them very much.
Thank you gentle lady.
For their nonsense.
The gentleman from.
Settling in New Orleans
representative Garcia thank you
Mr speaker I like the the for
members to welcome my guest in
mind shattered today Mister
Jones of general committee thank
you.
Thank you John.
The gentleman.
From.
Similar McKinley Sokoto San Juan
and finance yes.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr speaker
I'm sorry I would like to do
some ladies are in the rostrum
and on the top of the gallery
the the ladies are
Representative New Mexico
federation of democratic women
and today is women improved a
and on the capital Seoul first
of all I would like to start by
introducing.
Very Michael federation state
president and city councilor on
the City of rants New Mexico.
More.
Number two remote learning the.
down on a county president.
The.
Some you get County president.
Us so soon we will be with you.
President of the first.
Tribal federation in the nation
and and I.
Have a did you move.
Santa Fe County president.
San Juan County.
No one County.
And lesion Julie.
It goes from Santa Fe County.
Mr speaker of the hopeful
Representative please give these
ladies are on the will pause you
know they're all about
democratic women and supporting
Democrats and it's very
important to everybody here
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen welcome
welcome to the house of
representatives.
For now Spence Jan lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Travis.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial three.
From the speakers table and
being made the next order of
business.
House memorial three seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker would you get me to
that point that the record
reflect that election assessor
for placing House memorial on
final passage has been taken in
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the more
Mr speaker this memorial.
declares that January twenty
seventh two thousand twenty
three B. New Mexico nurses stay
in the house of representatives
we all know the important role
that nurses play in keeping us
and our families healthy and
well and we also know that they
were under tremendous pressure
during the COVID.
With this memorial I want us to
honor their work and
recognize that their importance
in New Mexico.
lady we're gonna have the clerk
read the title the memorial and
then we'll go to any debate that
might be applicable.
To read.
House memorial three introduced
by Representative Chavez a
memorial declaring January
twenty seventh two thousand
twenty three New Mexico nurses
stay in the house of
representatives House memorial
three introduced by
Representative Chavis.
The moral.
The gentle lady from.
It's amazing counties including
catcher instead of support of an
answer Representative Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker will the
kind lady yield I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to rise and support of
this memorial I have a sister
that's a nurse that saved.
My I feel like so you have saved
quite children's life several
times and my own my mom my dad
and many countless people in New
Mexico and I just want to to say
how much I appreciate nurses and
any of the medical of people in
New Mexico but especially nurses
they have a really near and dear
place to my heart so I rise and
support thank you Mr speaker.
Ingenuity the gentleman from.
San Juan Representative lane
thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan thank you Mr speaker Mr
speaker I also rise and support
of this but I want to turn the
body's attention we have a
career nurse amongst our own
body this year one of our lovely
new members Representative
Jennifer Jones and so I think
it's appropriate for us to give
her yes thank you.
We appreciate her all the nurses
across our lovely state the new
road where work day in and day
out so thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell Mr speaker
thank you very much for the
gentle lady please Mr speaker I
will yield to the gentle lady
from Travis county I to stand in
strong support of the these
nurses go above and beyond
anything that we could hope for
I also want to the body to
recognize my niece Cheyenne
Spence who in December I got to
attend her graduation from New
Mexico State University she was
a crimson scholar and she earned
her master's degree in nursing
okay so Mister speaker thank you
very much.
Thank you gentle lady.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker does the gentle lady
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
county I will be brief my mother
was a nurse for forever and she
always said nurses are the best
people and and I think that's
probably true with some of the
folks included and generally
they know more than the doctors
know.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
speaker.
Thank you for the debate the
gentleman from current about the
with the low pay Roosevelt and
CENIC in Representative Zamora.
Thank you Mr speaker I stand in
support of this memorial.
And as many of you know I have
two daughters that are
registered nurses the the eldest
daughter has a is moving up in
her nursing career and has in
listed to be a nurse
practitioner is our next step in
her in her career and I saw both
of those girls work through the
pandemic and all the issues that
they faced and we deserve.
We as a body shop to give the
nurses a big salute.
They deserve it they went
through a hard time and and
never gave up.
To service our people in their
and their patients thank you to
all the nurses across the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you gentlemen.
Thanks for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield Mister speaker
I yield Mr speaker I my wife is
a nurse into my four daughters
are nurses and they worked on
the COVID floor want to work in
the E. R. and and the they told
me stories that I wish they had
of told me so my I support this
memorial with but every fiber in
my being thank you for what
nurses do.
Thank you gentlemen.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
settlement can support us on one
and elicit representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker for the
gentle lady please yield Mister
speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from all those
counties.
Of thank you gentle lady image
transport of this memorial I
have a daughter that's in our
in.
She been are in for twelve years
now.
It is very very important we
support all our medical people
in the medical field years are
over big part of what we need to
do.
And I strained Center strong
support of this memorial thank
you for you eight thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
There's further debate the
gentleman from catching granting
the Representative Terrazas
thank you Mr speaker will
generally please yield Mister
speaker I will yield thank you
only for bring this beautiful
provided shin as a fuel director
we work with nurses every day in
our in my profession and we're
I'm blessed to have in my
district a the nurses college
and so the they're they're
helping these nurses get out out
into our hospitals and so forth
and I hope we can we are still
needing more nurses in our state
and I hope we can retain him and
and gain more we appreciate
every nurse for everything they
do for us thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentleman
from Chavis eighty in a dental
representative Townsend thank
you Mr the girl gentlelady
yields Mr speaker I will yield
to the gentleman from all those
counties thank you gentle lady
for bringing this forward
It is amazing to listen to the
body and see how many men and
women representatives here today
have nurses in their family
lives and in my case the
daughter of.
Had spent much of her career and
critical care and emergency room
nursing and is now teaching
nursing and
and teaching other nurses within
the hospital and it is really
important that we support so
thank you very much.
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentleman
from Colfax County hunting quase
sent me in and you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker will delay
yield Mister speaker I will
yield to the gentleman from all
those counties.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
each one of us in this room a
great debt to the nurses in our
state there's not one of us we
were probably spent on the
bottom when we got here.
By an order of so throughout the
years and throughout the various
different the helps prices that
come the nurses are the ones
that come in they've got the
hard for the people in the hard
to take care and and so we
appreciate them and I stand in
full support of this memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen seeing no further
debate the generated close thank
you Mr speaker I also wanted to
let the body know that my son
just graduated from UNM and he
is now a licensed are and.
Been synced.
January twenty seven businesses
day there will be many many
nurses here on that day to speak
to you to talk to you about
their work life on and I hope
that you all welcome them.
I now move that house memorial
three do now pass.
And I
okay right now pass us with the
unanimous consent of the house
that the record show that the
rule has been called and that
all members present voted in the
affirmative there's an emotion
show all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered.
Thank you Julie.
Instant replay is there we go
got seventy deserve
congratulations gentlelady
inferno Spence.
Speaker of the the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Sandoval
Representative kits thank you Mr
speaker I would like to make an
announcement acknowledge us my
very important guests here today
we have the Sandoval county the
democratic federation of
democratic women that are in
place we have president Barbara
Jordan.
treasurer Haley Fortin.
NGV Gordon on the for.
These groups in Santa Fe County
not only have advocated for
policies of four children and an
environment that they have done
boots on the ground work to
provide backpacks food and
school supplies to the public
school children in the town of
Bernalillo Rio Rancho and
Corrales and I just wanted to
say thank you.
Thank you for your efforts and
welcome to the house of
representatives any further
announcements.
Right gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports see no
objection it is so ordered.
Three.
Mr speaker your consumer and
public affairs committee to is
been referred house bill nine
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it to pass and insert for
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair.
Move adoption we are unavailable
committee report on house bill
nine holes in favor signify by
saying aye.
Was me I seven four opted.
Mr speaker consumer and public
affairs committee to miss been
referred house bill thirty one
has had it under consideration
point same with recommendation
that it to pass and then through
for to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair for reduction
thank you delivery we are
optional fable Committee por for
House Bill thirty one all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
All those those guys have a
committee report adopted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation
seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
House bill seven introduced by
representatives Serrato little
Cortez Sapan ski and on you nor
do an act relating to health
protecting access to
reproductive and gender
affirming health care providing
for enforcement imposing
penalties prescribing relief
house bill seven introduced by
Representative Serrato literal
Cortez Sapan ski and on in our
new house bill seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee finance House
Judiciary Committee.
One eighty three introduced by
Representative McQueen and act
relating to government
reorganization of the department
of game and fish to the energy
minerals and natural resources
department as a division for
placing the state game
commission with the game
advisory board and
administrative attaching the
board to the game and fish
Division reassigning rulemaking
to the game and fish Division
providing for transfers of
functions person appropriations
money property contractual
obligations statutory references
and we're making from the
department of game and fish and
the state game commission to the
game and fish Division house
bill one eighty three introduced
by Representative McQueen if
house bill one eighty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house energy and natural
resources committee finance
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill one eighty four
introduced by Representative
McQueen and act relating to the
state game commission for
reforming the state game
commission commission
appointment process providing
for an increase of members if
the number of congressional
districts in the state changes
setting term limits for
commissioners and requirements
for appointment and removal of
commissioners house bill one
eighty four introduced by
Representative McQueen house
bill one eighty four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house energy and natural
resources committee then house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
So one eighty five introduced by
Representative Ortez and act
relating to energy and acting
the environmental standards for
appliances and fixtures Act
providing penalties house bill
one eighty five introduced by
Representative Ortez house bill
one eighty five having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house energy and natural
resources committee then it's
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill one eighty six
introduced by Representative
Allen Martinez and act relating
to property tax providing
flexibility regarding the
requirement to provide proof of
eligibility for a disabled
veterans property tax exemption
house bill one eighty six
introduced by Representative
Allen a Martinez house bill one
eighty six seven minutes twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house leaving
veterans and military affairs
committee thanks house taxation
and revenue committee.
House bill one eighty seven
introduced by Representative
Allen of Martinez and act
relating to the children's code
requiring the policies and
procedures of the children youth
and families department be
promulgated in accordance with
the staples Act house bill one
eighty seven introduced by
Representative Allen of Martinez
house bill one eighty seven
amended twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee vents the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill one eighty eight
introduced by Representative
Rubio or tass said Otto and
Allison in act relating to state
government creating the economic
transition division within the
economic development department
expanding the membership of the
sustainable economy Advisory
Council and act in the economic
transition act making
appropriations house bill one
eighty eight introduced by
representatives Rubio Cortez
Toronto and Allison house bill
one eighty eight have a minute
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee thence
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one eighty nine
introduced by Representative
brown and act relating to
educational retirement providing
an exception to allow certain
contracts of the educational
retirement board to exceed four
years pursuant to the
procurement code allowing
eligible employees of southeast
Mexico college to participate in
an alternative retirement plan
confirming the required minimum
distribution age to the federal
Internal Revenue Code of
nineteen eighty six house bill
one eighty nine introduced
Representative Brown.
House bill one eighty nine
hundred twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
then said house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill one ninety introduced
by Representative Chasey and act
relating to grand juries
providing that lawful competent
and relevant evidence is
evidence admissible under the
rules of evidence permitting the
target of a grand jury
investigation to obtain notice
of the central facts an
accusation and of the targets
right to look at the grand jury
of certain evidence changing the
early states after which a
target me testify allowing the
District Court to determine
compliance with section thirty
one dash six dash eleven NMSA
nineteen seventy eight laws
nineteen sixty nine chapter two
seventy six section eleven as
amended and to dismiss an
indictment without prejudice for
a violation of that section
house bill one ninety introduced
by Representative Chasey house
bill one ninety having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee since the
house Judiciary Committee.
The house bill one ninety two
introduced by representatives
brown and Armstrong and act
relating to taxation and
removing the income cap for the
social security income exemption
pursuant to the income tax act
house bill one ninety two
introduced by representatives
brown and Armstrong.
House bill one ninty to have the
minutes read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
Indian Affairs Committee thence
the house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill one ninety three
introduced by representatives
brown and Armstrong and act
relating to taxation providing
for the indexing of adjusted
gross income for social security
income pursuant to the income
tax act house bill one ninety
three introduced by
representatives brown and
Armstrong house bill one ninety
three having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections in universe Committee
then so house taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill one ninety four
introduced by Representative
small for the legislative
finance committee an act
relating to public school
finance creating a K. twelve
plus factor increasing the
length of the school year
increasing the at risk program
unit increasing the
responsibility factor for
principals and assistant
principals by a percentage of
the family income index
providing technical cleanup
repealing sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight regarding
the K. five plus an extended
learning time programs house
bill one ninety four introduced
by Representative small house
bill one ninety four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one ninety five
introduced by representatives
McQueen and and I Burt and act
relating to forestry amending
the forest conservation act
authorizing the forestry
division of the Energy minerals
and natural resources department
to contract for and conduct a
forest fire prevention and
suppression control suppression
rehabilitation and repair posted
fire slope stabilization erosion
control riparian restoration
seating and reforestation of
burned areas removing references
to the repeal forest
conservation fund making
technical changes amending and
repealing sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight house
bill one ninety five introduced
by representatives McQueen ended
Nighbor got to see this is
always my favorite legislative
pairing neighbor McQueen house
bill one ninety five having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house energy and natural
resources committee then to
house appropriations and finance
committee.
One ninety six introduced by
Representative Lord and act
relating to children revising
the preferred placement of
children in temporary custody
house bill one ninety six
introduced by Representative
Lord.
House bill ninety six seven min
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then the house
Judiciary Committee
House bill one ninety seven
introduced by representatives
guy a goes Lara Madrid and
Lundstrom an act relating to
fishing increasing the time for
free fishing days designated by
the state game commission from
Saturday's to weekends house
bill one ninety seven introduced
by representatives guy Ecosse
Prada Madrid and Lundstrom.
House bill one ninety seven is
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house energy natural
resources committee events house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one ninety eight
introduced by representative
Lente that at a Allison Sapan
ski and Johnson and act relating
to public education amending the
career technical education pilot
project and the career technical
education fund to include
secondary schools funded by the
federal bureau the bureau of
Indian education house bill one
ninety eight introduced by
representative Lente at at a
Allison Sapan ski and Johnson.
One ninety eight amendment twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee then so House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House bill one ninety nine
introduced by Representative
Baca Representative G. Andrés
Romero and representatives
Garrett more ball Malia and
Harper.
Legislative education study
committee and act relating to
public education increasing the
at risk index increasing the
fine arts factor increasing the
responsibility factors for
elementary middle and high
school principals and assistant
principals house bill one ninety
nine introduced by
Representative Baca
Representative G. Andrés Romero
and Representative Skerritt ball
Malia and Harper.
House bill one ninety nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
this house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two hundred
introduced by Representative
Vincent Representative Allen
Martinez and Representative
todos OS Pettigrew and of course
and act making appropriation to
the Veterans Services Department
to contract with a veteran
police and first responders
posttraumatic stress disorder
therapy program in fort Stanton
house bill two hundred
introduced by Representative
Vincent Representative Allen
Martinez Representative Terrazas
Pettigrew and al cone house bill
two hundred have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house labor
veterans military affairs
committee then state house
Appropriations Committee.
House Bill two one introduced by
Representative Harry Garcia and
Representative Alcon radio and
Castellano for the legislative
finance committee an act
relating to professional
licensure boards extending the
termination due to the licensure
boards for dental health care.
Edison architects professional
engineers and professional
surveyors public accountancy and
funeral services in limiting the
termination date of the
licensure boards for optometry
podiatry pharmacy and
acupuncture and oriental
medicine amending and repealing
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight House Bill to a
one introduced by Representative
Harry Garcia and representatives
of con echo and Castellano.
House bill two one have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election an
Indian Affairs Committee since
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill two oh two introduced
by Representative Serrato and
Dixon and act making and an
appropriation to the higher
education department for the
central New Mexico community
college to develop and launch a
venture studio to build and
develop local companies House
Bill to move to introduce by
Representative Serrato and
Dickson for House Bill to to
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House joint memorial three
introduced by representative
Lente corolla at a at a certain
Jana ensure he'll be Joint
Memorial honoring New Mexico's
bilingual multicultural
Education Act and requesting
requesting the governor to
proclaim twenty twenty three as
the year of bilingual
multicultural education house
joint memorial three introduced
by representative Lente corolla
it at a certain Jana introduce
you.
House memorial three I've been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee.
House joint memorial for
introduced by Representative
Lord Joint Memorial requesting
the secretary of children youth
and families to convene a task
force to address the ongoing
problem of children running a
way from foster home placement
house joint memorial for
introduced by Representative
Lord.
House memorial for have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee.
House memorial six introduced by
representatives Lundstrom and
Johnson Representative Harry
Garcia and Representative Alcon.
Morial proclaiming January
twenty six twenty twenty three
Gallup McKinley county today in
the house of representatives
House memorial six introduced by
representatives of lunch from
Johnson Representative Harry
Garcia Representative Alcon
House memorial six have been
read twice by title is ordered
this order not printed.
And based on the speakers table
do not printed speakers table.
House memorial seven introduced
by Representative Roybal
Caballero Chavez Trujillo and
Herndon Memorial requesting the
Human Services department and
the workforce solutions
Department to convene a task
force to study the impact of and
make recommendations for the
implementation of the New Mexico
basic income for low income New
Mexicans and report its findings
to the legislature House
memorial seven introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero
Chavez Trujillo and Herndon for
House moral seven min read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee.
House memorial eight introduced
by representatives serin Jana
how to meal Lundstrom Figueroa
and good old off a memorial
declaring February thirteenth
twenty twenty three New Mexico
National Board certified
teachers recognition day in the
house of representatives House
memorial eight introduced by
representatives Syriana how to
meal Lundstrom Figueroa and
Google if.
House morally amendments was by
title is ordered not printed and
places rigor stable.
From Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
It now being eleven fifty nine
A. M. I. and move we roll the
clock to show it's a twelve oh
one PM thank you moved we move
we adjourn until till one PM.
We adjourn till one PM.
One PM the house will come to
order.
Mr speaker and now being eleven
fifty nine AM.
It's coming.
All.
Okay.
I ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended the
generation but all those present
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
objection is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and the record show
that the journalist reading
phone approve subject to
revision and approval of the
rules in order of business
committee.
If there's a junction it is so
ordered.
The clock has been delayed from
Bernalillo Nelson Mr speaker I
move with that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Are there any other
announcements before we break
for the day.
Folks the good folks at MVD are
in the lounge until five o'clock
today for simple MVD
transactions.
If anyone of you and I'm looking
up the rookies have the plate
that's about to expire or
driver's license this is a great
time to take care that.
Because it's going to get pretty
busy and it's gonna be hard for
you to do that later on.
And we do in the lounge until
five o'clock this afternoon.
Any further announcements.
Mr speaker this just
There were a number of us who
couldn't get out of the garage
last night really late and I
didn't have my key card with me
and even Senator Ingle got stuck
in the garage and one of the
things that occurred to me as we
probably need to that need to
let all the members know how to
give a quick call to security so
that fortunately there was
somebody watching in the on the
side and he came down and opened
it up but we didn't want to
spend the night here.
Mr speaker not yet lady night
session as young.
that's a great suggestion and
will get an email out to work
with the leadership offices to
get an email out to all the
members with contact information
for for our esteemed security
personally or the building the
gentle lady from.
Santa Santa Fe and Taos
Representative thank you Mr
speaker of the house agriculture
Essex's and water resources
committee will meet tomorrow
morning at eight thirty see
there.
Be there or be square to the
gentle lady from Taos good
afternoon Mister speaker in your
house rural development land
grants and cultural diversity
will be meeting tomorrow at nine
AM we have Google built a
consider thank you great members
eight note.
In as well as the gentleman from
Santa Fe and Santa as
Representative McQueen and.
Mr speaker the House Energy
Environment and that's a
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
we will not hear house bill
ninety one or house bill one
forty two.
Not hearing ninety one and one
forty two we will hear house
bill thirty two and sixty seven
thank you Mr speaker members
signal gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker I was just
going to talk on Representative
Chasey is point there are
buttons on the side of the
overhead doors as long as the
keys are turned off the key
there's a key spot on their
loans just not turned authors
and open and close.
Button on both of the both sets
of doors thank you good
information members signal to
John from the nana thank you Mr
speaker your house Appropration
the finance committee will meet
today in subcommittees room
three oh seven room three oh
nine beginning at one thirty
thank you Mr speaker thank you
member six million other from
some of the letters that Harper
thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to bring to the members
attention there was a very
significant event that happened
yesterday.
The largest most powerful rocket
in the world is gonna take us to
Mars at its full wet dress
rehearsal and it was a success.
And we're going to sing during
the session Mr speaker I'll give
you preoccupy dates but during
the session we got the first
orbital launch of starship.
And it's gonna change the world
I noticed although I'll give you
one example why if you had to go
on a trip on a plane.
At the end of that trip you had
to throw away the plane.
How expensive with that truth
be.
Right that describes our current
rocket system why was so
expensive to go the moon with
Apollo.
Starship is completely reusable.
So it will be on the land and be
refueled and so the costs that
trip now is limit to the cost of
your fuel so this is how we're
gonna gets more that is
incredible is I mean most of us
are gonna see us on Mars in this
generation slides want to share
that I'm super excited that was
a huge change of address thank
you Mr speaker very cool
gentleman very cool rental plus
for that that's thanks.
The trip continued in next
week's crucial and also copy on
Amazon about the Mars rover
amazing amazing stuff any
spacers out there like us please
take note.
the young lady from you a
reserve for our thank you Mr
speaker I just want to announce
that the house consumer public
affairs committee will meet
tomorrow at one thirty in room
three seventeen.
Number six.
The gentle lady from sun the
fares are set up to thank you Mr
speaker your house commerce and
economic development committee
is meeting today at one thirty
in room three seventeen and will
have the secretary and deputy
secretary and division director
of economic development project
for setting today thank you.
Thank you gentle lady members
signaled the gentle lady from
Los Alamos Sunderland in Santa
Fe Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting on Friday at one thirty.
Members signal
any other else miss going once
going twice.
Right members thanks for a great
day.
This is Mr speaker I move house
stand in recess until ten thirty
tomorrow.
Thank you members the house will
Center recess until ten thirty
tomorrow morning.
