Representative in order to
present.
Representative block present.
Representative Chasey yeah.
Representative operated via.
Representative work here.
Representative ram here
Representative some more care.
By share Figueroa here
Representative Johnson is here.
Or okay thank you good morning
everyone I just want to
housekeeping on our agenda we
were here
House bill one six five after
house bill one four eight.
And what staff.
In the house joint.
House.
The whole.
Morning madam chair he.
How is this morning with the
house to meet with Lucien to I
am presenting this morning on
behalf of the house working
good.
Has worked for the last fourteen
months modernization questions
and that includes the co
sponsors representatives or
tested not very exciting and as
well as representatives Rubio
Amanda Dixon Matthews.
and online.
Thank you for being in the.
From Legislative Council
services we have to think order
questions about why languages
drafted the way it is.
Constitutional resolutions.
This resolution would be for the
voters of New Mexico the option
to change our legislative
sessions to two sixty day
session.
Expanding that short thirty day
session to sixty.
And removing the limitations on
the scope.
For the second session where we
are restricted to matters
budgets and issues determined by
the governor.
So you were all there.
And I'm sure everyone in this
room is where thanks for the
benefits of public school.
We are currently in the fifty
six.
Legislature of New Mexico.
Which has to session the sixty
in the thirty day.
that to your legislative cycle
is called the by Indians here
that are in our discussion this
morning.
One of the things you need to
know is that our by any of total
cycles legislative session days.
Is the third shortest cannot
come.
This resolution would let the
voters.
Whether they want their
legislators on task.
An extra thirty.
Why why is this.
Our current structures the vinyl
structure sixty days and thirty
days was created in nineteen
sixty.
That's more than nearly eighty
years ago.
And think about the population
since that time involved doubled
we all represent twice many
constituents more constituents
need more from their
legislators.
Think about.
Thanks to the issues thanks has
changed.
If you think for example just
about health care.
Eighteen sixty four when the
structure was created chair
didn't exist.
The science and technology in
many of the treatments we have
now didn't exist the insurance
industry has profoundly changed
and we is a legislature are
tasked with making decisions.
Around these issues.
Thank Nico to.
The science and technology is
exporters rate since nineteen
sixty four.
Both in practice and
distribution of product.
One million that had not even
been.
And now citizens across the
state need access to property
and commerce for healthcare for
education.
New Mexicans rely on us as their
legislators to craft the
guardrails to protect consumers
and to push for expansion in all
of these industries when I
search the people.
This Brett depth of issues does
not stop on the even numbered
years and nor should I work on
behalf of the people of New
Mexico do you want to do even
number.
New Mexico is one of only seven
states in the country that
limits the scope of the
legislation.
In the second section of the
plan.
And third.
Fiscal responsibility and
accountability require more time
to build a budget of more than
eight billion I.
This resolution has to other
elements of which you should be
aware.
There are two additional reforms
in there to help streamline and
improve efficiency of
legislation.
And one of them is a recess for
five days at thirty eight point
in the sixty day legislative.
And the purpose of that is at
the thirty day point.
All the bills have been
introduced.
So that five days it's time to
get deep into the legislation
coming down the pike read it
thoroughly reach out to experts
if we do to inform ourselves
reach out to our constituents
and so they have time to look at
all the legislation to give us
feedback about what they want.
It gives us time to negotiate
controversial elements of bills
that tend to log jam the end of
sessions.
Of it makes the process more
efficient and it makes
legislators more important and
better able to serve their
constituents.
The second reform and this
resolution where you might
consider it the fourth into.
Is to carry over bills from the
first session of the legislature
to the second session of the
legislature.
So there are always good bills
that was out of time.
Under this resolution if it
passes bills would freeze where
they are.
If there table they free stable
if they have a do not pass they
still have a do not pass but
bills that are in progress
freeze where they are sick up at
that point in the second
session.
Of the state legislature it does
not carry over past the two year
cycle.
Twenty seven legislatures in the
country currently used carryover
model.
So New Mexicans deserve to have
were formed legislature's.
More thoughtfully that'd and
deliberately debated policy and
they deserve to have the full
scope of their needs address
involved provided says.
Without question to a budget for
governor's message.
After a few years it is time to
this.
Change before the voters.
Over eighty percent of
respondents in a recent poll by
common cost access.
They would prefer a long
recession.
So with that I'll stand for
questions thank you madam vice
chair let's go to the audience.
For those who are in support of
the bill please raise your hand.
And for those who are in
opposition of the field these
hand.
Seeing none will take public
comment please refrain your
comments to one minutes try not
to be repetitive addition to the
essence of time and we looks
like we have a lot of support
from again from the second I I.
The state would you stand please
thank you madam chair I
apologize for the interruption
but there is an amendment to and
before he this weekend for.
About the.
Discussion okay.
Your.
This.
The.
Motion to discuss that.
The amendment is point two two
four two six nine point two.
Amendment actually only changes
the tire to make it more in line
to match the bill as I described
to you.
The title more and.
Thank you Mr all right we have a
motion to adopt an amendment by
representative little.
Have a sentence.
For.
Concerns
The state
second is there any opposition.
Seeing that you have an amended
builder vice chair thank you
madam chair in New Mexico the
state.
Supporting comments please thank
you thank you madam chair of the
members of the committee and for
the J. R. eight of.
Sorry.
Well she
Or professional
one of the six cities.
I wish
to ask.
The question so I'm gonna ask
you questions about the review I
identity
theft at G. mail.
First question.
Encouraging the sixty day
session did you happen to be in
effect would.
Second question you did you have
enough time to do research talk
to your.
Your bill's.
Question I'm running and running
between hearing.
Actually being able to digest
the information.
Four section.
The session.
Session to build time.
Supporters of Bill.
The task.
You
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for hearing
being my name is Michael for we
have all to this pharmacy.
Advocacy network we support this
bill because frankly we're tired
watching the bills we think have
major support and could become
all die at the end of the
session because their job is to
provide for frankly I do have
your amendment changes to ninety
days.
At least six.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is still
in part from here Representative
center city policy but I also
stand for use.
Hours and some publications of
modernizing state legislatures
there's three metrics to
determine the degree to which
the legislature's
professionalizing.
First of which is session going
as fast for those wishing to is
the second which is legislative
pay and the third which is a
whether they have a full time
legislative staff New Mexico in
the last legislature's to
modernize and transitions it's
time to do so the product in
this will be a more effective
legislature in terms of
legislative output executive
accountability more
representative body that
reflects our diverse population
and policies that prioritize
applied working families a
strong I strongly urge this
committee to pass house service
solutions to and I think
representatives for the
leadership reading this drivers
losing to the committee today
thank you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I Meredith Meijin
speaking on behalf American
Association of university where
and we stand instruments for
going to repeat what the
previous speaker said but have
we want to thank the sponsors
for working on this too long
overdue as we heard and that we
really do this are particularly
like the provision where the
legislation can carry over into
by Indians so to start from
scratch in the same time for all
of us Legislative Council
Service to basically keep the by
aliens as one session taking
care of separate teachers thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee member one
presidential members of New
Mexico.
Police stand strong supported
this measure.
We are solidly in favor of
improving efficiency
accountability and transparency.
Thank.
You.
Thank you madam chair committee
members were used to use I'm
here on behalf of New Mexico
Elks lodge.
Recklessness resolution and
consider the other way to the
school we're talking about
session where should be paired
with compensation for
legislators and officials staff
we're going to all this this
will enhance your ability to
consider the wall list of
complex difficult measures to
deal with every day.
I have the privilege of serving
this body for fifteen years the
Legislative Council Service so
first row seat help difficult
your jobs this measure the other
measures you can consider during
the session the water by looking
legislature to fix that.
Thank you thank you next please.
Madam chair members committee
Mason Graham also director for
common cause us ko provided that
comes here provides a background
for the full that we did back in
October but the civic trust for
pulled out a hundred sixteen
point one is there isn't working
support for extending the line
sections of there's also
bipartisan support for this
seventy four percent Democrats
sixty four percent of
Republicans and sixty four
percent of the state also
support this measure increases
socialism specials thank you
thank you for the comments.
CNN let's go to the webcast
we're gonna hear comments
supported the bills Stephanie
Welch.
Madam chair of many this would
be about a and I'm at a workers
rights attorney for the New
Mexico Center on poverty not
sure what was initially
otherwise we thank the sponsors
using this important joint
resolution we stand in support
of H. G. R. to all New Mexicans
deserve a legislative session
that gives our legislators as
much time and freedom to
consider legislative solutions
to the vast number of issues
affecting my communities every
even year we limit our
legislators to budget bills we
give them the or thirty days to
address all relevant matters
affecting New Mexico's knowledge
in the betting that was already
done prior legislation would
prove the legislature's
efficiency whether legislation
becomes law should be based on
the merits the legislation
rather than just clock running
out of proposing this
commonsense equipment or
constitution New Mexico improve
the legislature's ability to
promptly respond to issues
important to New Mexico's pretty
Mexico for these reasons we
support this joint resolution
and there's a committee to pass
it thank you thank you axes jam
started.
These are the.
K. my constituents.
Are you a.
Good morning Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jim day Schardin and I'm
representing the renewable
energy industry association of
New Mexico we have about sixty
diverse members been around
since two thousand and four and
we really support this
legislation we believe it's
vital for New Mexico to have an
efficient and effective state
legislature to prosper and move
forward having to sixty day
sessions will allow for more
deliberative process enabling
quality legislation to get the
attention it deserves.
By a lot of money all subjects
to be considered in all years
will need to let this
legislation to be heard in a
timely manner the five day
recess provides a positive
simply make sense and also
enables legislators and
stakeholders to tend to other
matters they might need to and
the carry forward from years
enables quality legislation to
continue to be considered and
not die prematurely thank you
very much again we support this
bill.
Thank you Mexico have Kurt
breaker.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is
director of the director
Leuthard advocacy ministry of
New Mexico through advocacy also
express the mission of New
Mexico conference of churches
I'm here this morning to state
our sport right here too as well
due to our deep interest in good
governance I will state that we
to strongly support any efforts
to modernize and professional
ice our state's legislature all
concur with all comments and
arguments of organ made in
support and the answer time
allegiance that within the
ministry New Mexico New Mexico
office of churches urges for
create share to thank you.
Thank you Paul Gibson.
Are you.
A new.
With three times are more and
muted can you hear me why we
can't thank.
Thank you Mr chair madam chair
bill sponsor and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of a chair to my name is Paul
Gibson co founder retek's Our
Democracy statewide five oh one
C. for nonprofit with over four
thousand members yes there are
two would bring New Mexico into
the twenty first century our
legislators legislatures
consider are more complex issues
that were even imagine what our
current structure was designed
the two things we appreciate
most about this resolution and
it's way overdue is the five day
break.
as that gives legislators just
an opportunity to recharge their
batteries review bills check in
with constituents staffing is
also achieve a staff to validate
assertions made by advocates
constituents lodging in the
first days of the session this
way they can verify the vote the
truth of the solution and get
out what is really going on the.
Difference from today's place or
about of the racing one thing to
the next no for profit
organization to make decisions
and rust manner in which our
legislature.
That we have to go to the next
speaker thank you for your.
Next one miles Tokyo.
Right.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is miles
token deputy director of a lag
representing our statewide
organization membership based
organization we stand in full
support of H. G. R. two and also
H. G. R. A. we're gonna get that
now I want to put that in there
as well we work tirelessly to
create a more inclusive tomorrow
and Representative
representative democracy and see
both the break as well as the
carryover of bills as incredibly
important to the future of New
Mexico I urge you all to please
pass HR two and eight share
right thank you so very much
thank you next we have Tom
Solomon.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you so much my name is Tom
Solomon who coordinator with the
climate focused environmental
organization three fifty New
Mexico we have of our nearly
seven thousand members three
fifty New Mexico strongly
supports the G. R. two.
And the climate coalition we
often say system change not
climate change this legislation
is part of that system change to
enable it just and equitable
transition to a clean and
sustainable economy we have so
much work to do to reach that
goal and extending the length in
the scope of the session in odd
years with the recess and with
bills that carried over to the
next year is a prudent and
important step to modernizing
our legislative system so that
we have a chance to achieve
that.
To be clear if they are to
should be paired with passing in
C. R. eight a legislative
salaries because we are just too
much of our unpaid volunteer
legislators so let's do that
together please pass this
resolution the October twenty
twenty two comment because.
Thank you.
Next we have to retail.
Hello hello Janet Williams yes
I'm Janet Williams president of
Santa Fe now good morning
chairman chairwoman and members
of the committee we will just
say yes to everything that's
previously been sad and stand
strongly in support of this
resolution thank you thank you I
have a license.
Yes good morning Here Johnson
vice chair for the role of the
members of the committee I'm
quite a right here the navy
veteran and chair of the
veterans and military families
caucus for caucus has more than
four hundred fifty members
statewide many of whom depend on
services and other resources
provided by the state the state
agencies to provide health care
transportation education housing
assistance in constituent
services to the hundred and
forty two thousand veterans in
New Mexico play a critical role
in our well being and that of
our families date legislation
governs these agencies as the
needs of our aging population of
veterans increase this new
federal budget like packed Act
become available it's necessary
for New Mexico provide
appropriate funding and
resourcing to oversight agencies
for all of the reasons that
Representative Figueroa
explained we believe these
changes would make the
legislation legislature more
effective and efficient we ask
you to vote yes joint resolution
to thank you so much for your
time thank you thanks we have
Susan Martin.
Susan I think you need a new.
News.
While we're waiting for season
let's go to Jacob Vigil.
Jacob Vigil.
Okay let's say
let's see we have now we're back
to Susan Susan are you able to I
mean.
Can you hear me my apologize.
the Sierra Club Rio Grande
chapter stands in support of
these legislative changes to
enable the legislature to to a
few of
Much more job and to be able to
have the resources to protect
our democracy thank you so much
thank you will stay on the
webcast we have any opposing
comments.
I don't see any and any of
closing comments in the audience
I don't see any committee
members.
The screen is the ways in the
state.
Is this for you okay witness.
Yes you mentioned emergency.
Thank you madam vice chair for
previous forward so I.
Questions to hear.
On the I guess C. thirty one
thirteen.
All business pending for the
house of representatives and
Senate the regular session.
Odd numbered year shall be
carried over for consideration
committee on the floor so I'm
just making sure this is only
the previous session of that.
At current term two years is
that correct yes yes yes we can
of like zombie bills from.
Madam chair representative.
Of the because that would put a
lot of them on the table and
with really good plus there was
one concern I have and then on
the on page I think line twenty
on that same page it says recess
for five days following the
thirtieth day of the regular
session.
Does this mean calendar days or
legislative days madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative is
legislative days this is where
the expert with community
correct me if I'm but it is the
state and which in a separate
place in statute not in the
constitution madam chair where
we have to find all bills must
be introduced by.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative because
if it's late days I believe that
right now we're in the fourth or
fifth legislative day were as
we're in truly that this tent
provided air fifteenth or
something so the case may have
insight on that Mr Gladden chair
I don't know if chase with
economic used himself or has a
committee.
So purpose of providing
technical assistance on the
matter before this committee I
do not appear in support or
opposition to the back of the
answer the question the five
days this week I the state is
not provided.
Thank you.
I stand corrected.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr corner and Representative and
that those are the main
questions I have about this bill
it's one to clear up those
questions so thank you that's it
thank you Representative Zamora.
Madam chair still trying to hold
this position.
Hi Dave this first is.
Chair Representative.
What will be the cost to the
citizens of the state in New
Mexico for the.
Madam chair and we're
so glad you asked because for
for has.
Fiscal impact reports as the
information in a couple of
different.
That house joint resolution cost
money to print and distribute so
there's that.
Madam chair representative I
think your question is that what
is the cost of an additional
day.
And according to the fiscal
impact report on page three is
three million for the per diem
for the legislative and then
there is
I'm not sure madam chair and
representative how that was
calculated the business bureau
of you and
did.
An analysis and their houses
chair came closer to.
In either case three million or
ten million it's less than one
percent of our state.
And madam chair representative
if this is like the home today
you can take the ten million
dollar trip with.
I I see it being a big cost.
Madam chair representative I see
it as being a big cost to the
taxpayers I could see.
The topic talking about in the
bill.
That Madam chair representative.
Some of the.
Of the things that we talked
about are being worked on and
you know.
That they are being marked off.
In the in terms is it not true
madam chair and representative
that.
All the numbers committees are
working on these budgets
HM if the Senate finance Ellie
S. C..
All the numbers committee's
the board hard.
Follow through the interim.
To put these budgets together
that's not so Representative
Madam chair representative it is
absolutely so thank you for
bringing in a because we do have
in terms of these but we are
appropriations the LFC that are
working hard all through the
internet she built around.
What we are asking madam chair
representative is time is
actually in that thirty day
session to go through the budget
but
so all the people of the New
Mexico as representatives can go
through it and.
Understand.
House Bill to that is that thank
understand the line items and
make sure I chair the needs of
their constituents
Representative in that but
because all members are not
interim committees.
Madam chair representative are
you proposing that they quit
working on that budget through
the inner.
Madam chair representative
absolutely no.
Chairman representative then.
The issue with if you don't get
on board on that ship.
When they start doing the budget
through the interim.
When it comes.
To the session that budget is
pretty much done and they'll in
usually if you go to page.
LFC years for somebody like that
if you go to one of these
numbers committees I usually
tell you this budget.
Pretty much said you can't just
go for the big amounts I might
look a little amount of
appropriations bill but their
budgets are pretty much said so.
Are we going to be just.
Really not gaining any traction
here by doing this or I don't
see the scope of this I don't I
mean when it.
I worked on a dairy for twenty
two and a half years.
And when an issue would come up
if we've changed some of the it
doesn't change change one thing
is going to change the process
of many things here.
And I mean it's gonna be a whole
different animal when you
disease.
That is going to be a big cost
to the to the people of the
state of New Mexico.
And I I can see the history I
can see how are you.
What your bill out there but
then I think you're you're doing
a lot more and you think you're
doing there's there's got to be
a lot of questions here as to
how.
Mechanically
from the whole system is gonna
change.
And is it really gonna help us
that much.
We have a Senator.
That I've heard of speaks from
the people many times and he
says you don't want to sit there
anymore time then where's said
they're worried do enough
damage.
And and that's kind of a joke.
It's it's it's it's tenants that
is applied the the talking we're
talking about things but.
On a more serious note.
This restructures.
The whole system.
It doesn't just give us another
thirty days to add on to what
we're doing it.
I have a lot of reservations
about it.
I just wonder how hard you
looked into that how to how to
how do you feel about it
Representative chair of the
Madam chair representative thank
you for that really it's awful
question because this is a
tremendous structural change
however Madam chair I would
Representative I would say it's
not as radical change that some
of our constituents and the
public they're asking for that
we've even heard this morning.
Madam chair representative the
sixty day session is what we
already do every other year.
So changing the thirty two to
sixty days.
Is going to cause a complete
overhaul we already know how to
do it into the budget looking to
budget in the sixty day session
so it's not.
You need changes all that madam
chair.
Representative the task force
looked at a breadth of options
why sixty why not set.
Why not ninety.
Why why is the sixty part of
that for the reasons you just
described other things to
consider here are.
When our fiscal year goes into
that and we have a statute this
is our laws go into effect
ninety days after it adjourns.
Well we can't run a session so
long that are going into effect
after the fiscal year staff.
So that was part of the
consideration part of the
discussion to.
and madam chair if.
One of the reasons to keep it to
the sixty day.
Is the carryover element allows
us in a sense more time to get
work done by and.
So all of these pieces that he
rightfully bring up I think
madam chair part of the question
that are really important.
And I think this resolution
addresses them well.
Thank you madam chair
representative that's all my
questions.
Thank you.
Committee members.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much fanfare and
thank you madam vice.
It was a lot of work to come up
with this and.
I.
I think that.
Hi I just called the end of my
very first session.
And for that.
Confusing.
Crazy day it was in New we have
to adjourned and so was like
everything was in slow.
On the map that we hadn't gotten
a lot done I also remember madam
chair years in years coming back
and fixing things that we're
unintended consequences.
That occurred as a result of our
vast.
toward here.
And as.
In fact we we have to do that a
lot where we we
Actually.
Have the rose since the middle
of.
Even those kinds of consequences
and I I do think that times have
changed
Since we became a state and it
certainly warrants a second look
at the story thank you for all
your hard work I appreciate it I
also the.
Appreciate the clarity and the
Well as well.
This.
The path.
Representative.
Sure do.
S. as in.
House joint resolution two and I
have a second by Representative
off in the field.
The.
Well.
On the ability yes is amended.
Representative block no Sir.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative.
No Sir and I want to explain why
the.
Representative Zamora
By Senator yes.
Yes.
Representative Rehm.
You madam chair and committee
members I apologize I've got
about three things going on I
don't.
You know I've been a victim of.
Of legislation dying on the
Senate calendar we all have in
understand the motivation.
But you know to.
I guess there's a good reason
why legislation with.
Start over.
In the next session you know in
the interim we have additional.
Of thought to amend legislation
and so I think it's nice to
start afresh.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Then by to have a due pass house
joint resolution resolution two
as amended thank you madam chair
thank you.
Go to hell straight resolution
eight Representative Rubio.
Thank you all the more it's I
feel like it was just yesterday.
I I'm here to present health
condition eight which
It's pretty straightforward is
create a commission we increase
the commission an independent
commission that would establish
legislative salaries for
legislation in house to go to
voters so if you have to have
the health.
Is
also sending this question goes
to the voters on whether or not
he create this independent
commission I do have an expert
here Representative joy here
tonight commission a study with
the university of New Mexicos
program and and rose is here
with the program to provide
preliminary results after that
study has not yet been completed
and solve all provide an
opportunity for for her to
introduce herself before we move
I have an amendment and I'd be
happy to to discuss that now is
you would like
move for the session.
Right so the amendment sexually
shortened the the title because
we're removing an entire section
on page four
pages six through ten section of
he just six pages six and strict
action to essentially is
removing all the voter
referendum language that we have
in terms of all the Legisla-
hello voters petition the the
the.
If and then if they are not
happy with what the results of
the commission on we're removing
that because it's redundant and
so
that was the conversation I had
with someone from secretary of
state had already in the
constitution on the other items
are essentially just remembering
it's clean up
and and.
That's about it.
Listen to this them.
All second do we have a vision
Madam chair so I understand
right that page six the dental
just be eliminated yeah it's
just it's language that's
already in the constitution that
provides the the process for
voters so voters have the
ability to referendums this is
just redundant of what's already
voters can already do that in
general.
Just to clarify madam chair with
with Representative is a modest
question you've created section
to section correct correct so
section three today's.
Senator more.
I don't have any more questions
thank you so we have adopted the
amendment.
Current.
so I can hand it over to rose to
give us an introduction and to
provide some of the work that
you've been doing what I will
say is that many of you have
already seen
on a variety of several versions
of this legislation I've been
hearing it since twenty
seventeen it's an issue that's
very important to me there are
folks in the public we've talked
about not only just issues
related to good governance but
also really I was trying our our
our legislature in terms of
experience like experiences I
think it's it's really hard to
recruit and retain really great
legislators and so this this
legislation helps to address
that the commission here would
look solely at the legislature
on like what we've done in the
past where to look at all public
officers this is strictly for
the legislative branch so with
that I'll hand it over to rose.
Madam chair thank you for having
me today my name is rose for our
from the bureau of business and
economic research at UNM and I.
I am the primary author and
researcher Legislative
finalization study as funded
through Representative scared
last spring.
I just want to give a little bit
of information study doesn't use
the last.
Initially later you know what I
can do for that cannot answer so
we conducted surveys and
interviews of legislators and
staff throughout the summer and
fall this past year.
We emailed each legislator using
less from the LCS and we're
involved no fewer than three
times each legislator using the
numbers on the legislature page
because we wanted to get as much
participation as possible.
that was really the primary.
Trusted what we did for our
study looking internally how
this car with these different
ideas of modernization affect
staff this legislators have for
the legislators ideas on these
topics of modernization and then
we provided cost estimates based
on the scenarios offices in
those interviews and surveys
using real state years they're
all estimates and
Any of the legislation here
today doesn't
necessarily reflect what we put
in there they were based on
services internal and has to go
to referendum as Representative
Rubio mentioned so thank you for
us today.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and with that I also have the
chase order on on line if if at
any point there's any language.
so it will open it up to
questions okay thank you let's
go to the audience of those who
work as make a comment in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Those in opposition.
Okay let's begin with my right.
one please.
Chair representative this
legislation since the second
twelve this.
Two thousand.
Representative was that the
legislature should be comprised
of everyday people and salaries
that not and salaries for two
years for both politicians.
More than.
That argument doesn't hold water
in fact the opposite happened
only citizens who can't afford
to several those who can't
afford to Sir and without the.
They have because they have the
needs and the time to serve.
Is there anyone here on the
floor this is really doesn't
want to get a phone call with
the senator it's not it's not a
job it may have been.
Of this twenty first century
just not.
Representative salaries.
As it is not sustainable we have
evolved into a seriously calm
society.
Your full time attention thank
you.
Next is here in support of the
bill where.
For people to be part of the
legislation this.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael for
we are volunteer.
Oxy of this bill
I think it's fair to say that
when our constitutions were
written if you had asked them do
you want to own the wealth the
landed gentry to the members
legislature all they would say
yes but first they would have
failed to understand the
question because I think for
many of them nothing else was
imaginable.
We don't think that way anymore
I like the legislature that is a
little more open to
participation from the non.
Madam chairman is less than a
policy director for the center
Pacific policy Mexico state
legislature tackles most
critical issues facing our
families and communities these
issues at the core of our
democracy for ensuring high
quality education is available
to everyone to access to better
paying jobs and building safer
communities despite as we and
growing responsibility to New
Mexico legislature maybe part
time volunteer institution the
lack of fair paid to work for
work creates a very virtual
broad and inclusive
participation in our legislature
our legislature in New Mexico
should be reflected and
representative of all people in
our state with the fourth work
without pay currently within
Latinos native Americans Asian
Americans and African Americans
are underrepresented in the
legislature many more people
from diverse racial and economic
backgrounds would run for the
state legislature if they knew
they could both make ends meet
Representative their communities
instead they're left to choose
between their lively and being a
voice for their communities I
urge you to support thank you
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee and make sure speaking
on behalf of the American
Association of university women
and we think this is very very
important for these just
mentioned and also because of
you'll reduce the influence of
lobbyists we know that there are
a lot of a lot of if they have
to this we were talking to
legislators all the time and we
don't want anyone to.
To that influence what happens
is because you have paid
provided here is that people
will be able to take the time
that they were two or three jobs
generated non session times to
date in the survey our state so
Hey David they will have more
time to do a better job and not
have the.
Thank.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee on hand for one
president of the league of women
voters New Mexico.
He stated in stronger supported
this measure.
The league believes there is a
cost to government and that
costs should be paid by the
taxpayers Mexico instead of
by personal and financial
sacrifices of many of our
legislative thank you.
Thank you madam chair committee
members for your to use the New
Mexico launch.
This is the second way to school
compensation for legislators
here's good news Representative
well qualitative quantitative
research supports this measure
the work for bureau but by
agency for.
Research article altered by
professors to the gross Michael
rock of our flagship university
university Mexico in a poll
commissioned by for for for for
commission and foundation and
calm because of also we look at
all refuel Centers widespread
public support in support among
provided for this proposal last
we have a group of saying it's
the right thing to do in the
verification do.
Sign up for a very difficult job
losses all at the.
This is the stuff thank you
thank you.
Thank you madam chair Graham
Campos Mexico I support this
bill for all the reasons
mentioned and as a this Ortiz
which is what we did do a whole.
With the folder of this issue
there is a four four if
something interesting about this
whole is that a majority of New
Mexicans actually do not know
you a service of the legislature
thank you sixty four percent
could not understand which
together compensated majority of
that sixty four percent believe
you guys are over seventy five
thousand.
Personally I got into this work
because I care about our state.
This year only on one side is
remind compensate for.
In order to support this thank
you thank you for other comics.
Okay let's go to the webcast.
Miles.
Good morning chair woman members
of the committee my name again
with Ole New Mexico and we
follow we are in full support of
this legislation and ask for do
pass I'm reminded of the way in
which our country's democracy
was set up to be exclusionary
and
and we are constantly working to
break that down and make sure
that all members of our of our
community have a the ability to
participate in our democracy
fully believe in our democracy
and to having more access to
To being able to represent our
our communities is also part of
correcting that exclusive
history thank you so much thank
you X. we have jam.
Good morning madam chairman
members of the committee Jim
days ago with the renewable
energy industry association of
New Mexico
we obviously just made some
comments in support of H. J. R.
two and for similar reasons we
also support H. J. R. eight we
commend the members of the state
legislatures of the state
legislature for their hard work
especially considering the
volunteers however to ensure
that we have the best possible
representation the legislature
one that is diverse and highly
qualified we believe that
legislators should be
compensated so that it can be a
full time job this investment
will help will help to provide a
more efficient and effective
legislature and I would also
like to note that it's my
understanding where the only
state that has a volunteer
legislature we support this
legislation thank you very much.
Thank you yes Representative
Stephanie.
The agency will be about a
that's the for the Welsh and I
will workers rights attorneys
The New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty we think the spots for
introducing this resolution we
stand in support of H. G. R.
eight New Mexico is the only
state in the country that is not
paid does not pay a base salary
to state legislatures
unfortunately this makes it
extremely difficult for anyone
without significant financial
resources to be able and willing
to run for the legislature
without a base salary for
legislators it's almost it's
difficult to imagine a scenario
where no weeks investing can run
for state office get elected and
maintain their duties as a
legislator all while trying to
put food on their tables pay
bills and provide for their
families additionally by giving
all legislators a base salary we
further prior within focus on
the issues affecting our state
and not the financial stability
in some we support district
resolution because it proposes a
more equitable political process
that by stone New Mexicans run
for office for these reasons we
support district resolution and
urge the committee to pass thank
you.
Thank you alright.
Yes good morning again madam
chair members the committee
director with the litter
advocacy ministry in New
Mexicano we are here to support
as well H. P. A. R. eight
continue your focus on issues of
good governance through our
legislature functions a key
piece as well simply must be
moving away from a volunteer
based legislature into one that
justly pays are provided for
their work well I've been
pleased with the changing
demographics of our legislative
body offering provided several
salaries further would further
open the door to the vast
diversity of New Mexicans to
serve in this way I especially
appreciate the COVID of
Representative Rubio regarding
the importance of the need for
diversity and life experiences
too often we assume others life
experiences the same as ours and
this is this in the
legislature's well all barriers
must be removed that limit the
pool of potential public
servants and H. generate
proposed solution for the
state's legislature I also could
consider would concur with
convincing arguments already
made by those in support the
third advocacy ministry New
Mexico on a conference churches
urges portrayed share eight and
thank you for this opportunity
share position this morning.
Thank you next year for us.
Susan you need a new.
I'm sorry it's important to keep
in mind that New Mexico is the
only state that does not provide
a salary to its legislators and
are we rank near the bottom for
overall legislative compensation
paint provided a fair salary
alone more people to seek office
which will produce a legislature
that's much more reflective of
the diversity of our population
and will reduce the inequality
of power between lobbyists and
legislators the Sierra Club Rio
Grande eight chapters
stands in support of H. G. R. A.
thank you so much thank you
Janet you're next.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee good morning.
Spine Janet Williams president
Santa Fe now and we stand in
strong support of this
legislation we believe that the
modernization of the legislature
will lead to more equity and
equality and we really urgent to
support this resolution thank
you.
Thank you Tom Solomon.
Thank you madam chair Solomon
again from three fifty New
Mexico and I'll just support all
of the previous comments that
were maybe slow the point so
eloquently as to why this
legislation is so important to
pass I just want to add that
you've seen here today in the
public comments of very very
robust alliances isn't groups
that stand with you and have
your back ready to support those
efforts including through
putting it on a future ballot
for a public vote we thank you
for your work for your service
especially thank the sponsors
for bringing this forward.
Thank you next we have J. D.
Matthews.
Hi Madam chair good morning
members of the committee my name
she Matthews I'm with New Mexico
working families party I want to
thank the sponsors for bring
important issue forward we
supported whole heartedly I'm
not gonna thank all thirty four
of the sponsors by name but I
think it's pretty awesome that a
bill has
that much support within the
legislature and has that much
support out in the community as
well many good statements have
already been made and so I won't
repeat them ju just like HDR to
which we also support
to continue and and pass this
for H. R. eight as well thank
you for your time this morning.
Thank you Paul you're at.
Johnsonville Sanchez all thirty
four of you and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of H. J. R. eight my name is
Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy statewide five oh
one C. for nonprofit with over
four thousand members passage of
HJR two and eight our package
that would not just modernize
the legislature bring it in the
twenty first century but also
professional is the process and
ensure the legislature's not
having to hold down a second job
a paid job while deliberating on
important tax and policy issues
impacting all students in the
state the focus in our energy
would be focused on roundhouse
issues not their rate jobs.
They're paid job would be the
roundhouse Mexico residents
deserve important issues to be
decided and thoughtful manner
legislature that includes
representatives work with
working class experience S. J.
R. eight would enable working
people see profits and
Representative perspective of
working people those reasons we
take our boxers strongly
supports HR I thank you very
much so you have Jacob Vigil.
For more.
Projects have let's move to
Claudia.
Good morning again chair Johnson
vice chairman Roland numbers the
committee Claire I structure the
veterans and military families
caucus caucus has four hundred
fifty members statewide New
Mexico as a hundred forty two
thousand veterans which
represent eight point eight
percent of our population
however only six percent of our
legislators in New Mexico our
veterans are the second lowest
in veteran representation in the
nation even though we have an
ample supply of potential
candidates who are for military
bases into national labs rate
legislative body would eliminate
the need for legislators to be
financially independent rich or
retired with a pension it would
also attract a greater diversity
of Canada's with a wider swath
of experience to run for office
we could attract more veterans
which would improve this
constituencies representation in
the legislature our experiences
are not the same as many and
they add a valuable voice to the
conversation whatever the.
I see.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bob
Ali.
Quarter Exxon reported over
fifty billion dollars in profit
which they returned to their
shareholders and executives
rather than a.
Investing in a sustainable
future cleaning up.
Messed up and made in the
Permian basin illustrate the
huge amount of money that we're
willing to give.
Appropriations.
It from our land that some
people are unwilling to spend a
tiny fraction of that amount to
create a strong effective
legislature the only way to curb
corporate profiteering.
You to support this legislation
thank you thank you.
LA staff webcasting.
Madam.
I don't see any back to the
audience any closing comments we
have one
thank you madam chair I just
want to say this is a critical
piece of modernizing the New
Mexico legislature and I really
like the idea of a citizens
commission establishing with
those salaries could be and the
fact that you acknowledge that
legislators should still get
benefits for the time that they
spend in Santa Fe many are away
from home and can't get back to
their homes during the session
and I believe that legislators
work for their constituents all
year and that should be
recognized I think this will set
of New Mexico and a positive
passed for more economically
diverse legislature that will
better reflect the people that
the legislature service I hope
you all for that thanks thank
you okay let's go to
Representative Chasey.
And someone.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you so much Representative Rubio
and all your co sponsors I know
how hard you've all been working
on it
On this whole issue of not just
of getting legislators rate but
trying to get staff and and and
help us be more responsive to
our voters.
I did find myself sometimes to
groups that our constituents
state we have staff like our
contractual delegation this is
really
Quite embarrassing that with we
don't and
I I would to recognize Rose
Rohrer to I and I learned of
this when she presented to the
courts corrections and justice
committee is now constituent of
mine through redistricting which
I didn't realize before but
there's a good presentation on
line in the courts corrections
and justice in November of her
presentation if anyone wants to
look at that it's a good
powerful eight and I I expect
some
progress further now it and lied
education we're not quite
physicians said today or not
still a is that right Madam
chair representative yes okay
thank you thank you madam chair
but it was interesting the the
attitudes people have and the
assumptions that everyone makes
about legislators I mean I never
assumed I was going to get paid
when I ran for this job and I
have been here the
as long as member in the house
not in not in the Senate there's
some senators who's been here
longer than I have
But it takes a toll but with the
first.
I was really surprised it seems
that most everyone here was
either very wealthy or retired
and
You know.
A certain privilege and I was
one who had the privilege as
well to serve and yet it has
been.
Of a challenge
financially to do this and it
really it really hasn't I was
actually practicing law until
recently nearly full time and
when I did that I couldn't
participate in the interim
committees as
As I wish to and as I really
need to.
So
To that.
It's alright it's it's just a
couple of drops of coffee.
Every five food but
I.
I am really strong the
The.
Change in the demographic now
without having.
Change the constitution but I
also see the the.
This support the diversity that
we have no and to increase it
and make it just more possible
take some of them the pressure
all those who are survey I have
had jobs where I didn't get paid
while I was here I've had jobs
where do you get paid for that
was here I had one when job was
really a great job
of the only reason I left that
job was to go to law school and
you know probably cost me a lot
of money to.
I love to do the job but it's
it's more about how well one can
serve and I appreciate people
who've been involved for years
and years like totally Ortiz was
our staff attorney for
courts corrections and justice
all those years that but he
served and before he joined the
sentencing commission and
People who have been intimately
involved with the legislature
I appreciate their commitment to
making it better in the future
and you know this may not happen
before
I before I'm finished but I sure
hope it happens for the future
of our our state and
Really the.
The federal this body and the
outcomes so
Without madam chair will
Concluded provinces just
remember I'm I'm really I'm
grateful to you for the work I
think we have we're in the right
path it's but.
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam chair
and one of the things the
Sanchez for very Isabelle I'm I
took the UNM survey I'm happy to
report that is an extremely
robust survey took about a total
of two and a half to get through
all of it up but I'm not.
because it's for a good cause
and Madam chair representative
at I I am I really glad I
finally have a public space in
which I can tell everybody just
how hard this job as.
You don't know hearted tell you
are put in a position where you
have to choose between in the
middle of a global pandemic your
constituents who can't eight
your family who needs you and
your boss is your source of
income.
I have thought many many times
of wanting to quit this job
because of the under stress it
induces on folks have to balance
all three of those priorities
they used to say the only way
you could serve in the New
Mexico legislature is you have
to be one of the three R's rich
retired or resources fall I like
to think of myself myself as the
third but
yeah I am I am extremely
grateful madam chair to the
sponsors for doing this I know
it's been hard I know that the
message is hard many people
don't understand that we're not
paid understand why we don't get
paid in the understand that you
get what you pay for which in
this.
This is a.
And this opportunity it's
nothing's.
I really hope madam chair that
for this we've done this survey
before I know that it's not just
stuck in a drawer it has been
before in the past I really hope
that you stick with it Madam
chair representative until it
gets done I am here because you
know.
Madam chair representative thank
you Representative I do not know
it's really important for little
girls to see people that look
like us here in the states the
matter how hard it is and let me
tell you it's really hard when
you're one you're this age and
you're trying to balance all
those priorities so.
Also so that when cry I'm not
going to cry thank you madam
chair thank you to sponsor I
really I actually have to go to
a budget meeting or finalize the
finalizing your budget state but
I can't wait to vote for this
for thank you very much thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair okay.
Right for all the years that
Representative Chasey of if
that.
The.
Madam chair of the committee you
know I think common cost set of
rights he didn't take that job.
For the money he cared about the
state.
I actually seven generations my
state I care about it that's why
I am here.
And so we're.
Choices do we want people who
care about the state.
Or do we want paid politicians
I agree we need more staff I
think more staff in Santa Fe
both on both sides you know so
that we can reach out I am very
happy with that we have they're
able to respond the state
agencies responded with so I'm
happy with that.
This raises a real interesting
question.
Currently we're paid per diem.
And we have a retirement and
that's the that's what we of
course if we it Hey.
It will create another pair of
retired.
So do we get to retirements.
And I think that that's a real
question.
But of you know words if our
current one is based on years of
service and you know also I I
see that as a problem.
So when we.
Look at our founding fathers.
They saw it is a civic duty
that's the way I see it.
We talked about will will pay
the legislators will have a
professional so as you look at
the facts.
And.
We see many of them women as
normal citizens like us not.
At the end of their career
they're millionaires.
I've heard that will reduce so
this well let's look at watching
the news what's all going on in
Washington it's not going to
reduce law this.
Should we open it up to others.
If we're gonna open it up
completely.
Currently we don't have
let's see I think it's and
Representative Chasey may have
to help me on this but if you're
a state employee or county
employees you can't be in the
legislature's or anyone else.
Well.
Madam chair.
It depends.
I think there were county
employees that want to serve.
But right now anyone the
legislature the state
legislature house bill two funds
directly you know because I was
a senior research associate at
UNM health sciences center one I
first returned and I left a job.
So I could work at the
university so I I think it to
work at at.
Mexico tech New Mexico.
the state or join in you can.
Yes Sir but there was a time
when we had Kodi employees or
Members I'm not exactly sure if
it's counties decided not
themselves because there are
plastic counties and.
The.
I don't think they do it
yourself yeah.
Madam chair that I mean if we're
going to open it up and I
understand why we exclude the
you know I mean I'm voting
directly on.
The money going directly to the
agency I work for but anyway let
me move on so madam chair and
Representative Rubio when I look
at page two I look at all the
members you know we're gonna go
ahead we're gonna have the same
partial.
Fortunately every member that's
there.
Even even once appointed by the
ethics commission the ethics
commissioners were appointed by
politicians.
So we we have politicians
appointing.
Is going to determine.
What ourselves the.
So that's one thing that I see
is problematic and I don't know
how to solve I don't know how
you solved.
Anyway madam chair in
Representative Rubio we go to
page three and we go over the
line seventeen I almost wonder.
If we shouldn't high salary.
To the state's revenue for that
year.
Why state that is Representative
Chasey hi we're here outside of
the.
When there wasn't any money.
And so we're talking about a
hundred twelve legislators times
whatever.
As if that were some provision I
think our.
Our appropriation committee
finance committee would have to
look more in the future and make
sure the money is there.
To go ahead and of you know fund
the salaries and New Mexico yes
thank you Madam chair
representative on the line
fourteen
that that's one of the the the
things that we try to
incorporate into and making sure
that salaries wouldn't raise or
lower by more than ten percent
in any single adjustment we
added that because recently the
state of New York for example
again they they raise their
salaries over three hundred
percent and that's certainly
something that we did not want
to accomplish here we even
discussed incorporated
language that is specifically
what you're what you're
describing something more
specific but this is what we
actually landed on after some
further discussion that we felt
that ten percent would be sort
of the the middle ground for
everyone that we talk to.
Madam chair and Representative
Rubio when we go down the lines
up page three one sixteen
seventy.
It looks like what you're what
you're proposing is the speaker
would have a salary higher than.
Other members and does that
include it is the intent and
doesn't include that you have if
you will see in your date of
payments to each member Madam
chair representative no that's
actually language we have
removed from the from some of
the drops in the in the past
because other other states do
that where they leadership does
have a higher.
Another the but we are it what
we're proposing is that everyone
would have the same salary with
this with this says is that when
the commission is considering
salaries they're looking at
based on New Mexico and what are
what what we're what people
normally do in with the I guess
when you look at job
descriptions
we would they would meet those
those suggestions yeah Madam
chair and Representative Rubio
let me ask it another way that.
if we look at that one bridge.
Okay we represent about thirty
thousand
Constituents senators represent
almost fifty thousand so does a
Senator get paid more than a
then a house member.
Madam chair representative as we
drafted No.
Madam chair you in
Representative you may want to
tighten that up.
You know on your.
The C. Madam chair
representative when we get to
the Senate I'm sure they will
pay all right.
I do that.
Yeah we have definitely heard
from them previously and madam
chair and Representative Rubio
so let's go over to page six
we're talking about you know
from page of I.
And we're talking about
Of.
Thank you madam the state.
Of our member of this
commission.
So.
Six or we'll see.
Which the after the language on
six and seven I think we need to
insert a new number I.
And what I would propose is for.
Two years after leaving.
Become a candidate for office.
So I am I am a member of the
commission on determining
salaries for a really got a good
now I'm going to be a candidate.
Anyway I would make that motion
and.
Representative center from the
moment yeah I mean I I consider
them from.
Are you talking about
commissioner who's been serving
in the infinite creation and
then wants to run for office
that they have to wait two years
after.
Madam chair Representative Rubio
you test for gonna make you not
be on the commission two years
before we have to make sure
you're not.
At the running for office two
years after.
Okay so we're going to have to.
Moved to discuss the amendment
and walk through it.
So that we can noted.
Sure I'm not sure
Representative.
District Representative do you
have language for it's going to
Judiciary if it gets out of here
and we can.
Get the proper amended I I I did
state that properly implemented.
That's that would just be able
thanks thank you this is
sponsors willing to do that.
I can have an amendment for
Judiciary of that school madam
chair that all withdrawn
automation and we'll just to
deter sharing the I agree that
correct what we stand for that
better teacher thank you thank
you Representative.
Changes for the two.
So our common commitment
to
New Mexico Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Zero three will
Some reading the bill and it
says that.
That would determine are celery.
We get per diem.
And our salaries and to provide
a little ironic.
Madam chair.
You madam chair of
Representative that's just
that's pretty traditional in
terms of how we laid out in the
constitution most missions to
get mileage and per diem okay so
but it wouldn't be salaried
managers okay and then going
back on Representative reads
question about the stacking of
what we get right now we there's
a pension and he served ten
years there's a per diem when we
get per diem as well and the
pension as well or would it just
be the salary and then P. R. A.
Madam chair representative madam
chair the recommendation would
be established so we look at
salaries they can also be they
can also look at anything else
we are not repealing the section
of the constitution regarding
per diem and mileage so that
will remain a against the voters
have an opportunity later on
that if they're not happy with
the commission's decision they
can repeal they can they can.
Do a referendum on the decision
the decision that's made and
then we would still have that
mileage and per diem I think
that if we if they were to
remove it not supported okay
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative not leave me
to another question regarding
the the referendum I I haven't
read the statute says what you
need to know what percentage of
the population are the last of
that needed to I believe it's
already in the bill itself but I
believe it's ten percent.
Okay and in FY County.
Thank you madam chair
representative so then.
There is no set salary in this
bill that what you're looking
for it would be based on this
commission madam chair correct
the voters when it's on the
ballot the question was the
sensually and they'll use the
title of the the
of the bill but it's essentially
asking voters to support or not
support the creation of a
commission that would establish
dollars okay thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative and so is there a
reason why you did not get the
legislature the authority to
make the salaries Senator spent
a lot of talk in this committee
at least about the power of the
legislature and you keep on
taking power away from us so
could you of high on what why
you chose to put it in an
independent commission off the
legislature itself chair
representative Madam chair
representative I as I mentioned
in my intro I've been
introducing versions of this
legislation since twenty
seventeen and so from all of the
work that we've done since then
this is been the the this is
where we have found the most
consensus within both
legislators and folks in the
community who support this
issue.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and I do echo
comments from Representative Lee
you know we don't want to make
career politicians so would you
be open to.
Future amendments that would
limit service in the in the
legislature such as term limits
Madam chair representative Madam
chair representative I hope I
don't have to be in the
legislature them.
and so for me this legislation
is strictly trying to improve
raise the number of people who
don't necessarily have access
all policy can be changed later
on and I know that there's folks
in the Senate who would like to
tie on term limits to salaries
things like that that I believe
the commission is we'll have
that that that ability to have
those discussions moving forward
but at this time I believe
voters that's my turn.
Voters want to vote me out then
that's that's it but I'm I.
I I'm I'm good.
I yeah I mean and and then the
commission in on on on
establishing salaries
it's still a couple years from
now okay thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so this
would not exclude them from
speaking about those
possibilities terms through
their changes that's what we
what's laid out in the
in in the work of the bill
that's what we're encouraging
them to look at terms of
sessions I mean in terms of
legislative salary for later on
I think
there will be opportunities if I
mean nothing is perfect when it
leaves the legislature and
signed into law there will
always be opportunities to
change things.
if in three or four years maybe
ten years if the commission is
no longer providing the kind of
service and our opportunities
for the legislature to make
changes okay thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative and so going back
to what we would pay these
people and it says no deviation
greater than ten percent Madam
chair representative and I know
in this last year inflation has
rates like Levin percent so
would you be open I guess maybe
in another committee here later
so time this to inflation.
Where the salaries then maybe
Madam chair representative madam
chair I think we've already done
that okay in the bill I can't
remember which one it is but it
is I to
It is tied to.
For that.
Since.
Yes section the page three.
Representative to director maybe
no for the let me see here for
the report the report okay.
Maybe chase might have.
On that.
Madam
speaker course.
Yeah.
I mean it's yup it's tied to
the.
Of whatever his wallet I'm
trying to remember the word tied
to a please see this.
Now yeah maybe it is I'm I'm
sorry I just don't I'm it's it's
blinking on right now.
Representative Rubio would you
like to ask your expert witness
to help clarify that.
I mean I don't know if he can
chase is not something you can
verify in terms of
that it's tied to inflation
where we can find that.
All.
Chairman already indicated that
I don't speak in opposition or
get rid of the bill of the only
the only reference to inflation
in the resolution presently we
we goes to the salaries needed
income household goods from
Mexico so that will change over
time there is not an inflation
factor tied into the actual
salary of the
One of the state or
the importation that there can
be taken care of by the.
Because the commission can meet
has to meet at least every four
years yeah inflation is one huge
issue and.
Here's a completion needs to
raise or lower the salaries
commission have need addresses
question and.
At issue report which.
Eight.
To the information.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative thank you Mr
border yeah that really.
Tightened up what I was looking
for because I just want to
increase the amount of change
that happens and then we would
get you know lower than whatever
the meeting and so I appreciate
that madam chair not just a
comment you know I I think it's
important to talk about this I
think it's good to have more
diversity in our in our
legislature you know me as thank
the only generation Z. member
ever elected throughout history
of time it's it's a weird you
know and how do you come from
means by any stretch of the
imagination Madam chair
representative on you know I'm
not retired I'm not wealthy I
know my mom is a school teacher
my dad worked for the state and
so you know I came from a
regular average New Mexico
School and yeah I was by the
grace of god that I ran for
office I I guess I was a little
crazy to do that.
But you know I'm I'm blessed to
be here and look forward to
welcoming more people that are
more diverse into our our
community here has legislature
so thank you madam chair thank
you Representative for this bill
thank you Representative thank
you NextEra Representative Alcon
yes you.
So close.
Madam chair in most of the
state I have a motion for a do
pass in the second but before I
take the I'd like to express
myself a little bit here then I
first want to say that thank you
like I ask about my home.
My family my communities and
Mexico.
And you know for the nice mereka
I was elected to office and up
to now to transition.
from job to job because my my my
workplaces could not afford me
being gone for sixty days thirty
days sixty days thirty days and
so that and that takes its toll
so I think this bill great in
tandem with
our last bill
House joint resolution to.
And you know I I appreciate on
that note are excellent staff
who also sent by.
We're getting to hear and that
you know it's no wonder people
on a farm for me because they
think I'm a seventy five.
I don't.
I have one question it is here
that in twenty eighteen we
averaged about twelve thousand
seven hundred forty five dollars
thirty day session and then
seventeen thousand two hundred
forty seven six action I think
that's an over just.
that's just a comment that I
want to.
With that.
yes actually both on this to
speak at all sorry
Representative Zamora I thank
you madam chair make it short.
Madam chair representative how
much this cost taxpayers and
state New Mexico.
Madam chair representative at
this point it is unclear because
the commission will make that
decision depending on what how
the surface Allori on fire right
now states it's a hundred fifty
to two hundred thousand
and so.
Thanks for work for at this
point Madam chair representative
that legislators are.
No Sir the Representative it's
it's
this is total.
Madam chair representative so
madam chair and representative.
I'm not very good at math us.
Madam chair representative
unless you already have an idea
of what the salaries gonna
proponents madam chair earlier
Madam chair representative maybe
I need to reinstate my question.
Once we set the salaries.
The total amount sellers for the
legislative.
Then what we'll do bill for to
the taxpayers etcetera Madam
chair representative.
Just to explain the voters have
to approve the creation of a
commission the commission will
then determine what our salary
is I can't tell you what that
salary could be they could say
we don't need a salary they can
say that we that that we each
could get up to fifty thousand I
don't know what that is.
And madam chair.
Representative.
Do you not think that this bill
would be more transparent if we
put those numbers.
To the voters so they would
understand exactly how much it's
gonna cost taxpayers of the
state of New Mexico Madam chair
representative as I mentioned in
my in my presentation is that
the commission will be supported
face of the Legisla- voters
supported it'll go to the
commission the commission will
then make the decision then the
voters have line up to ninety
days Sir do a referendum if they
don't support so transparency
there they will know the amounts
that the commission has has set
forth.
And madam chair representative.
We could come up with a charge
you know look at your Richard
numbers here.
And we could come up are.
Help them to understand the
totality of this bill.
I think can be a good idea for
the for the taxpayers of the
state of New Mexico understand
the scope for proposing.
Madam chair representative
I I mean I think there's a lot
of misinformation if people are
already saying make seventy five
thousand dollars so there's
plenty of public education that
needs to be done with this issue
between now and the time that
the commission is established.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Thank you so we have a motion
for to pass in the second please
take will.
Representative August ordered
yes.
Representative walked no Sir.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Rowe yes.
Representative right no Sir.
Representative the more now and
I'd like to explain of a
pleasure to go yes.
Madam chair representative yes.
Thank you Representative Zamora
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
It's it's hard as a person that
has worked all his life and.
Look for good jobs and try to
advance to.
Start the steps to give myself a
raise
on behalf.
I don't know how else we would
advance.
What we have now and and make it
a more.
Open job for for people of the
state.
But in in my views is just hard
to give myself a raise thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee.
Thank you Representative you
have to pass as amended on.
Resolution eight thank you.
Nibert.
One six.
That was.
And.
One of the house is.
Thank you.
This.
This is.
This
that Johnson.
Which is.
Okay.
It is.
Right.
How.
In the house.
Yeah.
But.
Okay.
Ladies and gentlemen begin again
it said ten twenty eight and we
have to be on the left and.
Representative night.
Thank you madam chair.
This is the early brief this is
another you know for a long term
vision built for you.
Currently in New Mexico has the
uniformed playing property yes.
Lee was enacted into law in two
thousand three it's receded and
prior the.
Based on my research with maybe
in the early nineties.
Because of the advent of a lot
of.
Other types of ways of funding
the accounts senator your
telephone.
The act needs to be updated.
And so what this does is it.
Exist forward to accommodate
those types of property it
clarifies which type of the
intangible property are covered
in the act.
By specific dormancy.
Where the actor was very clear
and expenses.
This spans remedies for the
holders of those accounts and
then this prioritises your.
It's confidential and should not
be we DO.
Unlike the uniform.
Commercial that are brought to
a week or so ago.
This at this is not just beer
amendments to various sections
with totally replaces section
seven dash eight eight F. one
which is the uniformed where
property at with a revised
budget all the providers.
Or where property at and I
should do I first with us and
Jack Burton with the running law
firms is here to assist me if
there's any questions
And.
With a group of questions here
yes ma'am we're ready your
question thank you let's go to
the audience comments and
supported field.
The opposition seeing that Sir.
The committee my name is Brian
Fallon with Albuquerque
publishing company in
Albuquerque general share hi
this bill hundred percent
because many times this morning
if we that New Mexico needs to
update itself
in lock step with the rest of
the country when it comes to to
loss like this Hey the
legislature and the other things
we are and and and as a citizen
I just think New Mexico needs to
keep up with the others states
and with the uniformed codes
that other station off.
Thank you let's go.
Let us.
You.
Yourself.
The.
While we're waiting let's stay
on the webcast are there any
opposing comments.
We're having technical
difficulties with you so
committee members
Representative.
Madam chair as Representative
not heard I want to go to page
one wind one.
Chair.
Yes.
Hi I have a representative on
the New.
I was actually.
Thank you Madam chair
representative I.
I was trying to do a little bit
of research to understand this
bill that link the but I did
have a couple questions so my
correct that this.
Is based on model legislation
from the uniform law commission
that is correct a writer.
Thank you and madam chair what
are the like really substances
changes from existing law.
Thank you for bringing.
Well we the majority of states.
Very much yield was digital
account with speaker Paul has
not.
Built with loyalty and reward
account so if you have a.
A lot of.
Files or something built up to
do those things that may be
available to us from one of.
And also
in your.
Alright well used in my pocket
the.
I have a thank all of our our
somebody gave the stimulus money
on and I.
Fifty years used for periods of
time that is what they do with
that money and so it is trying
to update those so that the
money
Has a process to get back to
the.
Going over so we heard of bill.
At least in Judiciary about the
weather published
Whether published the claim
property owners in the newspaper
receive generous though all of
this act as those provisions
property in details and.
So if there continues up it
It is a little bit broader in
scope because of the different
types monetary systems that were
saying today than than what
existed twenty years ago bring
those things up to a very and
it feels as a whole whole.
Versions regarding of
confidential information that
the holder would have.
What can and cannot the holder
do with respect to that
information in terms of
publishing and sending it to the
state for.
It also clarifies which state.
Gets to.
The the recipient of those funds
first to that person.
Thank you very much Jim Fletcher
reserve the answer of.
Looking at page twenty two zero
W. twenty two line.
Twenty five three states twenty
three one eight
Representative how.
People are contacted them am I
correct of the bill would allow
for seizure of the money our tax
referred that tax deferred
retirement fund.
The owner didn't respond to an
email for three years I see that
the bill requires first class
mail be sent.
Excuse me at the bank holding
the funds doesn't have an email
address on file for if the bank
doesn't think that the email
address is accurate but my
question of what if the bank
thanks for the email address is
invalid like could it could
retirement account be seized
because an email was like sent
to a spam folder or something
like that.
Madam chair representative let
me answer this one.
There's two years of the number
one you tried to try to go
through these processes to
contact the factual over and so
if you're not getting any
response from from those types
of contacts because it's a bad
email addresses change or evolve
wrestling this
they've moved from their home
location.
Money.
Seizes from critics that money
then of.
Issues to the state.
Service B. and then the state of
New Mexico.
This job in trying to notify was
honest in the last step is to
publish those names on the
website in in the newspaper so
that parties.
Can see their name on the
website or in the newspaper and
then made a claim to recover
their money there this whole
thing is trying to get people.
Their money for that that is
otherwise just sitting somewhere
in essence of their.
But after that.
And if they don't remember that
they have this account somewhere
so this whole thing is a
mechanism to try to return
people's rights for money to and
the process is that that thanks
insurance companies are other
folders of accounts after growth
through happening there and all.
How do we deal with with the
appropriate state agency.
Getting that level two.
So thank you thank you the
answer is and then after that so
I understand correctly.
After
the email goes and responded to
the property is issued by the
state and then the state would
try to contact the person at
that point is that correct.
Etcetera etcetera.
Madam chair representative I
recall correctly there's still a
period of time after those.
Responded to the email you for
that second staff takes place is
not back yet.
It takes some time and there's
different there's different
years legislative based on the
types of accounts from you one
to give that money to them
media.
I think if you're an employee
and you have a now with a four
year
I don't have the money but I
think the one.
If it's healthy you generally
don't the deal with Hartford
there's longer periods of time
because right.
That they're not dealing with
those types of.
Four years.
They're dealing with you every
two weeks to.
A lot of growth sure I'm there
long time for us.
Right I only have one more
question Madam chair
representative
In twenty sixteen that ABA's
American Bar Association
recommended that legislature's
rejects the uniform law
commissions Representative by
unclaimed property act because
it violated common models about
SGD intangible property so I
guess I have a concern with that
and my question would be what
has the uniform law commission
done to address those concerns
since twenty sixteen.
Well there's three things wanted
out one of the fifty eight and I
would just tell you that the
statute of limitations.
In this bill are consistent with
the sixteen Mexico law the
constitutionality concerns
regarding sales of securities in
this of your format or
consistent with existing New
Mexico law in light waters of
the priority rules that they
claim are inconsistent with
federal common law are still
consistent with the existing New
Mexico so GABA was looking out.
All the fifty states and
trucking up with these
plans the vitamins are
consistent with Mexico law marks
expert witness just look at the
this morning if you would like
to.
Thank you madam chair.
That's correct.
A few years all of.
the ABA a debt is not taking the
fictional position on this this
is just some of.
So.
Some action was.
Not to mention position are.
there of.
Position contrary action goes
all so we're we're sure.
Thank you very much chair
representative for your answer
that questions and thank you
Representative Rehm thinks yes
you're only on that.
C..
Madam chair representative
Nibert we have new members here
on committee I think you ought
to explain what is the uniformed
of log Commission who were the
members why is it important.
But it is so they understand
these big bills co
chair all take a stab at it turn
it over to my experts because he
has
Decades longer service.
Madam chair representative the
uniform law commission.
Is a commission of states.
That have come together for the
purposes of deciding certain
areas of the law should be
consistent across the fifty
states.
The bill that we talked about
last week the uniform commercial
code.
I would suggest to you is the
it's the pole star it's the it's
the one that that everybody has
recognized needs to be
consistent across the state.
This particular act.
Forty one of the fifty states
have adopted either of the prior
version which New Mexico for the
brand new version.
Forty one of fifty states
there's nine states that have
not adopted either.
Those states to the the
opportunity not to drive their
own rules but they try to look
at the issue areas that there
should be some consistency
across the state find.
Rules that are are.
The state whether you're in the
state with that state so phase
programs or are enrolled in an
identical or close to identical
fashion
The uniform law commission in
New Mexico
there are four legislative
members myself Representative
Chandler.
Representative Greg Moffit and I
mean Center drive up to and
senator Joseph Cervantes also
within this building
right over the
and
Bill more votes today who is the
Senate Judiciary staff we are
members then we have people like
Mr Burton polytechnics to use
for the
the head of the Legislative
Council she's a member are Ramon
Sanchez system sorely.
Senator pain used to be a member
of the the he's not all right
now.
this is Ariel from UNM Law
School of.
Seraphina issues a local
attorney here in Santa Fe was
appointed recently by the
governor.
All.
That may be the list of from New
Mexico to current I other states
have legislative members some
have judicial members some have
just appointed members the state
is to select how they bring
people to this body.
Of of you're logged Commission
as a professional staff Chicago
Illinois it's quite extensive
They are led by a board of
directors of members.
They oversee all those all the
task of giving things compiled
with our up to the states and
they were working with
Legislative Council inspired Act
as.
The New Mexico delegation
decided which uniform acts to
bring forward this year and this
was one of I think four or five
pieces of legislation that the
the.
Are you important axes were very
before this body tissue
Hello impact
is supposed to show up in front
of Commerce next time you have
the with the liability will and
she specifically prepared to
address the history of the U.
Elsie and and that I might go
there New Mexico.
He is one of the top five states
maybe the top state of adopting
uniform access reproductive
eighty some pieces of
legislation that uniform acts of
that either at the top or near
the top among states there's
some states if just on top
uniform acts our state to the
East Texas of the doctor the
uniform commercial code and
maybe a couple others but is
pretty rare we're as New Mexico
and Colorado this pretty good
job.
Ironically some of those less
populated smaller states seem to
adopt more uniform acts for them
the New York California Texas
thank you Representative we'll
go back to
R. detest motion by
Representative re we have a
second.
And second by Representative
Zamora is taking well.
Representative on the north no.
Representative law.
Yes please.
Representative K..
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes.
Representative right yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative blocked.
Yes.
Pleasure to go yes.
Madam yes.
Representative
you madam chair.
Thank you all Representative
Lente.
We will probably have to be used
on house for it.
Your.
Right.
Please.
Most.
The more a state.
Need
to.
To.
This.
This was house bill.
Representative Lente thank you
madam chair good morning
everybody house bill one forty
eight sure that youngest because
children can join childhood
education and care program that
for reserve their cultural and
linguistic identities what it
does proposes to require the
early childhood education and
care department.
ECECD to enter into inter
governmental agreements with
tribes I salute quests this for
funding early childhood
education programs eligible
tries will be the is able to
exercise self determination
state funded early childhood
education programs using their
own culturally and
linguistically relevant
education staff.
At with that being said madam
chair you want to introduce my
expert witness governor of the
state as we go to the public
there any question that I handle
and with that because that's
that includes thank you.
Mr Regis.
Users.
And chair members of the
committee on Regis Pecos
Representative share that
expertise.
I I
go to the audience those in
support please raise your hand.
Those in opposition.
Hand.
Go quickly to the public
public comments we have to be on
the house floor.
Right.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee controlled by a
the chairman of the local
governors and former governor
from the public to see of this.
Legislation will ensure.
Tribes will develop an.
With all the care needed for
education purposes and the
office of the council of
governors had develop the
program with.
The court decision and twenty
eighteen as
come
forth thank you for the
termination of.
So.
Yeah stand for thank you thanks.
Chino.
Chair of the committee money's
coverage you know
I would choose this for.
Ackerman tile set also.
We stand support of calls one
eight
this bill is all about
recognizes this state and also
New Mexico strives.
And allowing I that work in the
school for the education and the
development of children
and it's also about establishing
direct partnership with the
state New Mexico tribes and
building trust and allowing the
funds to be able to.
really take responsibility for
responsibility for the welfare
and well being of the children
as of those reasons renters
point so thank you.
Thanks.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee meetings state
Candelaria turning with the New
Mexico Center on poverty and
council council for us Martinez
case the standard full support
of this bill because it bounces
StateTribal of product
conversation into areas early
childhood education and then
also state parks tribal
education sovereignty and as
many of you know that.
The Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
found that early childhood
education is an important
component of these initiatives
education are needed students
that means access to early
childhood programs that really
Senator yes languages enough
identities.
Cultures and for those reasons
we also practice.
passes thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Austin the
document the state of New Mexico
and we stand in support of
eighty one forty eight for all
the reasons are stated this is
essential nature are dressing
inequity to the US market is
lawsuit provides I visibility to
create a continuum of education
of our children but also the
voters over one.
Last year constitutional
amendment to fund early
childhood education for all
Mexican children and this bill
last tribes of those with
expertise and intimate knowledge
their own communities to address
that and for functional early
childhood education to meet the
mandate from voters at the
latter's Committee that
moviepass thank you.
Chairman miss kids you have of
former governor Chicago also
director of the northern needed
for this council and chairman of
the all photos of governors
Education Committee I understand
support of this initiative
because
The company asset package and
interacting with files language
and culture.
What we wanted to do was to use
that to to Senator started early
on in life this so we created
thirty Senators the problem we
have is that we have childcare
and historic programs but there
there funding is limited and
their respective how we use it
this bill would allow us to work
more closely to develop those
earning thirty centers to use
advanced language but
To get the that is start at the
free to support thank you thank
you let's go to the webcast.
Chair members of the committee
Jessica how to re CHI St
Joseph's children I stand in
favor of H. B. one forty eight
we run the largest home visiting
program the state during which
we support families as they
welcomed their first child
during with them prenatally
until their child reaches three
years old we do not accept
government funding but we
advocate over the decade of
advocating for the
constitutional amendment for
early childhood advocates
provision of education if we was
to clean culturally sustaining
for all of our beloved children
this bill is not an option it is
a must to reach decisions for
malaria digits parents
excessively been racing
educating children but this has
been distracted due to genocidal
policies and practices this bill
is a step in the right direction
and crafting policy that
supports driving tribal
communities starting from the
ever so important period of
early childhood thank you
Representative ninety for case
by legislation thank you.
Curtis Chavis.
What Dr Curtis Chavis with the
carriage children's learning
center of director of
advancement
we are in full support of H. B.
one forty eight and we are a
native native language early
childhood center located in
Kochi public.
Thank you Bernadette hardy.
Hello this very hearty in here
with neighbors are sorry I'm New
Mexico native folk and we're and
support each the one forty eight
we know our students and
families need the support of
this bill especially for early
childhood students who are most
vulnerable and coming through
the school system and these some
of these concerns need to be
identified our teachers know
what our kids need and for
teachers need support to help
with the these concerns that
they identify and help them grow
and help them be better students
and.
And also our early what sorry
money another call trying to
listen to things but we need
also to try to support our
languages our native languages
in our schools even in the urban
urban areas thank you thank you
next we have Christine sams.
What's the whole but can you
hear me this morning yes we can
hear you okay thank you my name
is Dr Christine assumed some
from out come up with will and
I'm calling on behalf of the
American Indian language
resource in a research policy in
teacher training center at the
UNM college of education we
stand in full support of H. B.
one forty eight because we feel
that would be an opportunity for
own tribal communities to
implement what they have always
prioritized in terms of language
and culture building the
foundations for our native
children we feel that this bill
will be what allow tribes to
target the the the most
opportune time for our young
children to learn their heritage
language this is something that
is not addressed in mainstream
early childhood education
programs so we stand in full
support of this bill and we hope
that you will give it your
support thank you very much.
Thank you Charlie eight zero.
Good morning this is Charlene is
Cerro and I may hear with and
wrap this thing that.
I am from the public just let it
department of education director
and I am the executive director
for the public was that a head
start and early head start and
child care center.
And we are here standing in full
support of house bill one forty
eight for all the reasons shared
which you from the people who
spoke prior and we would
appreciate your full support in
moving this bill forward.
Thank you thank you next we have
Carlotta bird.
Good morning to all of you I
stand in full support of David
K. Representative Lente K.
introduction of house bill one
forty eight on behalf The New
Mexico tribal language
consortium.
who advocate for language
learning for all children.
We believe that this bill would
help to foster.
The relationship between.
Tribal governments and the state
and looking for alternatives and
great options for early
childhood education so we thank
you for considering this bill
and supporting it.
Thank you we'll stay on the
webcast are there any imposing
comments.
Seeing that in fact to the
committee Representative a lot.
And then Representative Chasey
thank you madam chair I would
just move it the passcode.
Okay okay so I have a motion
where do passed by
Representative block Senators
Chasey do we have any opposition
to this bill.
Seeing none you have to pass
thank you
committees the bacteria that
said.
We do need.
The state for Chandler.
Sure I've.
I got a it's affected some of
his.
Please.
Yeah.
Do it first.
Of.
All right.
And we're looking for for.
Okay.
You questions.
Seven no.
He ran.
In the state in the past.
Madam chair gonna let.
I think to.
I have no response.
Yes.
Thank.
That have that house memorial
one.
Morial.
Our our Legislative Council
commission this body
compensation and classification
of the new right budget because
all three branches of government
we all know there commend the
shortages yes the look and the
compensation.
They are supposed to monitor
these progress and have
recommendations to us by
December first twenty twenty
four.
This
time I.
Thank you so much care and quite
the more.
I'm here for all as well of no
doubt one calling excellent job
presenting this bill
this is an offshoot of a lot of
conversations.
See about vacancy rates
retention rates we need to be
able to recruit high quality
staff for state government in
France here in terms of how the.
They are C. forty eight so
what I did working with senator
Munoz on on trying to get our
arms around improving access the
cage off classification system
salary system in other.
That teleworking is called out
the one that.
Finally off of that state
workers The Dallas the proposed
thank you Representative let's
go to the audience do we have
any.
Pass comments in support of the
bill jobs Josh Anderson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
asked me Council eighteen we
represent about fourteen or
fifteen state agencies here in
New Mexico just want to thank
the sponsor for bringing forward
a classing Cobb study is you
know a long overdue these are
the type of proposals we need to
look at to be competitive so we
can pay our current workers in
future workers a competitive
rate rate of pay and also retain
our current workers so again we
urge the committee support and
just want to thank the sponsor
for bringing this issue four
thank you madam chair.
General Romero comments in
support of the memorial.
Our drummer well madam chair
members of the committee again
of with the local seventy
seventy thanks for the
communication workers of America
representing some twenty six
hundred state employees would
like to thank you for for
bringing this for Mario up and
was also think it's long overdue
bottom line is that we can't
compete that region.
Boy and that thank you again for
your leadership on the.
He is saying on the webcast we
have comments in opposition.
Committee members.
Question yes okay last year.
Madam chair representative the
memorial request report by
December twenty twenty four.
Madam chair representative the
staff.
Of madam chair and
representative I appreciate the
question time is of the so the
enough time to the job.
Right madam chair just a second.
Representative creating a
second.
Little is there any opposition.
From being
on your memorial thank you very
much.
Madam chair.
Twenty three years thank you.
This is really.
First is.
I
see no partners in this.
There is.
All right it.
Source.
Three sixty four.
For.
What these thank you.
Hello.
You want to
really.
Sorry
for the distress.
