Hello Mister speaker.
Well.
I have the email read.
Thank
you Mr shin.
Representative Garcia here not
on you.
Representative Gail Armstrong
would use the word want to make
sure that if funds are working
if you checked in for local.
Thank you.
The clerk to call those who
don't have a recorded.
vote.
Representative Alcon.
Here Representative Alcon is
here.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Representative Barreras.
Representative about it as is
present Representative bash.
Representative bash is present
Representative beluga.
Representative well guys here
Representative Cadena.
Here Representative Cadena is
here Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
In the.
Representative Harry Garcia
Representative Representative
Harper.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane is here
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan is present
Representative Lundstrom.
Here Representative Lundstrom is
here Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya is
present Representative Nyberg.
Representative Nibert is here
Representative Ortez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm is here
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative small.
Representative Terrazas.
Representative Thomson.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson is here.
Okay will cost close with warm.
Members please rise for today's
indication office by the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Herndon.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Please bow your heads.
There have been the father on
behalf of all of us who are
gathered here today thank you
for giving us another day of
life.
Thank you for being with us and
all of our joys and sorrows for
your comfort in our sadness
imported companionship in our
loneliness remember to watch
over each of us especially those
who are sick or in need of
healing.
And especially the families of
those who have lost loved ones
to gun violence.
As we all worked diligently to
carry out the work of the people
of New Mexico give us the
strength and tenacity to make
just and fair decisions without
areas whether real or imagined
just remember that we are here
to represent each of our
constituents without regard to
race culture.
Previous condition of servitude
our financial status.
Each day helping those that we
can approach to support.
Appreciate the support and love
we get from those around us
those who love us all of this
many more lessons we just
funding.
And we pray in your name.
Thank you generating the would
the gentleman from the general
any from grant Hidalgo and Luna
please leave this in the pledge
of allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
To.
So which instance.
It is.
With Jennifer San Juan
Representative Strickler please
leisure and saluting New Mexico
slide.
The state of New Mexico this is
a perfect friendship among
soldiers.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
good morning is a good morning
members I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered.
Good afternoon everyone.
Are there any nonsense.
San Juan.
Mr speaker apprentices later but
the house Republicans will
caucus for fifteen minutes right
after the session in the
leader's office.
Members take note.
It will build introduction to
and go to that.
This is any other restaurants
the gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objections so ordered.
Just to read.
House Bill to introduce by
Representative Lundstrom and act
making general appropriations
and authorizing expenditures by
state agencies required by law
House Bill to introduce by
Representative Lundstrom.
House Bill to.
Having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three introduced by
Representative Rubio and act
making appropriations for the
operation of the department of
transportation House Bill three
introduced by Representative
Rubio.
House Bill three having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
thence appropriations and
finance.
One hundred and one introduced
by Representative seven Jana
Matthews forterra's McQueen in
Anderson an act relating to
natural resources and acting The
New Mexico reforestation center
act directing the forestry
division of the Energy minerals
and natural resources department
to enter into an agreement with
the department of forestry at
New Mexican highlands university
the agricultural experiment
station at New Mexico State
University and the department of
biology at the university of New
Mexico to create the New Mexico
reforestation center to address
the impacts of a changing
climate on the state's forest
and address the state's
reforestation needs creating a
board directing the
establishment of a dedicated
account for funding making
appropriation house bill one
hundred and one introduced by
Representative serin Jana
Matthews Cortez the queen and
Anderson house bill one oh one
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee.
Since appropriations and
finance.
Of the one hundred and two
introduced by representative
Cadena and act relating to
taxation providing pass through
entities an election to pay and
entity level tax in lieu of
withholding exempting income
subject to the entity level tax
from the income tax act in the
corporate income and franchise
tax act house bill one hundred
to introduced by representative
Cadena.
I just wanted to having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred.
To the conversation Development
Committee then to taxation and
revenue.
House bill one hundred three
introduced by Representative
Serrato and Dixon and act making
appropriation to the higher
education department for the
central New Mexico community
college to develop and launch a
venture studio to build and
develop local companies house
bill one hundred three
introduced by Representative
Serrato and Dixon house bill one
oh three having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the Education
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
House bill one hundred and four
introduced by Representative
Dixon Serrato Martinez in my
Estes for the legislative
finance committee and act
relating to public finances and
acting the venture capital
program act creating a fund
providing for investments in
certain New Mexico businesses
and private equity funds making
an appropriation house bill one
hundred four introduced by
representatives Dixon Serrato
Martinez and Maestas.
House bill one oh four having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
commerce and economic
development department that's
appropriations and finance.
House joint resolution two
introduced by Representative
Ferrary a joint resolution
proposing to amend the
constitution New Mexico by
adding a new section of article
to the provides the people of
the state with environmental
rights including the right to a
clean and healthy environment in
the right to protection of the
environment and directs the
state to serve as trustee of the
neck of the natural resources of
New Mexico for the benefit of
all New Mexicans and by
repealing the current pollution
control provisions of article
twenty section twenty one house
joint really resolution to
introduced by Representative
Ferrary string resolution to
having been read twice by title.
Is authorized by section
nineteen articles nineteen
section one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee this
Judiciary.
House joint resolution three
introduced by representatives
and divert and Eli a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article four of the
constitution of New Mexico to
provide the declaration of a
state of emergency pursuant to a
power granted to the governor by
law terminates after ninety days
unless the governor calls the
legislature into special session
to address the circumstances of
the emergency and to require a
three fifths vote the legislator
legislature to restrict suspend
or terminate the emergency
declaration strict resolution
three introduced by
representatives and divert and
Eli.
Mr resolution three having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
government elections in the
Indian Affairs Committee tents
Judiciary.
House joint resolution for
introduced by Representative
read a joint resolution
proposing proposing amendments
article two section thirteen of
the constitution of New Mexico
to allow conditions for denial
of bail to be set by the
legislature remove the
requirement the building I'll
decisions decisions be made only
by a quarter of record remove
the limitation of building I'll
two defendants charged with a
felony clarify that fail may be
denied if no release conditions
will reasonably ensure the
appearance of the person as
required and remove certain
court procedural directions
house joint resolution for
introduced by Representative
ream.
House joint resolution for
having been read twice by title
is authorized by article
nineteen section one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the government
elections in eighty Affairs
Committee then said Judiciary.
String resolution I introduced
by Representative Dixon a joint
resolution proposing to amend
article seven of the
constitution of New Mexico to
allow voters who have not
selected a party affiliation to
vote in the primary election of
a political party and providing
political parties the option of
allowing only party members to
participate in the party's
nomination process on condition
that the party pays the cost of
that process house joint
resolution I introduced by
Representative Dixon pastor
resolution I having been read
twice by title is authorized by
article nineteen six one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the governor
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee thence judiciary.
House joint resolution six
introduced by Representative
Alcon a joint resolution
proposing amendment article
eight section fifteen of the
constitution New Mexico to
extend a property tax exemption
currently only allowed for one
hundred percent disabled
veterans and their widows and
widowers to veterans with less
than a one hundred percent
disability and their widows and
widowers and basing the amount
of the exemption on the veterans
federal disability rating house
joint resolution six introduced
by Representative Alcon.
Strong resolution six.
The mid read twice by title is
authorized to pursuit to article
in nineteen section one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
thence taxation and revenue.
House joint resolution seven
introduced by Representative
Alcon a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
article eight section five of
the constitution of New Mexico
to increase a property tax
exemption for honorably
discharged members of the armed
forces and their widows and
widowers house joint resolution
seven introduced by
Representative Alcon house joint
resolution seven having been
read twice by title is
authorized by article nineteen
section one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the labor veterans military
affairs committee then to
taxation and revenue.
US joint resolution eight
introduced by representative Ely
a joint resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of New
Mexico to create an office of
consumer affairs to promote and
protect the interests of the
consumers of New Mexico house
joint resolution eight
introduced by representative
Ely.
House joint resolution eight
having been read twice by title
is authorized by article
nineteen sixty one of the
constitution order printed
referred to the consumer and
public affairs committee tents
government elections and Indian
Affairs.
House joint resolution nine
introduced by representatives
Figueroa and you live a joint
resolution proposing to amend
the constitution of New Mexico
to provide for the creation of
an independent redistricting
commission to develop
redistricting plans for
congressional districts state
legislative districts and the
districts of other distracted
state offices house joint
resolution nine introduced by
representatives Figueroa and
Eli.
House joint resolution nine
having been read twice by title.
Is authorized by article
nineteen section one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee thence judiciary.
House memorial one introduced by
Representative Cerny on on a
memorial declaring January
January thirty first two
thousand twenty two New Mexico
and New Mexico National Board
certified teachers recognition
day and the house of
representatives House memorial
one introduced by Representative
seventy on a house or a one
seven hundred twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House memorial two introduced by
Representative Matthews memorial
requesting certain state
agencies to determine potential
actions to facilitate insurance
coverage for agritourism
activities House memorial to
introduced by Representative
Matthews.
House memorial to having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
House memorial three introduced
by Representative Serrato a
memorial requesting the
workforce solutions Department
to convene a task force to
finish the work of recommending
legislation for paid family and
medical leave and report to the
governor and the legislature by
October first two thousand
twenty two House memorial three
introduced by Representative
Serrato House memorial three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the labor veterans and
military.
Affairs Committee.
House memorial for introduced by
Representative Ortez a memorial
requesting the governor to
declare September twenty third
two thousand twenty two fourth
trimester Care day in New Mexico
House memorial for introduced by
Representative Ortez.
House memorial for having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee.
Memorial I introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero.
A memorial requesting the
General Services Department and
historic preservation division
of the cultural affairs
department to study and develop
recommendations for
memorializing and preserving the
birthplace of the lower support
the House memorial I introduced
by Representative Roybal
Caballero.
House memorial I having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee.
House memorial six introduced by
Representative Hernandez.
Memorial declaring for declaring
February second two thousand
twenty two in of the innovation
in Rio Rancho day and the house
of representatives House
memorial six introduced by
Representative Hernandez.
House memorial six having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
House memorial seven introduced
by Representative Hernandez a
memorial declaring declaring
February fourth two thousand
twenty two photo Thaiday in the
house of representatives House
memorial seven introduced by
Representative Hernandez House
memorial seven having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and placed on the
speakers table.
House memorial eight introduced
by Representative Garrett
memorial declaring declaring
February seventh through
February fourteenth two thousand
twenty two congenital heart
disease awareness week in the
house of representatives House
memorial eight introduced by
Representative Garrett.
House memorial eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
House memorial nine introduced
by representatives Dixon Crowder
and Gail Armstrong.
A memorial requesting the
construction industry division
of the regulation and licensing
Department to convene a housing
and economic development
efficiency task force to study
and make recommendations to
alleviate problems in housing
availability and affordability
by improving efficiency in the
construction industry at all
levels of government House
memorial nine introduced by
representatives Dixon Crowder
and Gail Armstrong.
House memorial nine having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee.
House memorial ten introduced by
representatives of Cortez and
Dixon a memorial requesting the
governor to declare the second
week of June as senator
certified anesthesiologist
assistants we.
Recognize certified
anesthesiologist assistants as
highly skilled health care
professionals the knowledge the
educational professional
training that certified
anesthesiologist assistants are
required to obtain and ignores
the crucial role of certified
anesthesiologist assistants in
the delivery of health care
services House memorial ten
introduced by representatives or
tests and Dixon.
House memorial ten having been
read twice.
By title is ordered not printed
and placed on the speakers
table.
House memorial eleven introduced
by representative Scott Diana
and Lane.
A memorial for questing New
Mexico association of counties
to convene a task force to study
the cost benefits and
feasibility of transitioning
detention facilities from
individual county operations to
uniformed jail and prison system
House memorial eleven introduced
by representatives Cabana and
Lane.
House memorial Levin having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House memorial twelve introduced
by representative Lente a
memorial requesting the public
education department to develop
a comprehensive education plan
to address the for student
groups deemed at risk in the
consolidated Yazzie Martinez
verses state of New Mexico court
decision and order in
consultation with the
plaintiffs.
Requesting the public education
department to provide the
legislature with an annual
report on the implementation of
the comprehensive education plan
in compliance with the
constitution of New Mexico to
provide at risk children with
the uniform and sufficient
education House memorial twelve
introduced by representative
Lente.
House memorial twelve having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Education Committee.
House memorial thirteen
introduced by Representative
Lundstrom a memorial honoring
Elaine and I and recognizing her
outstanding service to New
Mexico introduced by accident
House memorial thirteen
introduced by Representative
Lundstrom.
House memorial thirteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House memorial fourteen
introduced by Representative
Lundstrom a memorial for
claiming January twenty seventh
two thousand twenty two Gallup
McKinley county day in the house
of representatives House
memorial fourteen introduced by
Representative Lundstrom.
House memorial fourteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House memorial fifteen
introduced by representatives
Matthews seven Jana Andrew Hugo.
A memorial requesting the house
of representatives to encourage
food establishments that sell
children's meals to offer
healthy beverage options House
memorial fifteen introduced by
representatives Matthews
Sariñana ensure he'll.
House memorial fifteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee.
House memorial sixteen
introduced by representatives
Castellano handers Anderson ease
L. Nyberg and my Estes Memorial
recognizing the New Mexico
military institute Broncos for
winning the national junior
college athletic association
division one national football
championship House memorial
sixteen introduced by
Representative Castellano
Anderson he's L. Nyberg and
Maestas.
House memorial sixteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Morial seventeen introduced by
Representative Castellano.
A memorial declaring January
twentieth two thousand twenty
two New Mexico highlands
university day in the house of
representatives House memorial
seventeen introduced by
Representative Castellano.
House memorial seventeen having
been read twice twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
House memorial eighteen
Representative introduced by
representative Thompson a
memorial requesting the Human
Services department to report on
supplementals supplemental
security income legal advocacy
project data House memorial
eighteen introduced by
representative Thompson House
memorial eighteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee.
Memorial nineteen.
Introduced by Representative
introduced by representatives of
Rubio Lara.
Madrid Trujillo and guy a goes
I'm more of a memorial.
Recognizing lower and and get it
over as the twenty twenty two
New Mexico teacher of the year.
House memorial nineteen
introduced by representatives
Rubio Lara Madrid Trujillo guy
eagles.
House memorial nineteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business messages.
Okay no objection disorder to
read.
House executive message number
ten years speaker you often
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution
I'm authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of House Bill five a
bill creating a repeatable
presumption in pre trial
detention hearings that we we
would require individuals
charged with certain crimes
remain in custody until trial
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor message
of entered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Colleges and speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections so ordered I members
are housekeeping is done for the
day Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker the speaker
I have an announcement a
proposal provided I would like
to make right now.
The family of many hard go.
Both sickened and saddened by
the video being produced today
by Albuquerque public schools
showing the final minutes of a
brave in these life.
This video raises many questions
for Benny's family has been.
And seems to be that the
shooting could have been
prevented.
Hannity is morning together with
any family these are rific
actions.
Family just that the community
respect that morning and privacy
in these rough moments
especially after the production
of this horrific video and his
family with.
We'll take action to receive
justice for Benny had his life
only taken from him.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you generally.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker of the house
helping him health and Human
Services Committee will have an
organizational due tomorrow at
ten thank you they were saying
no members pursuant to house
executive message ten which was
just ready and house bill five
is now germane.
House Bill five over to remove
the rules in order business
committee and referred to the
government Alexion's in Indian
Affairs Committee thence
judiciary House Bill I pursued
house executive message ten is
germane.
In order to be removed from
rules refer to the governor
elections in in universe
Committee that's Judiciary.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan Representative
Lundstrom.
Speaker and good afternoon
everyone I just wanted to
announce that the house
appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting at one
thirty understand that they'll
be a caucus following of this
floor session we will meet at
one thirty I also wanted to let
the members know that on your
desks this morning you should
have had it forms associated
with the General Appropration
supplemental bill commonly known
as junior
that information should be on
your desk we would
like to go through that at some
point Mr speaker and in both of
the caucuses I want to make sure
that
anyone who has any specific
questions they can ask
Representative small or
Representative Sweetser as well
as our staff up in H. AFC thank
you very much.
Members say no the gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker coccus
members we will not be having a
caucus meeting today after four
session we will have our caucus
meeting tomorrow on zoom zoom
caucus meeting tomorrow thank
you.
After four session tomorrow
immediately after floor session.
Are there further announcements
the general Leo Representative
Romero thank you speak in your
house education committee will
meet on Monday will have a brief
organizational meeting and then
we'll jump into bills everybody
should have received an email
from the Education Committee
staff about the logging for zoom
and some of the contact
information for members but you
should have received that please
check it if you have an please
check with me to get on that
list but will have education on
Monday morning brief
organizational and then we will
jump into a few bills thank you
Mr members say no the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker we will be having a
house rules meeting tomorrow
morning at nine thirty to
discuss bills that may be
germane comment to clarify some
of the questions that we've been
receiving regarding that process
thank you Mr speaker.
Members say no so the
Representative Rehm
Representative Herndon others
that have made requests bills be
determined to be germane we went
back and looked at the way we
handle this in the the last two
thirty day sessions our practice
in both of those thirty day
sessions was to convene a
meeting of the rules committee
sort of do the same process this
time that we've done the last
two sessions so we'll have a
meeting tomorrow morning.
Nine thirty the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis thank you
Mr speaker the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee is meeting tomorrow at
eight thirty thank you.
There is only from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker of the house
Judiciary Committee we do will
have its organizational meeting.
The house Judiciary Committee
will have its organizational
meeting tomorrow at one thirty.
Members say no the gentle lady
from doing in a Representative
Ferrary thank you Mr speaker the
house consumer and public
affairs committee will be
needing briefly after floor
session then after our caucus.
And then to St.
When what day Monday if we will
we will be meeting after caucus
Monday sorry.
Thank you K. so.
We're having a caucus tomorrow
Friday.
I'm sorry.
We will be meeting after the
floor session on Monday.
So.
To the your This Is Your vote
First Lady is a Tuesday Thursday
yes we're in your figured if
you're are you having an
additional meeting on Monday yes
a run through of kind not really
an organizational meeting but
want to make sure all of our
computers and everything works
okay okay thank you okay members
take note the gentle lady from
will sell us thank you Mr
speaker house taxation and
revenue will have its first
meeting on Mondays in meeting at
nine AM on Monday so they'll be
a brief organizational
discussion and then there will
be a.
Educational presentation that
will discuss what is the
foundation of good tax policy
making thank you there is a no
general from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr speaker the house commerce
committee will be meeting Monday
as well at one thirty or after
the floor session thank you ever
say no Jennifer San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Yes Mr speaker house Republicans
will have a brief caucus in the
leader's office just following
the floor session.
Members say no.
The gentle lady for Santa Fe
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker just a quick revision
for our rules committee the
building that there are many
conflicts with members were
hoping to have it tomorrow at
two thirty PM and it will be
available by zoom.
Members of
the are there other the the
general Colfax more a Rio Arriba
and San Miguel Representative
Roger Montoya.
Mr speaker members I'd like to
take this moment to a technology
a tragic loss of a father and
son.
Set of beloved community members
coaches the Torres family is in
deep grieving as is the entire
region of northern New Mexico
Leonard senior and Leonard in
your passed from complications
of COVID and I wanted to HB
knowledge that tragic tragedy
publicly thank you.
Thank you gentlemen.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business messages.
No objections were required to
read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill one as amended
by the house with emergency
clause and return same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
The gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
Graham with regard to the next
order of business committee
reports objections ordered clear
to read Mr speaker you're
enrolling in a grossing
Committee too is been referred
house bill one as amended with
emergency clause has had it
under consideration report
saying.
Has been duly enrolled in gross
preparatory to signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Brittney
but us chair.
Mr speaker move the committee
reports please for adoption a
favorable favorable committee
report on house bill one as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
Calls was named reported opted
for the record I that the duly
enrolled in the gross copy house
bill one is amended as assigned
by the office of the house in
open session gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Speaker with Alexa for business
announcements and miscellaneous
objections sorter gentlelady
from Valencia.
Mr speaker today is national
cheese day and I really tried
hard to find a good joke to
celebrate but I couldn't find
anything good to.
Thank you generating.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker
I move that the house and recess
until eleven thirty tomorrow
morning.
Thank you everyone for a good
morning and afternoon.
please thank you to everyone
who's joined us in the gallery
please watch our committees
online this afternoon.
Thousand recess until eleven
