Is.
Madam.
Please join me in prayer.
Our heavenly father we thank you
for your love for what you've
created us to have a fine minds
we debate bills as we seek to
really serve our fellow New
Mexicans in the best way
possible to pay for your
guidance your wisdom and your
love among us I pray this in the
Albuquerque sailing which
academy Emma Gomez Joe Montana
eight and one thing is actually
white hawk presented on this
breaking Twitchell thank Nico
Stallis qualities also brands
Able.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
objection it is so ordered good
morning members.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Herndon.
Morning Mr speaker it is a
month and back in nineteen
eighty seven Congress declared
the entire month of March as
women's history month since then
every single president has
great history right in this room
as we celebrate women's history
month in the month of March.
That I would like to introduce
for women to follow for many
many years and her name is
Amanda K. E. K. being a mum so
let me tell you a little bit
government and public service as
well as business and after
graduating from Stanford
University and the Stanford Law
School and being a mom move to
nineteen seventy two to nineteen
seventy seven and being a mom
was an associate professor of
law at the university of New
Mexico School of Law with ten
the successful efforts to pass a
state equal rights amendment to
ratify the federal equal rights
amendment and then she led the
may not know this but women were
not allowed to be admitted to
the New Mexico military
institute in Roswell that is a
admitted but and being a mom
said oh no not in this state
we're gonna make a difference so
not only did she say that but
Mexico legislature it's made a
pathway to make sure that in
I want to tell you just one more
thing about this incredibly
historical woman who's with us
today and being a mom on June
sixteenth nineteen ninety three
hold the office but she didn't
stop there she was such a
remarkable person in that
position she continued to
dominate the anti trust division
justice honored and that being a
mom what they did was remarkably
exciting the anti trust division
lecture hall and we are so happy
to have and K. being a mom in
the room with us today as we
celebrate women's history month.
named Patricia Pat Rogers so let
me tell you about Patricia Pat
Robert Rogers she has a long
history of political activism
and Pat Rogers is the is the
responsible for the operation of
the Senate finance committee can
you imagine one person running
the entire Senate finance
own her own realty company and
Los Alamos Pat was called Pat
Rogers realty and she was
recognized in twenty thirteen as
business women of the year in
the United States and whether
tobacco and in nineteen ninety
one Pat Rogers was recognized as
the national federal Senate
and being a mom.
For the the order that was to
admit young women as students in
the military and the New Mexico
responsible for education and
training of the youth in this
country made it all happen so we
are proud of these two women we
mom are to be recognized for
that work to make New Mexico the
first state listen to this the
first state in the United States
to open its military institute
can be no matter what and and K.
and K. being a mom and Pat
Rogers had that person with them
and so we have them in the
gallery within the of the house
in center building would you
please stay in.
This is a family that has a long
and K. being a mom and Jeff have
a son named John and John the
historical son is here with us
and he brought with him is
exciting thing that's happened
she doesn't know that within the
state this but as part of
women's history month we have a
woman who is with us every
single day and has been trying
her name is eight months out of
a lease where are you history in
the making.
He wants to keep it a secret but
Well anyway I just wanted to
make sure that we all knew who
we were working with every
single day so thank you Mr this
is a list of.
honor thank you lady and if
anyone needs anyone to blame for
my career in politics you can
blame senator Jeff Bingaman
because he gave me my first job
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative role metal.
Thank you Mr speaker you and I
academy so if each of the
students once they call your
names if you would please stand
we have a local agency we have
So and then this broken twitch
and solace I think committees
Salazar per night is there.
Misia's court of a Andrew Faber
Gabriella Cravens and Gregoire
at this if we could all welcome
to all of our guests welcome.
Thank you thank you Albuquerque
center which Academy for joining
us today on this very special
day
To read.
the Albuquerque sign language
academy has been nationally
recognized for being a model for
inclusive education that serves
neuro diverse children and is
respectful of the family unit
and we're as the Albuquerque
sign language academy positively
impacts workforce opportunities
that support students and
families with special needs
conservation creating in
partnership with the New Mexico
youth conservation corps The New
Mexico wildlife federation the
outdoor equity fund and the
department of game and fish and
Penn state university the
university of Minnesota the
university of Arizona State
University of New Mexico and New
Mexico highlands university and
and ferocious nature of the
students and the staff at the
Albuquerque sign language
academy.
And we're as the Albuquerque
sign language academy has
educational outcomes in New
Mexico now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that March seventh
two thousand twenty three be
impact it makes in New Mexico
signed and sealed at the capitol
in the City of Santa Fe.
Thank you honey badgers for
Nelson's you lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan thank you
Mr speaker today a I'd like to
introduce my shadow her name is
a four H. presidents and wants
to major in neuroscience she she
was one of my lead coordinators
at as you some of that I held
and twenty twenty one and we're
currently taking biology at
highland university and
financial literacy through C. N.
M..
She's one of our she's she's one
right now Mr speaker who is nine
years old and I've seen her grow
into this these young
incredible a young woman and I
to that vision so I just like to
introduce you all to your future
New Mexico governor Kylie the
hill as she stands here next to
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker I want to
turn the body's attention this
morning I have a certificate
highlighting the importance of
jobs and more than two point two
three billion in total outdoor
recreation Mr speaker I can I
can tell you New Mexico's
outdoor opportunities are one of
the things that broader home
few years after law school and
opportunities for outdoor
recreation is part of what drove
me back.
Mr speaker I I live in what I
would submit is is really the
is over three hundred arches in
my district there's a TV trials
there's tons of things to do
outdoor wise one of the world's
highlight this this important
and growing industry it's one of
the jewels of our state and I
hope that we continue to invest
in this it's a great opportunity
for folks to advance economic
house retreat in October on on
the whole dance I'm gonna go
sentence making.
Mr speaker how bout a fly
fishing trip and we'll do a
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
congratulates New Mexico's
outdoor recreation industry.
outdoor recreation experiences
such as camping fishing hunting
motorcycling off roading
snowsports trail sports water
development department was
created and according to federal
bureau of economic analysis
outdoor recreation and two
thousand twenty one generated
recreation contributes
substantially to tourism and the
New Mexico true brand promise of
adventure steeped in culture and
whereas communities across New
recreation economy and whereas
outdoor recreation provides an
opportunity for young adults to
remain in New Mexico and work in
rewarding and sustainable
legislature also created the
outdoor equity funds to ensure
that underserved you've had the
opportunity to enjoy New
Mexico's great outdoors and
we're as New Mexico has
hundreds of such businesses
already existing and many more
launching and whereas there are
numerous nonprofit organizations
in the state that protected.
state's first outdoor recreation
youth mentorship program.
And whereas New Mexico has a
continental divide trail which
compete outdoors in a diverse
equitable and inclusive way and
we're as the annual New Mexico
outdoor economics conference
brings professionals together to
which improves the state's
health and wellness.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
congratulations be extended to
outdoor recreation week B. plans
to celebrate this vibrant and
vital component of the state
side in sealed at the capitol in
the City of Santa Fe.
really a way to put our people
love it state on the map thank
you very much.
Anywhere else with this.
Sorry Mr speaker I move that we
go to that order of business
committee reports no objection
it is so ordered Cllr to read.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
tomb is been referred house bill
fourteen has had it under
consideration report same as
recognition that do not passed
by the house Judiciary Committee
fourteen but a favorable
committee report on house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House before ten of those if
it was in this and I.
recommendation that do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're an
adoption of a federal committee
report house bill two fifty nine
as amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
had it under consideration point
I was recommendation that I do
not passed by the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty four
do pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
Bill three three for all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Well as opposed to a test of the
Canadian border adopted Mr
speaker Judiciary Committee too
is been referred house bill
adoption we're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill three three seven but
a favorable committee report on
house Judiciary Committee
subsystem for House with three
four sixty six as amended has
had it under consideration
reports it was recommendation
that a do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr speaker move adoption
we are on adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill four six six as
five zero one has had it under
consideration point I was
recognition that it to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred Senate
bill sixty four as amended has
had it under consideration point
same with recommendation that a
D. pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
those in a test of a committee
board opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
two thirty two as amended has
had it under consideration point
I was recommendation that I do
adaption unfavorable report has
a ten thirty two as amended but
a favorable committee report
House Judiciary Committee subs
to president thirty two all the
severity of this and I.
that order business introduction
of legislation is an objection
it is so ordered click to read.
of rights act to the healthy
hunger free students bill of
rights act amending and enacting
sections of the healthy hunger
free students bill of rights act
bill four as amended.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate bill four
as amended has been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house
child health and safety act
defining electric assisted
bicycle providing standards for
the regulation and use of
electric assisted bicycles
amending and enacting sections
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee.
Senate bill four fifty as
trained in the use of automated
external defibrillators making
appropriation Senate bill four
fifty as amended introduced by
Senator Pirtle Senate bill four
Senate bill three ten as amended
introduced by senator Ortiz a
Pino.
An act relating to mental health
amending and enacting sections
of the mental health and
status examinations authorizing
crisis triage centers to
involuntarily admit certain
individuals in crisis and to
provide involuntary treatment to
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
bill time.
House Bill fifteen.
I'm sorry.
Okay so good.
Santa Fe Representative Romero
again the number is two two five
nine seven five point one.
It is currently in the house
rules in order of business
two five nine seven five point
one.
Out of the house rules in order
of business committee and
instead refer to the house
Judiciary Committee see no
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business third reading
of legislation.
Sen objection it is so ordered.
ready on item twenty two yes I
am Mr speaker can get me to that
point.
Mr speaker house bill one thirty
that K. twelve plus program
restructures reorganizes and
defines the requirements for
increasing our instructional
making to go beyond what is
required in the bill if they
would like and reflects the year
study and analysis and input
from stakeholders around the
state in the legislative
ten eighty for secondary schools
to all having eleven forty for
quality learning time already a
hundred of the one hundred and
that requirement provides
clarity and flexibility to
schools by defining
instructional hours for the
first time and it provides a
range of qualified instructional
instructional coach I can tell
you having develop professional
development time in the duty day
makes all the difference for
newly licensed in alternative
beyond the eleven forty and add
days so it adds flexibility
practicality and local decision
two six zero one four point one.
Deleted you move house floor
remember one to house bill one
Well we'll wait for to get pass
out so that you can explain the
amendment.
Gentlelady to explain and it is
on line.
districts and schools requests
on page five we strike section
B. section three B. and what the
days for forty we do not lose
any funding in the process of
choosing locally to do that so
this ammendment differentiates
thousands of so schools that do
hundred eighty days of
instruction and let's see hold
on so schools that
that and decide to do a hundred
ninety one to two hundred and
five instructional days for five
days school four hundred and
sixty six two hundred and
feared losing money as we did
this bill and this addresses
their concerns by fully funding
with they choose locally to do.
the amendment the gentleman from
Colfax County hunting quase and
again you Representative
Chatfield so Mister speaker does
generally yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
amendment I believe proposed and
Monetization on it is that after
of which they were able to the
which would work for them but
they could they could use
in that it was set forth in
hours not days.
Extra days the pose being the
extra time being measured in
days and this ammendment go
right back to doing that very
schools in on the eastern side
of the state do not support this
amendment it was tried in
committee and and failed who we
and thank you for point out this
is different than the amendment
proposed in that in the House
Appropriations discipline
addresses the concerns of I
believe it's about fifteen
districts and schools that stood
point sixteen thousands and only
applies to those districts that
appeared to be losing funding of
with house bill one thirty.
Maintains the funding on those.
Districts that are already
putting in the time Mr speaker
kind gentlemen you have totally
described it accurately.
the amendment.
See you amended bill generated
from Leo back on the amended
bill.
Representative Chatfield so
Mister speaker this bill has a
long history
she she will she will very
gladly yield to you gentlemen
So thank you gentle lady thank
you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I've enjoyed working
with the gentle lady on this
bill for a good long time.
For several years.
rural schools it never was
thought to
we always kind of knew that it
was implemented and sure enough
we got very little participation
speaker various teachers parents
interested in the thirties from
the eastern side of the state
and were there was zero
participation and all of the
all of us and the result of that
was house bill one thirty as it
stands right now and so Mister
the gentleman there's further
debate the gentleman from
violence Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker to the
gentle lady yield Mister speaker
I yield to the gentleman from
Mr speaker totally distant go
through the legislative
education study committee
process yes Mr speaker was
thoroughly vetted through that
process.
Mr speaker and gentleman
collision of educational leaders
the superintendents association.
R. A. F. T. New Mexico.
schools association supports it
also.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
I also want to
lady with this bill also does it
actually shows about the value
of teachers of opportunity to
collaborate included in those
hours is that correct Mr speaker
of the activities or other
Start time the students spend
outside of the classroom could
also count towards those
instructional hours is that
From my community and the folks
that I have spoken to you know
this is what we kind of what we
want to provided endorsed of
bills that come out of
committee.
provides a good framework that
provides funding for those
districts to meet these new
requirements so Mister speaker
gentle lady I am happy to
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Santa Fe thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
wanted to give a few couple
examples of how this may work
with what my school district
speaker gentle lady so it was
really collaborative was
exciting about how they decided
to leave through a lot of these
issues was that they saw their
attendance increase because
people are tending more so I
don't want to take away from the
for example to
help transition sixth grade
students in the seventh grade
class as part of that would that
also count Mr speaker gentle
lady towards this Mr speaker
expect expended after school
programs you know into the
summer a little bit more that
helps a lot of our parents that
are balancing you know not
having the child care whether at
work with this also continue for
could if you look on page to
section one B. of a defines a
sectional hours as a school
program and that the school
provides technical knowledge
skills and competency based
applied learning as you
described research or evidence
And then instruction that occurs
at the same time that breakfast
is served thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle gentle lady I
appreciate all of the
thoughtfulness you put into this
and really answer a lot of
concerns my district thank you.
I'm I'm reading your bill here
and I just have a few questions
so with this bill increase the
hours in the classroom of the
day a decision is a local
decisions.
Okay thank you Mr speaker in the
gentle lady and does this have
an appropriation Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
a gentleman from an incident
Representative made of bottle
Maria.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield yes Mr speaker
I yield to the kind lady from
Valencia County.
with so many of my
fellow educators that were
really worried about the title
they were worried about the case
of K. twelve plus that that they
worries so currently our hours
are ten eighty correct for high
school.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady it's
ten eighty.
thank you and so Mister speaker
gentle lady when I kinda
calculated eleven forty divided
by a hundred and eighty days do
it's about six point three three
so it's a little bit less than
that so really we're of students
are usually at school for at
least seven and a half so this
it within a hundred and eighty
Wednesdays those still count
because those are PED hours for
a for our teachers they're also
intervention hours for our
students that need a little bit
going to change it's really not
going to change much but now you
get a better value and then so
like my district currently we do
work you know we we pretty much
meet this already we do that in
In L. E. S. C. was so don't does
my screen at that point if we
have the exact same schedule as
we do now we qualified for the
extra funding and I both and and
Mr speaker and gentle lady as
long as you meet the minimum
instructional hours the answer
according to my experts which
are Dr Gwen Perea Warniment the
not only get
extra funding but we can it
really is not going to change
our lives to to much what I
really liked about this and this
is a question that that I kind
summer in order to make up
credits and and that kind of
stuff and what I and and is is
it possible that this would
qualify us under that K. twelve
program those or maybe extended
learning that kind of stuff it's
not and it's not and everyone in
the school has to show up Mr
speaker kind lady yes.
districts really can can
customize this to fit the needs
of their students so I stand in
full support of your bill you
know for the debate the gentle
lady to close Mr speaker I now
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Presented Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
votes yes Representative Ferrary
negative house bill one thirty
as amended has duly passed this
house J. lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon are you
ready and item thirty three.
on final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentlelady to explain the bill.
partners including law
enforcement public attorneys and
detention and corrections
officers
house bill two that are
contingent on the passage of
house bill three fifty seven and
the bill ensures that there are
guardrails protecting the
legislature's substantial
resources for recruiting out of
state candidates and promoting
collaboration between agencies
that would otherwise be
competing for the same candidate
pool overall the goal is to
the bill's co sponsors if that
is okay.
Gentleman from San Juan thank
you Mr speaker thank you
generated from Bernalillo for
yielding.
Mr speaker I just want to
for recruitment and retention
but what that fund didn't do is
it in place any any gar rules so
to speak in terms of how those
monies to rid to be spent and so
proper and so this does
encourage recruitment from both
out of state and does not
currently in the workforce
instead of trying to recruit
from other agencies whether
dedicated fund for corrections
officers Mr speaker of the
body's not aware our corrections
staffing level is at a crisis
point and so this is much needed
there's also a serious need for
both district attorneys and
public defenders and so that's
part of what this bill does as
well as trying to target those
just appreciate the time and
encourage the bodies for
additional delay from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I'll stand
for questions there is debate
the gentleman from Chavis and
gentleman from Eddie Lee and
Tero.
Sorry Chavez Eddie in order.
Two out of three pretty good
around here Mr chairman.
How the lack leadership that
kind of stuff.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you a
each of these funds has a
committee that is responsible
for setting up parameters and
reviewing the applications of
employed by the department of
public safety and as I'm sure
everyone knows those are our
state police are housed within
the department of public safety
and then one member who is
employed by the department of
finance and administration and
then from within those for the
committee will select a chair
prioritization and things that
the committee should take into
consideration but then they will
make the.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
these both these committees
report to DFA and LFC is that
correct and how often.
basis they do provide a report
to DFA and legislative finance
committee and that helps us to
ensure that.
informed decisions moving
forward about whether the funds
needed additional monies or if
there are problems and we need
to make adjustments.
Mr speaker John when that is
correct.
What happens if they can't
collect chair.
Novel idea Mr speaker gentle
lady
On page seven lines.
Five through eleven.
There is a prohibition can you
speak to that.
Page seven lines five through
eleven.
Mr speaker gentleman could you
are you and I looking at the
same version point two two five
eight seven five.
Point three.
Mr speaker gentleman it if
perhaps you're referring to one
Can you give me that to do two
to five number please.
problem thank you very much to
the provision lady to close
thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house appropriations and
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three five seven
the vote is now open.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes
what is approval to sixty four
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house bill three fifty
you ready and item number twenty
four.
For gentlelady from earlier
certificate you're ready and
item number twenty four yes Mr
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker this bill updates the
language of the connect New
Mexico act to work efficiently
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to sixty two as
amended do now pass we are on
final passage of house
government elections Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
recorded vote Representative
Castellano yes Representative
Castellano votes yes
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Rubio yes
sixty two as amended has duly
passed this house.
From the you are you ready and
item number nineteen thank you
Mr speaker you to the point that
the record reflect that election
is there for placing House Bill
persons for experiencing
homelessness the access to a
state issued ID card without any
of the and with that Mr speaker
Of.
Gentleman on this who is
eligible.
for this I do.
in the the amended the amendment
for the taxation revenue
committee
It follows the the the federal
definition of a homeless
regarding the
the person to cause and how
homeless individuals can obtain
the birth certificates as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman our.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
so much there is a division lady
from Travis Representative
Ezzell.
I don't mean to hard but I
couldn't hear your responses
earlier so if I'm asking the
same questions over again I
Townsend got the response.
Is what the agency is this
through I could not hear the
your response.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
department okay Mister speaker
and.
So they have to go through there
the same things that we have to
go through providing the.
problem in my particular area
for people that were let out of
jail down there for them to be
there was lots of.
Local help on some of these
people trying to get them
have a social security card
before they could be issued a
social security card they had to
go through the federal court
These particular people that we
are trying to help here by
getting them identification
where they can be gainfully
employed.
What.
Mr speaker gentle lady the there
is a process already in place I
think the the bill passed maybe
the last session I agree I I
believe Mr speaker gentle lady
The the the an affidavit proving
who they are so that settlement
Mr speaker gentle lady that
processes is already in place.
lady I assume that they go
through the the N. B. T.
department for that.
Mr speaker there be another
population those in need and
they do take the extra steps
necessary would there be any
other means of been able to
obtain that affidavit through
shelters
and and other even school
districts assista assist these
these individuals in obtaining
the there the documentation
this particular problem that
we're having that in our area
upon the release of the.
Prisoner what we were trying to
get working with our county
commission down there in the
were may be issued some sort of
an ID that would be could be
used as identification and
that's still be in.
Maybe work out done in Travis
your answers are do appreciate
it thank you Mr speaker so you
know for the majority leader
close gentleman close.
Mr speaker I now move the house
What about the clothes.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Castellano yes.
Members we have one member who
has not yet hit the button and I
have not closed the vote yes can
we reopen it so that
Representative Figueroa can hit
Once.
Going twice.
The vote is now closed with a
sixty five in the affirmative in
Mr speaker we go that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
under consideration point I was
recommendation that a do pass
and is referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Ortez chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're on adoption of a
Environment and natural
resources committee team is been
referred Senate conservation
committee substitute for Senate
bill twenty one as amended has
had it under consideration point
Speaker move adoption where an
adoption of federal governor
port on how CENIC conservation.
Committee sept Committee
substitute for Senate bill
twenty one as amended all those
bill one eighty two as amended
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and is referred
to the government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
Posibles may yes I'm a good
report often.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to ms been referred Senate bill
two of six has had it under
important option with federal
committed for the Senate bill
two zero six of the severity of
this and I.
All the severity of us in line.
Since miscellaneous business for
real this time seen objection it
is so ordered announcements
You Mr speaker the house
democratic caucus will have a
meeting today room three
seventeen right after the floor
session members take note any
other announcements
miscellaneous business.
affairs committee will need
approximately five minutes after
we get out of the caucus.
Members take note.
Red chili chips.
reals.
The
