Go here.
Your woman Representative.
Thank you members thank you for
coming to this meeting and I
know we have some
the representative said the
house will be joining
Representative Sweetser on your
presentation I'd like to all of
you I and the Representative
speeches would you put house
bill one seventeen on the table.
Thank you very much of Madam
chairwoman and members of the
committee it is a pleasure to be
before you this morning with
this bill we are very excited to
bring to you this appropriation
bill for the New Mexico historic
women marker and issue checks I
was always trying to get in and
out quickly with the bill but I
was hoping this morning madam
chair to take a little bit of
time because I have some very
distinguished witnesses and I'd
like to to really get the
committee a good feel of what
what we're doing here.
We we welcome this
Representative Sweetser and
we're we're looking forward to
hearing your bill all right
thank you madam chair so I would
like to acknowledge my co
sponsors Representative Gail
Armstrong and Representative
Phelps Anderson and hopefully
they'll have some input if
they're able to stay on through
the presentation at the end but
right now I'd like to turn it
over to my witnesses and I'm
going to begin with run to order
by the way these are members of
the New Mexico historic women
marker and mischief steering
committee and they are all
volunteers and so agency I if
you would start and then you can
hand off to your colleagues at
the presentation proceeds thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
thank you madam chair good
morning and it's an honor to be
here with all of you I wish we
were in person but Hey this is
the next best thing.
I wanted to
especially thank Representative
Sweetser and representative
Armstrong and Anderson for
sponsoring house bill one
seventeen for the historic
women's Barker initiative.
I want to also just send our
best wishes to you
Representative Montoya for a
speedy recovery
behalf of of our forum
international women's forum and
I'm gonna introduce my other two
speakers first R. myself I guess
is brought up this that cabinet
secretary for the department
transportation under bill
Richardson so I don't know all
of you everyone's changed since
I've been involved in this
and with me I have and yet the
only way when I do this.
Ron Gonzales who's the former
secretary of the department
cultural affairs under governor
Martinez and polytechnic is the
former director of the
Legislative Council services and
what he still knows her probably
still not Veronica as well and
wait like we said we're part of
international women's forum of
New Mexico and we have some
other members who are on the
call he can't see who are
supporting this as well as the
department of cultural affairs
I W. after is what we call it is
a leadership organization we're
in thirty three countries and
have a over seven thousand
members across the across the
globe and New Mexico has a
hundred twenty eight of those
members and why I'm bringing
this up is because the historic
women's marker initiative was
originally the brainchild of the
New Mexico at the New Mexico
portion of the international
women's forum and that's where
we put in tireless late loss of
volunteer hours into this
project.
Want to give you a little
background because of help you
understand why we're asking in
this bill or why the bill what
the bill is for is to give you a
little background and us so what
happened is in two thousand
five.
We were have we at a couple of
our members we're talking about
how we can in are some women
from history and we realize that
lesson that over six hundred
markers historic markers across
our state on our highways not a
single one of those markers
with
Basically recognized solely as a
single woman and so this that
this might be the right thing
for us to do is a state approach
this and see if we can get women
on the stork markers.
In two thousand six with the
support of governor right you
Richardson and the legislature a
bill was passed house bill six
twenty two or a three hundred
and thirty thousand dollars to
the Department cultural affairs
and this was to do research on
these women.
That were nominated I'll go into
that and second and to write
some stories and so forth and to
work with the department
transportation and getting these
markers on
I constructed and and in
locations where we're at math
and must meet if you look behind
Paula Paula greater hand again I
see has a typical marker what it
looks like.
It is in the historic style that
we've been doing for the park
service's nineteen thirty five
and they're recognizable all
across the country because we
have a very distinct historic
marker.
We want to thank the legislature
from two thousand six thousand
help provided legislative this
money during that process every
county every pueblo tribe and
nation was involved in
nominating women from their
jurisdictions and after very
arduous process notable women
were selected from every
jurisdiction and now we have
close to a hundred markers
installed on our highways so
that's an exciting thing many
more than a hundred women are
being are also marked as matter
of fact if you one of the women
that we're artery in court has
been honored is I need to Otero
Warren in eight eight County
Representative part of that to
your area and that she was from
Los Lunas and she was from a
very wealthy Spanish family that
she was involved very very much
so with that with New Mexico's
suffrage movement in the
nineteen twenty two she was the
first woman in New Mexico
history to run for Congress and
although she didn't win she
brought a lot of recognition to
women in that by by running and
she was a political and social
reform right to work also at at
the as the Santa Fe public
schools superintendent and for
the WPA.
What's exciting about this is
that we're thrilled to announce
that Nina Otero board will be
honored as one of the five women
featured in the upcoming
American women's quarters
program she will be featured
alongside iconic co it.
My Angelou agent they Cherokee
nation's first female principal
chief Wilma Mankiller so we're
very excited about that she's on
one of our markers in happy to
announce that.
A little bit let me see what my
next year.
The history and so forth is that
are already mentioned
Some of our successes excuse me
and our as part of the program
And the department of cultural
affairs we had to go people are
we being that I keep thinking
I'm still with the department
transportation so called even
though it's been thirteen years
worked very closely with the
part of the cultural group of
properties review committee you
know very well and they said you
have to do something with this
material you have all this
information what are you gonna
do with it and they urged us to
put together a website and now
we have a website and is W. W.
W. in an historic women dot org
and it's it's up and running in
need to work next part of this
bill they've also as part of
this program again we've
advanced education pilot for
seventh graders or New Mexico
history credit curriculum and
Santa Fe prep school.
We also work with an honest
program for juniors and seniors
at Santa Fe this is on
additional research on the
historic women a markers and
we're Corporation that into our
our website we received lots of
national and international
recognition and we have other
states are looking to New Mexico
is a leader in wanting to do the
same thing we're very excited
about that.
Back to the bill so try to get
that background get to the bill
and the bill basically an
appropriation of three hundred
fifty thousand dollars to the
department of cultural affairs
and will and the funding will
provide will provide money
funding excuse me.
To promote the program for the
development of a marketing
communications strategy what we
found is that we have this
website and even though it's
still under development we don't
know how to drive traffic to
that website get people to see
what's going on we all the
volunteer hours that we put in
we just don't have a volunteer
who can do that too.
But with the help of the
department of cultural affairs
through getting some special
funds will be able to advance
that further get some people to
drive some traffic to that as
well as learn more about what we
what the program is about.
We also need to preserve and
safeguard the stories of these
women that we've honored on
these on these markers by
creating a repository of
materials to be archived and
developing traveling and
permanent exhibitions perhaps
you know with the with the
museum's.
We want to enhance our website
it needs a little enhancing
we're very proud of it but needs
a little bit more information
we want to develop an
interactive technology platforms
and targeted promotional
materials to align with the
state's marketing campaign with
the department of tourism so
that people when they go to the
market we want to put that you
are codes on all the markers so
when someone businesses Barker
they can sign their phone on it
and get some information more
information on that moment and
that important but she's done or
at our at our history as well as
maybe doing some kind of
password saying Hey I've been to
all these markers and anyway we
have several ideas.
We're going to be establishing a
statewide speakers bureau with
people who knelt most about
these women to also go around
the state for the different
programs for rotary clubs and so
forth and we also want to
develop units up of New Mexico
history for eight curriculum for
teaching middle school and high
school as well as college
students about the historic
women they were part of the.
Basically the very fabric that
shaped our state.
And we would collaborate we'll
be collaborating off obviously
with the CA and the department
transportation are to research
in some way or more markers
and you know develop a program
and how we're going to develop
this I tell you
And not sell I forgot to
mention.
No no I did mention that so so
that's fine
with us we all stand for
questions I have experts with me
who will be able to answer some
questions I just want to point
out for those of you who joined
a little bit of late as that
polytechnic is grandmother was a
party girl who's also on our
markers and she's in our heart
party girl I'll bet is and we're
real proud of that thank you.
So madam chair I did want it to
come in on the Harvey girl
outfit when I spoke with miss
Tackett she said would that be
too much and I set I think this
committee would totally
appreciate that so madam chair I
I hope that that is the case I
did want to turn it over to my
co chairs if they had anything
to add Representative Armstrong
if you're still on I know we're
we're all in multiple meetings
this morning so.
With your permission madam chair
thank you very much
Representative Sweetser when
represented Sweetser came to me
and asked me to co sponsor of
this bill I said wow what a what
a great idea you all may think
I'm such a dork but my husband I
gave my husband a book.
This year for Christmas of all
the historical markers on map.
Because we drive all over the
state all the time as all the
other representatives now are
the miles we put on our vehicles
and sometimes I take the time to
read them and sometimes I don't
but we're planning our trips
based on the historical markers
so it's a real honor and
privilege to be part of this and
I I hope and and pray that we
can get this through with the
funding and I think it's a
phenomenal thing for the history
of New Mexicans men women people
of all colors and backgrounds
and
but yes focus on the women
that's a little bit Sen near and
dear to my heart is even though
I support all of them it's a
it's a great pleasure to be part
of this bill thank you madam
chair.
And thank you there you go this
spot your first passport them
people can be the Armstrongs.
And madam chair it is
Representative Phelps Anderson
is still on if you would like to
to say a few words madam chair
Short and simple I think this is
a great bill
needless to say over do because
I would have never noticed of
the six hundred that we were
deficient in recognizing such an
important part of New Mexico's
history and that is the
contribution of the women of New
Mexico thank you.
All right thank you so madam
chair a little bit longer than
we normally do on these bills
but I did appreciate your
committee and I really wanted to
in order to give it a nice
background of how we got here
and with that we would all stand
for questions.
Thank you so much Representative
Sweetser
it was it was a great
presentation thank all of you
I'm going to get a hearty girl
helped it to I think that's
actually very expanding so and
and we're on the floor
when you presented I couldn't
help but think of my great aunt
Jenny who is set director of
real education
for the state of New Mexico in
the thirties she used to drive I
had a picture of her standing in
front of a model T. Ford which
she would you know go up to the
chili line and then she would
get in her forties and drive up
to tell us which used to be a
dirt road in those tights it's
amazing what women did in this
state and I think we all need we
have our personal stories but we
haven't had a place to put them
so I I am going to join this
group of this international
group of women and see that on
to that we can all help be a
part of this I think it's kind
of a renaissance for women it
really it's a people recognize
what we've missed in the past
recognize what we need to do for
the future and without to
Representative Sweetser and and
and other representatives I
would like to see if we have the
any participants who would like
to speak in favor or against
this bill.
Okay I don't see any I don't see
any what it means let me just
make sure.
We okay all right I do think
that I didn't see any similar
turn to members of the committee
and I know we have I think we
have a lot of participants here
and side like to recognize
representative Kelly Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair I just you
know it's one of those things I
just want to thank everybody for
for bringing this bill forward I
thought gosh appropriations acts
and then hopefully we can get to
the Senate pretty easily
I am I'm.
Thank you know I'm one of the
few members that remember when
he's been here in the round
house we didn't have a in the
lounges only in males restroom
and Out of females restroom
because the building was built
there was no consideration to
women it was like you know we
might have more women friends
maybe not and now we're one of I
think to an entire country where
we have a the email major.
In the legislature which I'm
very honored and proud to be
part of you know I also you know
the constitutional amendment we
did a few years ago.
Might have found it popping out
sorry.
that basically allowed changed
the school board elections
because the reason they were
separate in the constitution
because women weren't smart
enough to vote in other
elections so that was the only
election they were allowed to
vote it and so we've come a long
way and this may seem like a
little thing to some people but
I think it's a big thing and so
I want to thank everybody as you
know we at hardball with the
Harvey girls if you haven't been
to the land you make sure to
stop by the Harvey Louisiana we
have a huge
this fly over there and my
mother is should we should and
hospitality in the state of New
Mexico so we always got his a
Harvey girl
Figurines throughout the years
I've been familiar with that
sound I now I'm rambling but I
just want to thank you guys I
think this is important and
that's all I have to say thank
you madam chair for let me
ramble a little bit I'm very
proud of you ladies thank you
thank you Representative Fajardo
words well spoken Representative
Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for.
The sponsors of this bill I'm
here at my desk and if you can
see
what they are in front of me and
I just want to say this is the.
This is something that is near
and dear to all this I think
you're at just being what the
what the Representative Fajardo
as being and the majority of
women in a legislators right now
it's this is really historical
moment and I've also been
Constituents reach out to me
because they want to take this
thing maybe a step further
member looked online and get
bridges and get straight to get
other other
things named after women in our
in our cities and the counties
and so thank you for bring this
for my I have a couple
questions.
You have mentioned.
Excuse me.
Governor rejection right
appropriation for three hundred
and thirty thousand dollars the
research part portion of this.
Was the last time we received
any money to do this kind of
work.
And madam chair Representative
look and part of I was the only
time that that we that we ask
for money
and it was through several other
legislators also it was the
capital outlay and B. L. and
they put some of their capital
outlay money towards the project
as well so it wasn't just the
governor but it was the governor
with several other legislators
and yes it's the only time we
receive money the only time we
passed.
Thank you thank you for
mentioning that are mentioned
that you do in the capitol
project because maybe.
We're looking to do it right we
can we can look.
Are to get to appropriations and
that and that way.
In order to madam chair is that
you're working with Santa Fe
prep
this initiative that you're
working on and.
Thank you bye just Senator
preparatory it and our public
schools Madam yes madam chair
representative I would one of
the reasons is that the public
school system has their
curriculum already established
to what they're going to be
doing and so we have
we were we have a teacher that
we know at the Santa Fe prep he
was willing to incorporate a day
have bringing women into that
curriculum and then we they also
do junior and senior projects
and she by herself came
Representative Hey we want to
help with that with this marker
so that's how that came about
not because we're trying to
excludes mac Act we're trying to
get it in public schools period
yes thank you madam that's to
the point I'm trying to make I
think that this is something
that we really need should have
a conversation with our public
schools and our New Mexico
history classes no New Mexicans
your classes begin in junior
high.
And I think that
I just wanted to understand your
perspective that are what is
going on I think this is
something that is.
This is significant enough that
we start having those
conversations and I appreciate
your work and I appreciate your
diligence and getting this done
and I think this is something
that we can grow and appreciate
again all the sponsors not to
work from
as well thank you madam chair
appreciate the fact and madam
chair if I may just add on to
Representative Lujan comments
one of the initiatives in the
bill is preserving and archiving
the information and actually now
I have a daughter in high school
and I think even without just at
the curriculum in in some of the
great that would be really nice
to have this is a huge resource
for all the schools in the state
so I appreciate Representative
Lujan said tension to that issue
thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you both and now
recognized Representative
Serrato.
Thank you madam chairwoman thank
you for the sponsors for this
wonderful bill into the
witnesses for the wonderful
presentation I really do
appreciate this met with my best
friends growing up when we would
just Las Vegas and you can just
see how we're just being at a
hearty house again you know
seeing that part of her history
because I can't believe this
program other was that was a
hearty girl and so you know
again seeing that part of that
history and share our kids with
their in explaining all of that
you know just an exciting
moments when you have these
these markers of these
opportunities to share that you
know it's really it really is
touching to see I I did want to
mention real briefly you know as
I thought you had mentioned you
have all these wonderful
objectives and I love and
applied and doozy Azam and.
and ambition.
And I'm curious you know.
How do you have the team you
know that's that's possible for
this one time you know non
reoccurring fund to achieve a
lot of those things how do you
feel about getting to a lot of
it and again if it's just
ambition I I don't stop thank I
might have a dispensary is how
that and it's it's in to all of
your big ideas I think they're
wonderful.
Well thank you madam chair
representative we have we've
talked about this and we it is
an ambitious program that we
can't do of ourselves and that's
why the request for for funding
and that is to help to be able
to hire people to help us do
this we're experts at doing
these kinds of things and while
three hundred fifty thousand
dollars sounds like a lot of
money it may not do everything
here but it will help us to also
go out and do some additional
fundraising because people see
that the
like other foundations and stuff
or stated there's a commitment
by the state your mask for
likely to help provide funding
as well and so that's this is
this is a step to get us toward
getting other allegations and
fund raisers in place as well to
help us complete everything
that's on our wish list.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that as well this I I
appreciate that kind of broader
thinking that you have and it's
really wonderful to see you
making this information more
accessible to more folks until I
had thank you thank you.
You Representative Serrato and
the chair to recognize Senator I
mean excuse me Representative
quest'anno.
Thank you madam chair we
chilling Las Vegas thank
Representative said we had a
Harvey house so the new in reply
or renovated Castaneda hotel and
you know it's it's also now I've
I've been there it's great I
want to talk about a little bit
about this attack at in this I
don't know the day that we're
here to lobby for this I don't
know if they're following me
madam chair throughout the round
house but really not a lot like
that again that everywhere I
turn they were there and you
know I'm I'm just excited in you
know I'm going to support this a
hundred percent and I just want
to tell you guys you guys do
also work your hard work is
going to pay off.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
yeah my aunt Lucille was a
Harvey girl I mean we all have
stories we all have stories so I
thank you so much I I did have
one question Representative
Sweetser is is this in the LFC
budget.
So thank you for that question
and it's very important we have
been working to have included in
the cultural affairs budget and
I think we've made headway but
at that at this point it's not
in there it looks like it may be
before the bill goes to the
Senate so
hopefully within an and positive
vote this morning that will help
the effort along the way so
thank you for the question okay
and this this bill goes now to
appropriations is that correct
yes ma'am that.
Good luck and let me know how I
can help in and with that I I
wanted really thank everybody
for this incredible work
I it's the first time I've heard
about this organization I will
become a member I'm sorry to
that we certainly have our
stories in district forty one
that I would like to share to
with our families in the land
grants and this sec yes I do we
have a wealth of family history
in the north and I would like
I'm I wanna make sure somehow we
follow them into this this
organization to and I know just
the went out so I will be
working with you and I
appreciate it so much and with
that I will call for motion.
We have a motion by terra Han a
second the motion second by
Representative Castellano I
would say it clear call Rowe.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative Castellano yes.
madam chair is is Representative
Cook here I am.
Okay Representative Cook yes.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Yes.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Your.
Representative.
Yes.
We have a unanimous vote and
then Representative M. C. Sir
you have a bill to carry point
thank you it thank you so much
you madam chair and committee
members and I was a negligible
in not us missed and solace to
say a few words I wonder if we
could just wrap up with her
expertise and just comments
because you know she chaired the
department and she's just a just
a wealth of information on this
subject so with your permission
madam chair just a few words if
that's what we love to hear from
her thank you.
Well madam chair and
Representative Sweetser members
of the committee thank you so
much for giving us the
opportunity to address your
committee this morning and for
hearing our bill so quickly I
also want to express gratitude
to our state all of our sponsors
for caring this legislation that
we really feel is so important
to telling the story of our
state and this is been a very
longstanding programs since two
thousand six a very successful
initiative now almost a hundred
markers dedicated to women have
been installed across the state
and we're really at a critical
juncture in terms of the
initiative for now we have to go
out and come out what we've done
and and really be able to give
access to the stories that are
so rich to our state so and and
with that and and many volunteer
hours have gone into this I want
to recognize all of the women at
the international women's forum
who have dedicated so many hours
and an effort to the success of
the initiative and I also want
to thank Rhonda and Polish for
for going out and and doing some
heavy lifting to really get to
members directly in person and I
think that's really wonderful
and madam chair thank you so
much we really appreciate your
support and all of the members
of the committee thank you for
your support as well.
All right thank you so much
madam chair.
Thank you all and see you on the
floor.
Thank you.
Thank you I.
