Well call is closed we have a
quorum.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
body please father heads.
I will serve one in this
building.
All those gathered in the
chamber and our family our loved
ones that would we've left
behind.
courage to do your will.
May we never forget that we have
this opportunity to represent
our students and our citizens
and protect those who mean us as
well as.
this last couple days that we do
here will we ask all these
things in Jesus name amen.
Representative available million
leaders in the pledge of
allegiance.
Percent growth in the pledge The
New Mexico flag.
J. lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker and morning.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business you
The lady from something very
percent semansky thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker I rise today
to pay respects to a great
House Dr Daniel Irwin fine who
passed away in September was no
stranger to the roundhouse drive
I was a distinguished scholar of
foundational Energy policies for
our state.
But Mexico is far from the only
jurisdiction that has benefitted
from his counsel Dr I worked
soldier in the Korean conflict
and as a key thought leader
through the Cold War and after.
Dr I lived a full and
please re have a certificate for
Mr I at at his side and his
friend and wondering if the
clerk would read the certificate
Whereas Daniel one fine was a
great American patriot in the
nation lost a real hero when on
September twenty sixth two
thousand twenty two he passed
And whereas Daniel find saw his
future wife Helen fine at nine
years of age and the movie in
Hudson New York and she became
his wife of sixty five years and
during the Korean conflict and
use the GI bill to pay for
college and we're as Daniel fine
intended Georgetown University
where he was a gold key
candidates ranked at the top of
under the legendary manning J.
dour and teach political science
and Dr provide became and
pioneer in African Studies and
furthered greatly the civil
the Cold War against Russia
which led to major testimony by
Dr fine on strategic minerals
before Congress and think tanks
also testified at the state
capitol about energy and the
future of energy in New Mexico
and the geopolitical light.
And we're as three American
offices and we're as professor
clam cutting him a lifelong
friend and leader in the civil
rights movement invited Dr fine
and the fine family to write a
New both Martin Luther king
junior and Malcolm X. and
whereas at Harvard University Dr
fine was honored by the
university as a lifelong Harvard
technology ventures.
Where as well at the
Massachusetts institute of
technology doctor finds work was
published in the international
Times and we're as Dr provide
spoke at the tufts Fletcher
school for law and diplomacy
many times and had a room
reserved in his honor.
his daughter Sharon finds that
the his son William fine his
brother Jim fine and his cousins
fine a great American patriot
signed and sealed at the capitol
in the City of Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker and we are
lifelong friend Phil look clear
so if you would both stand and
be recognized please and if the
whole house would help me
express our condolences.
Gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa Mr speaker thank you I
just wonder what welcome Mr fund
both quite recent thank you Mr
speaker.
To move from San Juan.
my son heaven my younger son
today is the seventeenth
birthday so he gets to spend
that with me today which I very
much appreciate
have tried to.
because of his father but.
I want to share is a bit about
the transformation that he's
done the last couple years.
So he.
not very athletic not very.
Motivated by can be Frank for a
minute and about two years ago
he decided he was going to
change things in his life
few times a week in the morning
around five AM quick and self
up.
Go work out got into wrestling.
and it's been very inspirational
for his mother and I to see that
sing Happy Birthday appreciate
that delivers an honest.
Representative in laying have
the birthday you.
thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to draw your attention to
on your desks today is
international women's day
celebration in the rotunda and
there's so many special items
empower women every day here in
New Mexico and
Mr speaker
this is a joint effort between
the Gail caucus thank you Mr
biggest district in the world
You know it's getting bigger and
bigger.
Right right Mr speaker and
history days so now someone in
state so there is a wonderful
exhibit up stairs and we hope
show it to anybody else and
discuss show too if you want to
see it.
pleasure this morning to
introduce a family member we
have with this at the rostrum
and read a Roybal who comes to
sister to my mother low poly
Chavis who lives in Carrizozo
and it the Rita and her husband
are proud owners of two
businesses The loans central New
Mentally queen and maybe Harry
Garcia to get her.
Thank you Mr speaker but we're
speaker is rents we recognize
will come right.
Thank you Mr.
Gentleman from really wasn't
woman and a mother her name is
Tiffany wrote she comes from the
Pueblo of this letter where
she's lived her entire life
she's able again proud Pueblo
woman and mother she focuses our
coalition to stop violence
against native women.
Advocacy journey began as a
server of a supervised
visitation assistant in twenty
fourteen at Ysleta Pueblo Mr
violence trauma and mental
health advisory board Tiffany
holds a degree in Human Services
as it and is the current social
workers and students in the
school of social work at the New
From Santa Fe Representative
Lujan good morning Mr speaker
good morning body add to rise in
and say happy international
With the behavior health issues
and have to deal with violence
and bullying and all those
things and I just want to rise
bit stronger Mr speaker and I
hope to be part of those the
support teams as we're working
towards doing that but I do have
hope
we can all get their the Senate
and the house together and I'd
like to say and and welcome to
our local tier teams here and
everyone to
to recognize them and to give
support specially when they're
cheering us on tomorrow what as
we're planning on and having
we can have some of that fund so
that we can recognize that
we have an opportunity to work
together and and be teammates
for come together with this
tomorrow thank you Mr speaker
that's all I have.
Thank you deleted the gentleman
Mr speaker and body as you all
know tomorrow is updated today
between myself and
Representative Alcon and I was
wondering Mr speaker if we can
Just to make sure.
You know it's a.
The divergence in New Mexico
three we really need to work on
something that Mr speaker thank
you very much.
The gentleman from C. will a
condition with corn thank you Mr
speaker I was just going to say
when they open the email.
Just now so personally one woman
veteran additions in the house
and I don't have here so I want
our house.
This thank you.
international women's day I
wanted to just read something to
you that someone just sent me an
a on a tax and it goes like this
May we know them may we be them
may we raise them and Mr speaker
I just wanted to thank our
mothers for bringing us here to
women who helped bring us to
where we are today thank you Mr
speaker thank you generally the
deleted from tells
Representative Ortez thank you
Mr speaker body you have a
are meeting quest staff the
district that I represent house
district forty two Kwesta is an
amazing community I recommend
that you go there.
to draw everyone's attention to
the the Los Alamos bag that is
on your desk today is Los Alamos
stay in the legislature so very
started at the time of the
Manhattan Project and it's
started as a volunteer
facility but now it's it's run
lot of recreational activities
Mr speaker in
that I think people would really
enjoy so I I recommend you take
a quick drive up there you see
Truman state level and see a and
support all the because district
in the world Representative
Armstrong.
today international which is the
international women's forum will
be in the rotunda from one
thirty until three thirty to
celebrate women's international
Thank you Jim the gentleman from
you thank you Mr speaker I rise
on a point present personal
privilege state your point Sir
thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
body I wanted to take a few
nineteen ninety nine Mr speaker
in the sixty day session it says
it no later than the thirty
fifth calendar day the house
show given the bill it's third
reading and final passage by the
schedule Mr speaker and body our
committee did its work this
house floor did its work
diligently we sent the budget
over four days ahead of when
history we needed Mr speaker and
body to have the largest state
reserves in our state's history
and we did that at thirty
percent two point eight billion
diversify our economy and make
our streets safer both by
recruiting more law enforcement
officers investing in our
judicial system and many other
pieces maybe the largest Mr
Medicaid for new provider
reimbursement so Mister speaker
body we will go back through
that but suffice to say we not
only did our work efficiently in
several years.
Moving forward of our most
significant revenues therefore
our most significant
responsibility to spend to save
set aside really bears from
right is the forecast right now
project oil volumes declining
there is one of the one of the
best investments that we can
make Mr speaker and body
stakeholders across New Mexico
to work on a comprehensive tax
approach that is fair that is
sufficient and that grows New
Mexico Mr speaker body I just
committee and that day Mr
speaker body I just rise today
to begin no the accomplishments
of this house and to actually
inform the body as it so happens
day that we should receive that
budget by the house joint rule I
wanted to rise to inform you Mr
speaker to inform the body to
thank everyone for their
diligent work and to pledge that
thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
memorial forty four has had it
under consideration point in his
recommendation to to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we are on adoption of a
All those opposing the S. of the
committee reported up to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred Senate bill
three eighty three as amended
has had it under consideration
point I was recommendation that
do pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
and I.
This is a test of the committee
board opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred Senate
rules committee substitute for
federal community for the
Senate.
The rules committee committee
substance percent joint
resolution one as amended all
those embarrassing of this and
I.
as amended has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendations to pass as
amended respectfully submitted
directly and the chair.
The suppose maybe yes I think we
reported opted.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to miss been referred
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate tax
business and transportation
committees substitute for Senate
Speaker move adoption of the
committee report we are an
adoption of a federal committee
for the Senate finance committee
substitute presented taxes is a
transportation committees
observer Senate bill one forty
seven as amended all those in
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go about
our business third reading of
list has been shared I believe
with everybody at this point
that everybody should know
what's on the deck.
record reflect election
necessary for placing House Bill
eleven as amended on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
number one to house bill eleven
as amended deleted can you read
the two to six number while the
amendment gets passed out to the
members yes two two six zero
uploaded online as we speak just
give it a minute while gets
passed out so that you can
explain your amendment.
has been passed out please go
ahead and explain it.
Mr speaker this amendment
moves that it strikes twenty
twenty four and changes it to
I see none you have an amended
bill back to you explaining the
amended bill gentlelady.
Mr speaker H. B. eleven is
tragedy HB eleven is a
bipartisan effort to become the
forty fourth state to enact this
the office of child advocacy is
created and administratively
children services and will help
these complex and overburdened
systems of CYFD through their
their support and resource
guiding.
There is the gentle lady from
the owners of COVID.
Thank you Mr speaker thing.
lady I didn't expect this bill
to be at first and I expected
that we'd have a.
Longer conversation on what.
Is proposed here.
Representative it was not.
Mr speaker Representative I'm
might you tell us where this
bill is heard.
Mr speaker speaker gentle lady
I was honored to serve on the
house Judiciary Committee for
two terms for years before
beginning here again.
And over that time.
And the kind of independent
overview and advocacy and
budget.
And policies that.
trauma deserved Mr speaker and
gentle lady over those years I
realize that.
We shared a perspective and came
a lot of vigorous debate about
what the possible solutions
where so Mister speaker and
gentle lady I was surprised to
see that this bill had not come
to House Judiciary and given
Over years I've had the honor of
loving and learning and
connecting to families from
across the state.
Who are survivors of trauma.
perinatal substance use Mr
speaker and gentle lady and body
do you have an understanding of
a parent it'll substance use is.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
women who have perinatal
substance abuse as I expected
and and I appreciate your
expertise but for the body and
those listening payment of
Mamas are actively using
controlled substances during
their pregnancy and the truth
the reality is in New Mexico
that often means that that
to tell you about the harm
they've caused.
And then when you build trust
and relationship as I'm sure you
know Mr speaker and gentle lady.
The start to talk about with the
cycles of incarceration.
Mr speaker and gentle lady over
years of doing this work first
as a researcher and a policy
program at places like me logro.
I had the incredibly a man's
What I knew then and what I'm
here today is that these are
complicated issues.
And the part that broke my heart
is through all this complexity.
policy in our narrative we have
thrown away.
These mothers and these families
where these kids came from.
couch of my dealer I want to do
something different help me find
something different.
And we do think that kid make
sure that kid was quote safe.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am very
much applaud you and appreciate
the components of this bill that
take us in a direction of real
From an income from from from
mama's that have showed up with
so much courage.
considered in figuring out the
solutions.
And for me when I think about my
life's work I've done everything
and many of us I imagine who
haven't because there's a lot of
privilege racialized dynamics in
this.
They have continued to ask and
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
child welfare reform has become
a political issue.
I'm incredibly disappointed in
this body.
off.
But Mr speaker and gentle lady
the kind of urgent and desperate
communications I'm getting again
the politics of this bill and
the coordinated effort and the
this the the key voices
involved.
Are connected to efforts.
called resource families in
front of the families that are
New Mexicans and surviving in
navigating trauma every day.
So Mister speaker and gentle
years on the Indian family
protection out.
And knowing the forces they were
up against an understanding that
in previous administrations.
certain religious values because
they had more financial
resources because they had more
economic stability and that
became part of the narrative of
good intention is not there yet
so Mister speaker and gentleman
I appreciate.
The intention I support the
components that come back to
directly year after year after
year we've prioritized certain
voices that have direct conflict
and interest
you.
There is a debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Martinez.
Mr speaker will the kind lady
this bill we owe it to our most
vulnerable citizens.
I think this is a well crafted
bill.
and I just wanted to stand and
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lineal.
I yield to the gentle lady.
to put my glasses or.
Done in Sierra it was not too
bad only two other companies
okay
not in establishing this kind of
oversight of the department and
I favor independent oversight
and I do so I'm going to be
multi year period.
There are some things that I
hope we can do in the future and
that we can talk about and begin
disincentives to this is to
remind children and families in
a safe manner.
so that and that children are
the equipment in context and I
couldn't
tell you what page online but
one of the things that I believe
you have changed in the bill
that's different from the
The
office itself may be evaluated
for its success is that right.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes that
is correct so what's been
returned from the home from
which they were removed that
casts a negative view on it to
my way of thinking Mr speaker
If we're talking about.
Returning to
An environment for which they
just hope that we can start
thinking that way and talking
about it that way and having
that be our goal so that we are
no other alternative so thank
you Mr speaker thank you lady
from this call for all your work
on this for all the people over
the years have been working on
I yield to the gentle lady
I I just want to weigh in on
this bill
I'm working on other CYFD bills
Substantial changes in
the laws that govern CYFD and
those changes I believe will
our.
Children particularly children
who are involved in abuse and
neglect situation so I join in
for with the sponsor in asking
of the division leader close.
Mr speaker I move for a day pass
of HB eleven twice amended
connecting the office of child
advocate we are on final passage
of house bill eleven as far as
Representative Castellano.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
The vote is now closed by would
have fifty six in the
thank you Mr speaker I am can
you get me to that point that
the record reflect that election
this is our for placing House
Bill three forty nine S. was
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
these changes include technical
changes definitions clarity and
licensure fees.
The board of nursing reports
where there is debate
degenerated from the yen are
when we Representative Jones.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady legal yield.
appreciate anything we can do to
help us streamline the nurse
practice act and also I would.
I I have an amendment.
yes house amendment number one
to house with three forty nine
as amended gentle lady do you
have in front of you can read
the two to five number please.
Yes I have an two two five.
Eight seven one point two all
right gentle lady it is being
There's amount somewhere on.
Standby generators from the
amendment well we get the best
of.
Thank you Mr speaker and I would
like a roll call vote as well.
and various areas of nursing and
and it was my honor to do so and
that's why I'm presenting this
amendment to help nurses in New
licenses for the first time
usually these these nurses have
just gotten out of nursing
school into the they're probably
struggling a little bit with
them.
Second I would like to help
nurses who are renewing their
license as nurses we are
required in your life we knew
our licenses every two years and
pay a licensing.
administrative fee for two
years.
It will lower the fee to renew
the license from a hundred and
ten dollars to seventy five
dollars.
hear this bill and the health
committee we crunch some numbers
based on the boards
twenty two financial reports and
reduction of fees which only
spans of five hundred and fifty
thousand dollars leaving one
point four million in their
operating budget.
they're fun so with this I stand
for questions.
The lady from Bernalillo is is a
friendly amendment thank you Mr
speaker and thank you.
Representative Lujan thank you
Mr speaker and with the gentle
lady from doing you and I he
does go into the field yes I
respect the profession beyond
and I and I appreciate what
you're trying to do but were you
in consultation with any of the
nurses association or any other
lady didn't didn't have a chance
to discuss that with them
however it was in twenty
nineteen they actually had a
pilot project to do this very
sure but I do know they did have
a a pilot project and they had
had planned this out to actually
reduce fees for time so that was
a amendment to reduce some by Mr
speaker.
I'm trying to read it as quickly
as I can Mr speaker.
renewals as a hundred and ten
dollars we're proposing to
reduce the.
The new fees to fifteen dollars
up with six hundred thousand
dollars that their operations
operating budget would be
decreased by Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady it would
bringing nurses to New Mexico.
that would be a any help we can
give to nurses would would be
would be beneficial
an actual help to to nurses
especially are just finishing
nursing school Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady I I
again I.
many people come up to me all
the time and just tell me all
the wonderful things about her
what you the care and just
everything she meant to our
toward something else and and
the recruitment and and and all
the other things that we are
facing in the crisis that we're
having with with having more
without having interaction and
us
those of the affected party of
this is is something I can't
support right now because I'm
to do and I thank you for
bringing four but this I don't
necessarily believe that this is
going to bring more recruitment
or more nurses to us but I
understand the jester and maybe
they want to advocate for and
and this direction thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
the debate on the amendment the
gentleman from current tobacco
with a low rate Roosevelt and
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady you know what I have two
daughters.
That are registered nurses one
Ms actually an instructor now
They make great sacrifices.
For the people that they take
care of and here we are with an
amendment.
If we count the nurses that we
have across the state in New
Mexico.
And what amount.
They're being helped with.
It's a minute amount.
exposing themselves to comment.
A lot of nurses didn't want to
take the vaccines.
My two daughters are included in
To train nurses.
To deal with the patients.
My youngest daughter worked at a
at a.
Because these patients aren't
made that mentally stable.
And she would come home beat up
with bruises the it.
in New Mexico and we're turning
it down.
We in this body have a lot of
power and authority.
To do things to help.
And and.
The young lady from from all
those counties.
This votes fixing to go to the
nurses across the state in New
Mexico thank you Mr speaker
thank you thank you madam lady
from Bernalillo presented
Chasey.
will be back on the amendment
there's been a roll call vote
requested and granted the vote
is now open.
Percentages gonna present but.
reopen it so that folks didn't
get to will get to vote.
Including the amendment sponsor.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Rubio is to table
Representative will first test
to table Representative Thomson.
forty nine as far as amended has
been tabled the lady back to you
thank you Mr speaker you know
for the legislative close thank
you Mr speaker I ask that house
What about those.
The clerk to call those members
of that are recorded what was
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
It was a close vote of sixty
four in the affirmative zero in
the negative house with three
forty nine as far as amended has
from Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
supporters and one of them is a
representative Garcia are you
ready on item number fifteen.
User Mr speaker give me that
point that the record reflect
Thank you Mr speaker hoping to
sixty seventy related to
driver's license in New Mexico
how do sixty seven streamlines
the way the motor vehicle
Mr speaker I would refer to my
school sponsor Representative
Harper.
Jennifer Sandoval Representative
Harper.
Whether someone Panavision
records you know determine if
the driver should be granted a
license without a with a with
restrictions under current law.
and beauty can ask for medical
imagine they're not getting much
help for and so this bill will
allow everybody to rely on
medical records submitted by the
records.
But secretaries Ortiz well
established and it's part of
their regulations and also
entity has been able to find any
physicians willing to become
stand for questions see no
debate the gentleman to close
thank you Mr speaker
House bill two thirty three is a
bill Agency bill for regulation
licensing department and all it
for regulation and licensing
those those are already in
existence and functioning they
just weren't in the statute and
the goal is just to add them and
earlier percent of her and.
Thank you Mr president Mr
speaker with the gentle lady
deals.
Mr speaker I yield to the my
colleague from Bernalillo
county.
D. and bringing on of course the
the cannabis Division but was
there any reason why is part of
the regulation and the
of the reorganization
maintenance a cabinet position
it is an executive office but
why isn't it part of the
cabinet.
was just to be sure we
accurately had the list of
divisions within the agency.
And had them in alphabetical
order thank you very much as I
that I was just wondering why
wasn't that considered as part
of the reorganization thank you
gentlelady there's the gentle
lady from Chavis Representative
lady from Chavis Mr speaker
thank you very much the gentle
lady I have not had a chance to
read the bill in its entirety it
there's it's pretty lengthy but
bill line six it's the item
number hi in regards to the
cannabis nursery.
I skipped over one page I am so
sorry I yield back to the gentle
lady all right there's further
debate the gentle lady from
lady from Santa Fe County thank
you speaker thank you gentle
lady I really like what you're
doing here I really think that
there needs to be more
enforcement around
do with the enforcement level of
Am I in the wrong bill Mr
speaker gentle lady you're not
wrong bill but the bill was
anything else.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally I I do appreciate that
but in those divisions.
What would the enforcement then
be the law enforcement.
cannabis and also liquor
that they originally had some
provisions in this bill
but did in but we're not at a
however the the cannabis
inspectors in the alcohol
inspectors they now employ we
through our law enforcement
for FBI background checks which
was an initiative of the of our
L. D. last year that we can get
through so I was just going to
is if that is in fact any part
of what this bill does Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
but yeah I was in to sponsor and
I I really am not able to answer
that question you Mr speaker
gentle lady I appreciate what
you're trying to do with the
with this bill thank you
At
be amended as passed B. yes this
amended the at.
The votes about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Castellano I'm
gonna vote just.
Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes
representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
that go to that order of
business committee reports
objection it is so ordered
surgery.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee respectfully submitted
directly and the chair
the speaker move adoption please
an adoption referral committee
report on Senate bill three
seventy eight as amended all
those embarrassing if I was in
Mr speaker I move house standing
committee us until five PM today
Wednesday March the eighth.
miscellaneous business
innovation is ordered Jennifer
million Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at fifteen
minutes after the conclusion of
the Republican caucus thank you
oh nine signal generated from
you thank you Mr speaker the
house commerce will not meet
today but we will be meeting on
Friday members taking note.
day and with that Mr speaker I
know once again the new emotion
that the house stand in recess
until five PM this afternoon
afternoon.
