Because because we generated
from earlier Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to ms been
referred house bill three sixty
two has had it under
consideration reports I was
available committed
pronouncement three six to table
those if they receive a state
line.
As well as a test of a committee
board opted is that ice cream.
You're not.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
chair Mr speaker move adoption
for an adoption of a federal
committed one house memorial
forty five calls and they
receive a state not.
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair Mr speaker
move adoption we are an adoption
of a favorable committee report
incentives Senator as amended
as amended has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation to to pass
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair the speaker move
to adopt the report earlier in
committee to is been referred
Senate bill one twenty as
amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation but it to pass
respectfully submitted a Sandia
conjure Mr speaker move to adopt
Those named as a committee
report opted Mr speaker labor
veterans of military affairs
committee to was the referred
Senate bill one forty five has
had it under consideration point
and recommendation to do pass
and then to for to the
five all those embarrassing
about the same time.
Was a test of a committee
reported opted Mr speaker labor
Sylvia Kwan chair
this without the need for a
reduction of a federal committee
put in Senate bill ten ten as
of military affairs committee to
is been referred Senate bill two
fifty has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendations to pass an
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
those in favor say if I was in
line.
The bulls made the NCAA
Committee board opted Mr speaker
labor veterans military affairs
committee team has been referred
for an adoption referral
community port on Senate Joint
Memorial eleven of those in
favor say if I was a nine.
recommendation that I do not
pass but the house agriculture
as sick as the water resources
committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty five to pass
respectfully submitted Susan can
and a chair.
report on house thank Nico
dressing as in water resources
committee substantive routed to
House Bill five twenty five all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose in a the as of the
Representative.
Ferrary chair Mr speaker move
adoption board optional
favorable committee report on
Senate bill eighty three of
those in favor say about the
same time.
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee respectfully submitted
Andrea Romero chair.
chair Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of a federal committee
for the Senate bill two forty
has had it under consideration
point I was recommendations to
pass as amended respectfully
submitted that small chair Mr
speaker move adoption or non
adoption referral committee
report on house bill two eighty
it under consideration point I
was recommendation that a D.
pass respectfully submitted in
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption or in adoption referral
committee put in Senate bill two
referred Senate bill ninety four
as amended has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendations to pass as
amended respectfully submitted
that small chair Mr speaker move
report opted.
Three fourteen with the
emergency clause Senate bill
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate health of public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill one seventeen as
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
sure do Lujan Senate chief
clerk.
This is ruby entered message
from the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house
Message will be entered from the
Senate Mr speaker I'm directed
to inform the house of the
Senate has passed house bill
seven as amended by the house
and further amended by the
Senate and request the
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker and we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business your
ordered.
Cool then from someone.
Thank you Mr speaker so import
business this evening I'm happy
marked by name their single
scoops if you did not put in an
order.
That's your problem not mine I
guess so and I do have ice cream
to that and and Mr speaker if if
you would be so kind to my
lovely wife made all this ice
for scratch script herself and
she is right here at the doors
Members are gonna take a little
bit of third reading this
evening and then we'll be.
Done for the night.
Mr speaker and and specifically
aware that all walmarts are
closing in Portland Oregon.
Every single Walmart is closing
and Portland Oregon do the
shoplifting Crisis.
Thank you dear lady.
For the for the amendment else
business lane is businesses
seen on the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Tracy.
Lady from Santa Fe are you ready
and item number thirty six I am
Mr speaker would you get me to
that point that the record
reflect that election is Sir for
placing House Appropriations and
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
four hundred is a plan to
address the problem of people
who lack health coverage in New
health care coverage of any kind
of let alone affordable
coverage.
House bill four hundred
establishes a study for the
coverage through Medicaid the
bill sets out the requirements
for a thorough study of plan
bill that explains and and when
we get to that point we will
have an explanation of an
amendment that is coming.
Mr speaker this this plan is
their health care coverage
they're currently covered under
Medicaid for under the temporary
expansion of Medicaid those New
conference had a score of an as
a representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker although
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
yield I gladly yield to the lady
from catching Sierra Sapporo and
myself and others on on making
this amendments so Mister
speaker I do have an amendment.
patience our our software froze
up here so we're gonna.
We're taking pictures of
everything so that the those who
requests to speak continue to be
requesting to speak.
we're at while the amendment
gets best sellers we work so.
Fernandes.
You are new you know Chattfield
has my and I screamed give back.
The system is back online.
I move house amendment number
one for House Appropriations
appropriations and finance
committee.
Substitute for house bill four
that is what has been passed out
the gentle lady to explain the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
once again on your desk is
something that we passed out
earlier this will show you the
does is strip out everything
except for the
this study we talked about this
Mr speaker and probation and
on page one line thirteen after
the semi colon strike the
remainder of the line.
Strike lines fourteen and
fifteen in their entirety.
sixteen strike the second semi
colon.
Strike line seventeen and
eighteen in their entirety and
insert other stakeholders
identified by the secretary.
Number five on page three line
eleven.
The strike plans and insert
sixty five or not otherwise
eligible or enrolled in
mandatory mandatory coverage
under the New Mexico Medicaid
state plan and have a household
Twelve twenty five.
In search of the.
following paragraphs The fiscal
effects.
Of recurring and non recurring
spending in the state budget and
and of.
Remember the succeeding
Through page eight strike a line
ten strike sections three and
four in their entirety.
And Mr speaker ultimately this
changes this bill into just the
study.
discussion it is a friendly
amendment if I might briefly
explain why please do so Mr
speaker and body this is going
to be a multi year project this
people that need access to
health cover care coverage that
we support our health care
providers in that process and
doing the study and focusing on
to be and then bring it to the
legislature and have that
conversation again thank you Mr
speaker Is there debate on the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker just once
again I'd like to to thank the
sponsors for allowing me to
insert this amendment and
and you Representative Chatfield
thank you Mr speaker doesn't
gentle lady yield Mister speaker
I yield to my friend from all
those beautiful counties so
Mr speaker and gentleman and
that the study I think is a
minimum requirement because we
do need that detailed analysis
So Mister speaker gentle lady
the study is wise.
But is not statutorily required
in order to give the agency the
study in detail which is which
was heavily informed by our
wonderful discussion and house
appropriations and finance
incorporate into this amended
bill.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
guess the point I'm trying to
make is what I found out during
that discussion is that the
agency can go ahead and
whichever may be in in most of
the folks that were you in on
that discussion that day
realize that we needed to study
understand it before we jump
into something we didn't know
about.
So Mister speaker gentle lady is
this or would this be if the
regretfully no it would not I
think it would fill a gap but
it's certainly not designed to
replace any existing health
from their health coverage when
they get a raise at work for
example that makes them
in eligible for Medicaid they
get back with the fees that
cliff in fact and they're
looking at that well if I make a
health coverage can I actually
afford to purchase on my own
because I'm I'm not going to be
eligible for Medicaid anymore.
Mr speaker and gentleman so for
is about three thousand dollars
a month.
To about thirty six thousand yes
Mr speaker and gentleman for a
family of four.
Mr speaker and gentleman at that
the department would need to
present and their report as a
might be paying the very lowest
premium and a family that's
paying it that's it two hundred
fifty percent of the federal
poverty line would be paying a
of that premium do we know Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
exactly why we need to do the
study we do not know at this
time.
And Mr speaker gentle lady do we
study will examine the impact of
income range up to four hundred
percent of the federal poverty
of the for a family of four that
would be about nine thousand
dollars a month
and it'll that is part of what
is so important about this study
dollars a year.
Mr speaker yes for a family of
four that is four hundred
percent of the federal poverty
line.
study in my novel for the.
For the ultimate result but I
think if we're going to do
something we need to understand
it in maybe when the study comes
regional and from Chavis any and
all that Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
Mister speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis Eddie and
Tero.
has been mentioned to us so we
can understand but.
Is the.
Your vision if I could be so
opportunity for coverage maybe
that's the right way to say Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
federal poverty line is tied to
federal law as well so that some
of the health care initiatives
that that have been enacted at
the federal level so we want to
programs but I will say Mr
speaker and gentleman
You know I I was sort of
astounded to learn that.
folks between a hundred and
thirty nine and two hundred
The speaker and gentle lady to
though that doesn't mean that
the cost or not being covered by
those those costs I'm I'm
reminded of and LFC.
Report I think it was last
September.
are there was a report out that
said that a.
Family of four.
With one minimum wage earner if
hundred twenty thousand a
hundred and ten thousand dollars
a year are you aware of that
that report gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
to be clear here we we make sure
we're on the same page and on
the same bill the bill has been
amended all this bill does is
Yes Mr speaker okay just wanna
make sure we're on that same
page so that we don't spend too
much time looking for other
reports that may have been done
in the past.
health care which I don't know
whether it does or not if it
does maybe it is a report that
would be valuable as you go
through this and try to pull
Is a study and I look forward to
the report thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
thank you gentle lady.
So this.
Bill as it is written now it
would just be a study so Mister
speaker gentle lady can you tell
gentle lady so will this be a
multi year study Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
staff report and plan are due to
so Mister speaker gentle lady do
you think that's enough time to
properly vet this legislation to
make sure that we have those all
months there this the study in
plan will be conducted over.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and so would we be also
looking at other states that may
have something similar Mr
jurisdictions have implemented
this so far.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and then so.
I just wanna make sure Mr
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman this program is not
intended to compete with any of
those programs however that is a
coverage that is through the
federal.
Government Mr speaker.
That's correct Mr speaker and
gentleman okay thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady so then
Implementation Mr speaker gentle
lady because I'm sure that this
would affect how they're paid
and and what services they
provide Mr speaker Mr speaker
percent federal match rate which
would allow us and and this will
be addressed in the study to
significantly increase provider
reimbursement rates in the study
maximize our health care network
which Mr speaker and gentleman
as you know is it has been a
huge topic of could of concern
system.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so we mentioned as
seventy percent federal match
rate is that something that was
passed through Congress or who
may Mister speaker I have
Nicholas court of a with me use
that legal director at the
center for a lot of poverty.
analysis that the seventy three
percent match will apply two
groups at over a hundred thirty
three percent of the federal
if they change in an income
bracket so Mister speaker gentle
lady.
How do we measure what income
potential Medicaid system that
we would be putting it Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that might be a little outside
focused on the bill which
creates a study okay thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would certainly want that
included in the study just to
see how we would be moving from
good effort thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady there's a debate
going from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
your willingness to
take the bill that would have
been presented initially I know
even before you accepted the
still concerned a little bit
about what we are studying.
some speaker gentle lady.
In the title of the act.
To create and implement the
obviously now we're just talking
about study.
But unusually just add to create
and implement a state
Is the section of law concerning
Medicaid but miss or gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's an
excellent question so Medicaid
currently is a
study we are not contemplating
expanding the kind of coverage
that's provided for example
we're not talking about
additional benefits that need to
don't qualify for the program so
the idea would be that we're
taking the structure that we
have and allowing additional
hundred and thirty three
percent.
Of poverty is that correct Mr
speaker JD Mr speaker and
gentleman yes there is a five
compare apples to apples Mr
speaker
a hundred and thirty eight
percent for a family of four
from the poverty the poverty
ninety two dollars per month.
So the speaker and gentle lady
three thousand one hundred
ninety.
Three hundred three hundred and
three thousand two hundred month
dollars a year is that correct
Mr gently yes Mr speaker and
gentleman.
For a family of four so Mister
speaker and gentle lady what
we're talking about is in it is
however I would just add.
That the
individuals that are at four
that coverage did that levels of
the federal and.
Poverty line that that are
really concerning are those that
hundred thirty nine to two
hundred percent where we have
Mexico do not have health care
coverage so Mister speaker
gentle lady.
up to four hundred percent is
there a cost potentially to that
that is a family of four making
a hundred and twenty thousand
dollars a year approximately is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes and
a financing plan which shall
include a sliding scale for
premiums and cost sharing that
is based on household income.
and I I would think that would
be appropriate the speaker and
gentle lady because of my
understanding is.
That the state match.
state match is ten percent and
the federal match is ninety
percent is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
that's correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
that's correct.
Speaker and gentle lady.
the direction that the that the
study would go.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
a great question I.
It is a probably a portion of
that is what we need to be
and so that is part of that sort
of complicated financing plan
that needs to be put together so
you know you're revenue out
maybe change we're and your
revenue in is certainly changing
they may have employer
contributions employee
contributions so those are some
of the it really leveraging
economies of scale really
leveraging the federal funds
visits and you know the food on
the table or having their
children participate in
athletics there's some of
difficult choices that families
have to make.
wanted to make sure that we.
But we would be looking at doing
potentially is offering an
option to.
If if they're able to shift some
of that cost they have their
current insurance if it were to
shift over to the New Mexico
have four for companies that
offer insurance in New Mexico is
that is that correct Mr speaker
gently.
the exchange verses Medicaid
MCOS verses private employer
health insurance so it there's a
number of options but it kind of
depends on where you enter the
the study be part of the concern
that we had
of those of us who who who
expressed concern prior to the
bill being amended as it has
percent of the poverty level I'm
just wondering our our is is
this study going to be.
Maybe offer what the scenarios
the potential options be and
what would be the potential cost
for each option for the
legislative or is to be able to
With a predetermined.
not outcome but program others
around that outcome and I'm just
wondering how how.
options Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
there will be a range of options
presented I would also say that
presentation and to provide
feedback to HSD regarding the
design of the study regarding
with the questions that they're
looking at answering and again
report and it that opportunity
as well the legislature can
choose this is really what we
want to support.
Speaker and and gentlelady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
think it is in sort of the same
way that we do on other studies
that are provided to the
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady just a different
line of questioning.
stopped taking on new Medicaid
patients.
I believe we may have come up
with at least a temporary
solution or at least a.
get through that will.
That is going to.
Change the pay outs to providers
in Medicaid which I think would.
it from an insurance plan for
from
customers who are paying out of
pocket.
so Mr speaker and gentle lady
to providers for the providers
to be able to to be willing to
accept more Medicaid patients if
where it describes that this
this study shall include
information about recommended
reimbursement rates to maximize
access to health care services
issue because we already have a
significant percent of our
population covered by this and
as we see those reimbursement
rates rise over the next year
where.
We could be offering more
benefits to move to a larger
number of people.
once again up to potentially up
the legislature at least in in a
scenario.
since the increase for.
Well about a hundred thirty
three percent of the poverty
level as we go from ninety
lady could be paying out to
help.
Of the people on this new plan.
and miss Baker gentle lady I see
that scenario well we could be
doing that on one item which be
it would be an increase from the
And then agency speaker gentle
lady this scenario could also.
Actually have a have other
money's coming out of the
providers to encourage providers
to take on more Medicaid
patients is that correct Mr
speaker and gently that that is
the scenario I'm not saying that
is the definite outcome but that
is a potential scenario.
and federal funds are looked at
by our wonderful house
appropriations and finance
committee for example and looked
at an interim the legislative
finance committee process
I would say that.
It is possible for this to be
revenue positive it is possible
for this to also be revenue
negative and that is what we
a lot of these costs through
county indigent funds through
other general assistance program
funds through emergency rooms
preventive health care so make
sure that people have access to
their diabetes medications that
they're managing their blood
pressure correctly that they're
getting some exercise and and
end up facing you know severe
complications from diabetes for
example that we then are paying
for in our local communities
happens you can't answer the
critical question correctly
all kidding aside Mr speaker
gentle lady
I'm looking at.
That person is a could be making
a a a wage
are you an annual wage of around
sixty five thousand dollars a
year Mr speaker and gentle lady
four for children and a wife.
With less than that for most of
that time that that I have small
children.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady that generally jobs in that
that's almost that's nearly
double that so Mister speaker
and gentle lady prior to.
Any overtime for talking a
thirty thirty dollar an hour
upper limit.
And that in the study is the is
the scenario are aiming for I
think what we could be doing is
undermining.
of a collective bargaining unit
and we bargained for those
benefits and I have great
benefits in that scenario so the
speaker gently I'm just
Because miss gently I think you
for around two hundred percent
of the poverty level we're
talking.
You know sixty thousand dollars
a year.
We could be supplanting.
we could be supplanting.
The the budget packages that are
That.
That when the study takes place.
That it offers several options
level I think is is way too is
is way beyond what is necessary
obviously anybody who needs
insurance.
thousand or year range.
Those were very those were very
very good pay about benefits
with minimal copays.
Any dollars for an office visit.
care medical care so I just
wanna make sure that what we
what we don't by going by over
reach that we don't disincentive
by businesses to pay those
And I and I don't think that's
good from for our system overall
because the payments from the
insurance program that I had was
a much higher payment to those
Mexico
so Mister speaker July I will
support
I will support the study.
And in part because of your your
one option but we're giving
we're given several options that
we could make a good firm
decision on thank you Mr speaker
disengagement from members and
Looking through the file or this
of.
Piece of legislation Senator
Yes Mr speaker speaker just a
moment.
Gentlelady roughly half of the
population is already on.
Medicaid was the anchor.
For you aware of the.
Current budget estimates from
the general fund to cover these
the neighborhood of about one
point three.
Million dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Medicaid over the last five
years.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes it
Expert witness have percentage
increases over the last five
years and Richard confirm today
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Terms.
The specifics of the store.
What is becoming a system
project.
In those Medicaid costs.
Mr speaker and gentleman but
while this study does not
and expense on expansion of
Medicaid.
One of the things to note about
Medicaid forward is that we are
and there's a very low cost
sharing and those of those will
be that will Representative new
revenue coming into the system.
existing Medicaid system is that
thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady how
four hundred percent poverty.
number of individuals that
included in that income range.
Representative a hundred and
twenty thousand eight hundred
thirty two individuals.
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentleman of a hundred and
twenty one thousand.
A little over ten percent
Mr speaker and gentleman yes if
coverage was extended to all of
those individuals.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
would be outside of the scope of
the study.
Speaker.
people that will still be buying
private insurance is that
accurate.
Mr speaker and gentleman
currently individuals over
Four options for folks in that
income range which is reflected
in the fact that you know only
around seven percent of that
proposal is really prioritizing
that one hundred thirty three
percent to four hundred percent
of the federal poverty line.
In here from our physician
community.
Medicaid reimbursements are
woefully inadequate.
business is from private pay
insurance so Mister speaker
gentle lady do not think it
would be appropriate for a study
Positions in the state.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman it
absolutely yes and that is part
of what at the Human Services
agency folks as well as some of
our health care experts in the
office of the superintendent of
insurance it's it's yet another
reason why this study is such an
without damaging the existing
market and making sure that we
have all those costs accounted
for and there is Mr speaker and
gentleman I would just
underscore there's no
market impact in the study could
come back in the report could
come back to the.
LHS aired the LFC that you know
we provide the greatest effect
percent of New Mexicans that
don't have health care coverage
right now between one hundred
and thirty eight and two hundred
percent of the federal poverty
line and that would be a very
reimbursement rates for
providers this is the way that
we can do that and that's the
information Mr speaker and
gentleman that I'm hoping to get
out of this study so that we
John let me just a couple more
questions were participation in
these programs be mandatory.
Mr speaker and gentleman now.
Mr speaker and gentleman it does
not require require federal
approval because it is already
Speaker gentle lady that seventy
percent match I believe that was
mentioned is already in effect
the other two jurisdictions that
have expanded.
Okay.
with subsidies from thirty eight
to four hundred percent of
poverty level is estimate as to
what the costs might be to the
I'll close with.
Successful implementation.
Policies consequence of this
study or any implementation.
continued substantial influx of
petrodollars thank you Mr
speaker is being delivered and
question I'll take the cliff
notes version
my friends that are native
American I'd like to go back and
sure how this is going to be
implemented with them and and it
What one of the issues in our
state
is insuring that our native
communities have adequate health
coverage in I just currently
Medicaid to cover their funding
gap their revenue gap so what we
hope this program will achieve
the impact for greater coverage
of our native communities in New
Mexico would be but currently
really I think solve
Would present a solution for
some of those individuals to get
greater access to coverage.
Mr speaker I I want to thank the
body and that would love to
think our members on the other
side of the aisle for their
those difficult decisions
between health care and other
important life necessities so
thank you very much for the
for house bill four hundred as
amended do now pass we're on
final passage of house
appropriations and finance
committee substance for house of
Close.
Representative Constanta votes
yes Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Rubio yes
hundred as amended has duly
passed house joint from
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett or Iranian item number
twenty five yes I am Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker house bill
three seventy five charter
school expenditure plan
requires the chartering the
authorization of the board for
charter school whether it's the
receive for being the authorizer
for charter school so the bill
requires a charting authorities
find that oversight did
because the chartering authority
does not have to use all that
money but they do have to report
exactly how it's used with that
I stand for questions there is a
appreciated generally speaker I
wasn't there in the committee
when we pass this bill out so
therefore I didn't vote for it
so
the gentle lady currently the
authorizing body which is the
PVC for a school district does
not have to report on how they
use up to two percent of the
generators what do all schools
have to do the same reporting.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
didn't have to report that now
they do this is specific to
charter school law.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gently why don't for a public
schools have to do this
school district or the PC.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gently so that there is a there
is a distinction between charter
schools and and public schools
unique situation where there
authorizer for administrative
and bureaucratic Services have
been allowed to take two percent
right off the SCG formula money
not have the same reporting
requirements Mr speaker and
gentle lady all schools have
reporting requirements such a
distributor but not the same.
school boards whether they're
the state charter school school
board or district school board
have reporting requirements
thank you thank you Mr leader I
appreciate this and the reason
do not function the same is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentle lady
charter schools all have unique
charters according to their
distinctly for charter schools
so Mister speaker gentle lady
and I'm not trying to give you
just a hard time on this but the
only appear to be but I'm I I
really do believe that we need
schools and I hope there's more
to there's more that's going to
come thank you Mr speaker thank
you generally seen over the
Legislative close Mr speaker I
Does not close.
But those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
votes yes Representative Ferrary
yes.
One of six to seven in the
affirmative during the negative
house bill three seventy five
has duly passed this house the
lady from the you know are you
We get it right this time have
the house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety seven on final passage
started I'd like to introduce my
dear friend an expert Mr Barron
Jones with the ACLU of New
Mexico as many of you all have
heard me say I first met there
and when he was working as a
and especially the lives of New
Mexicans that we're navigating
trauma and substance use over
years I eventually became the
bureau chief of recidivism
reduction of the New Mexico
and moving this bill over years
and years and years and
conversations to make sure we're
getting this right.
Historically this agency has
never gone to rulemaking as you
all are familiar with this is
standard practice for CYFD and
that we as policymakers ensure a
transparent and accountable
process often and there's
probably been bills passed today
that set and establish
legislative intent and then
implementation they said the
execution of the laws we pass
but somehow this agency
historically has never gone to
rulemaking so that's the first
component of this bill.
Legislative Council in a
bipartisan way to appointments
from that the majority party
into from the minority them two
members from the governor one
member from the administrative
Mexico corrections department
every day.
And finally.
This bill again established is
the advisory board and then
objective review for four ends
first of all they would be ready
to monitor compliance with
department policies and
secondly we ask that the help
evaluate and investigate the
efficacy of the programming
Services other responsibilities
including inside this department
I understand that we need to
make sure that we have the right
kind of objective review to
supervision of the NM CD and
just as importantly for those
working inside the NMC
facilities every day so the last
component is again making sure
that Mr speaker I'll stand for
questions there is debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
the gentle lady leader Casey
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and leader
from Dona Ana I really
appreciate this bill and I
have seen Lujan who bring your
own I think they claim situated
to be the sponsor of this
legislation because you actually
are viewed as outsiders and I
don't have the same authority
that you do and so I I'm just so
grateful that you have worked so
Is that those of us in the
legislature.
I'm tired one side or the other.
Like in favor of just the prison
rights we want the people who
them scared I had members tell
me that they have constituents
who were actually actually felt
threatened during the
state government so.
What I have tried to convey and
I and sincerely meant this as a
policymaker is that we want to
and then the of Bill and to
improve it over time and I was
really proud of you to get it
partner with our state agencies
so that they do a really great
job we want people who come out
of prison not to re offend we
Mr speaker and lady from Diana
thank you very much hi I look
forward to maybe a different
future for everyone involved of
much Mr speaker and taken lady
from Dona Ana there's a
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
Thank you Mr speaker and lady
What the flight can you explain
to me why this is needed.
To lock someone up.
We have to make sure that we are
being accountable to that shared
authority.
have a lot of respect for what
she's doing at the agency
but because of my time working
at the department.
I realize that there is things
happening inside these
real and significant access
inside those walls would have
room to better understand and
learn and eventually help to
problem solve so Mister speaker
board we made sure see here and
and change some of the elements
of our bill based on the
important catches it concerns
brought by US secretary for the
other words a victim of the
incredible people that worked in
the victim services office of
the corrections department made
sure to flag that and by the
time I got back to do dishes I
previous experience in
correctional administration so
they have a background and
expertise in running a prison we
have someone that has worked in
a facility as part of security
leadership but I do believe for
that the for the people under
the supervision of the
department who are literally
locked up and for the people
that work in those facilities
every day we need to be
will support the overall intent
and purpose of the agency over
the long run.
The lady thank you for that
corrections taken a stand on
this.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman as
of today the secretary still has
yesterday we're getting closer
and closer every day them the
important catches that the
secretary brought forward
forward dressed in the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
into an executive branch of
government.
Sen I feel that this is a way
for us to have complementary
care an objective review over at
enacting those laws and and
making decisions and sentences
for people that send them to
prison and then the executive
branch in running the supporting
HSD so as such in that a in that
again I think is doing an
outstanding job in getting
closer to making sure we
continue to listen to those
concerns and work to resolve
them moving forward.
as many shareholders at the
table as possible or state court
stakeholders.
Shareholders to I guess
At the table when you're
range of concerns.
Mr speaker calling lady is is
the money to fund this already
in the house bill two.
hundred thousand that remains
for the set up and establishment
of the corrections advisory
board
is in my junior bill.
Mr speaker kind lady and how
the house Appropriations
Committee something new to me
I've I've been on the policy
side of things and this is the
first year that I've had the
opportunity in the pleasure of
up to four FTEs for full time
employees in order to be ready
and responsive to the kind of
work and diligence it would take
to be in this effort along side
right kind of training even
potentially attending the eight
week training academy with
corrections officers so that by
the time they get inside this
prison walls the would not need
independent investigation and
not need an escort so as we
continue to flesh out as
recently as yesterday what kind
of training could we get this
person and these people the
so we don't know yet is is the
honest answer.
Mr speaker kindly thank you for
thank you for that I appreciate
agency to give it a little bit
more.
freedom to make some of these
decisions and and
recommendations.
Thank you for that question Mr
we've done is sends the money to
to the department of finance
authority DFA just like they did
with the ethics committee to
establish that so as it's been
the board the communications get
passed along to these appointing
bodies and then hopefully by the
end of the year we have a board
established moving forward that
board would be the body to hire
board vote with cause to
terminate the M. eight percent
but that otherwise they'd be
hired for a six year term so
they could really work
independently important for me
to share Salazar but the person
into back to that bipartisan
board to have long term systemic
conversations about potential
recommendations support
Mr speaker coming ladies so.
The the board itself the
advisory board would be a
standalone would be
Mr speaker coming ladies so.
Next year when we come back and
we we appropriate operational
Another agency how how is that
going to work.
It would be an appropriation to
the advisory board and not
through another agency so it's
not administratively attached to
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady from a very thoughtful
answers I do appreciate the
conversation.
yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo Cibola
McKinley so go to San Juan and
violence yeah counties.
Thank you
could explain the purpose better
than I could any day Mr speaker
gentleman there today are ten
New Mexico corrections
department prison facilities
three is the southern New Mexico
correctional facility in the
district I represent a down the
road from where I grew up
SNM as it's called
security piece to where they're
trying to find programming and
support so these people
returning to our communities
have a shot at staying out and
re offending Mr speaker
every single day for workers
coming home from three presents.
The kind of stories we hear.
come back to what it means for
mandatory overtime conditions
that sometimes are not ideal are
safe and for me there's two
elements to this it's making
sure that we have objective
to respect the constitutional
rights of those under the
supervision of the department so
as someone who who represent
these prisons every day I think
you know the purpose and the it
my city limits requests and my
concern is.
Were the vacancy rates.
you hear horror stories about
should another folder you hear
there what did all of the
content of this bill is not to
change any rulemaking or any of
that stuff in my correct.
we represent you know in a
public and transparent way what
the basic rules are how the
corrections department's runs
their operations every day so
we're not telling them what
rules to make we're just saying
too in all of the the dual and
but Morsell said our guards have
rights to be safe have a good
to a prison they don't have a
normal life you know much over
time and so forth and I then I
think if I'm not mistaken Mr
speaker gentle lady the whole
board and a budget person room
for us to additional down and
and get some information
objectively about what's
happening so that we can be
Legislation with you because
like we we Senator here you know
I have three prisoners in my
life in my town and you know
there's a lot of stories going
There is further debate the
gentleman from what that
Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Dona Ana please you Mr
speaker yes I yield to the
gentleman from of that County
that this commission is.
Is eliminated from bias Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
at some point but with a lot of
diligence and also the
conversations with people
throughout this body and other
stakeholders representing also
to trusted sources in New Mexico
different sides and including
people that have correctional
administrative experience a
person including
members but that will include
someone that has correctional
security experience and then
You know I just want to make
sure.
That we're clear on what an
ombudsman does Mr speaker gentle
lady this so this person Mr
speaker would not have
Mr speaker and gentleman as we
did sign that so far yes.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the gentle lady so.
cannot take necessarily a stance
Mr speaker they can give
provided.
In a potential legislation to
come down from the pipeline is
there is no resolution this
advisory board of the somebody's
person can't do a damn thing if
they might walk into a finding
and say something went wrong
inside these facilities and the
folks currently under the
supervision of the department is
that we want to trust these
individuals that potentially
would file a complaint ask for
after this bill we said that
those findings would only go
back to the Department if the
person provided written consent
that they wanted the findings to
to do right if I don't know what
they found so our compromise was
that on every single
investigation.
supervision of the department
that says actually I want to
send it all send my inmate ID
number sent to the prison I'm
locked up in I think you are on
findings the file would have all
of their information I
potentially if there was
something there that maybe slip
through the cracks it would
offer the corrections department
a chance to to find their own
You know I just I I agree
technically meant Mr speaker
gentle lady with a lot of the
concerns probably that it
doesn't have enough teeth so
Mister speaker gentle lady with
Mr speaker and gentleman
certainly that's been our intent
we had some important revisions
and amendments coming out of the
house Judiciary Committee that
Part of the process is again
giving the corrections
department the opportunity to
bring resolver long term
gentle lady so then I'm guessing
a lot of these conversations
with this ombudsman and the
commission would be not
the short answer is no what we
have attempted to do is make
sure this person with their
badge in this security clay
clearance and whatever training
seems to be appropriate as
we've had conversations about
potential security concerns
that's why in another important
flag that came from the
secretary of as we're all in
agreement no one should ever be
perimeter looks like so well
we've talked in detail with the
secretary HSD about some things
that just don't seem justified
we've also said that there may
the secretary is create a
special process for lending the
department could say this is
acutely sensitive work out what
it would look like potentially
information back with them.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady the that's good I I
really do hope Mr speaker gentle
lady that a lot of these very
personal things are kept secret
Yeah give me one second Mr
speaker and gentleman sure and I
would love all I'm looking for
that I can't remember after
redistricting where the that
prison fell whether it's in the
Representative Madrid district
but I always pass through when I
go to the airport in el Paso so
I always stop there and I think
the speed limit there is about
important role in the New Mexico
corrections department among
other things besides that they
house inmates and other systems
in the New Mexico system for
they face significant threats of
violence and harm and also
offenders that have harmed
children so it's a very unique
present has a really important
role in the ecosystem I'm on
county at our correction
facility we do have a lot of
problems with staffing some Mr
speaker gentle lady how would
this panel and this ombudsman
sure if I should admit this but
I have been involved in other
conversations including
bipartisan conversations led by
the county detention facilities
to try to address vacancy rates
facilities every day and that
potentially gives us more of a
basis for long term
conversations about improving
vacancy rates I cannot promise
that this fixes anything but
it's a different kind of light
have those conversations because
Mr speaker gentle lady we we
need good people to be working
and I know how hard the folks in
the corrections department they
my next question here about page
twelve sentences on one twenty
the department shall prominently
display at every department of
facility in which an inmates
gentle lady so how would this be
set up with the speed through
the department of corrections or
with the advisory board Mr
speaker be going in
independently and putting these
does leave this responsibility
with the corrections department
so once the advisory board is
established they have separate
responsibilities for making
information about themselves
information that connect back to
cut to the constitutional rights
of people under the supervision
of the department this would be
expected that they would display
that information.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
information Mr speaker Mr
speaker a gentleman I do not
have a cost on that but both
these in may and employee
handbooks are revised updated
update and publish that this new
information be included.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady I appreciate that so
talking real quickly here about
Mister speaker gentle lady that
my one concern regarding that is
I do I would want to make sure
that all the corrections folks
do have a seat at the table so
Mister speaker gentle lady.
just the the head of that you Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
as it stands in this current
House Judiciary Committee
they've come to speak on behalf
of their work is in support of
this bill but we wanted to keep
it open in case session chapter
of another you came into this
position with those two seats
people with correctional
security experience to this
board.
What that you and the secretary
agreed that they wanted to make
sure they have one at the
minimum and potentially could do
accountable to the kind of
learnings we've had
there is sometimes
Some
looking forward to what possibly
people who have cause harm in
these prisons our facilities and
that the corrections department
has not been able to permanently
terminate so for the secretary
want to people who worked in
those facilities and they came
to a different agreement that
they wanted at least one person
and someone there to listen and
learn on behalf of the you.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
question I have is for point
regarding this one is our.
The people that would be
appointed by the union so Mister
speaker gentle lady is says the
the to be removed at least two
years from the position and Mr
happening in the corrections
department because Mr speaker
gentle lady I know that two
years in corrections lord knows
how long that could be could
that have all the so many
changes or would it be very
there is a very good concern
that we could potentially be
facing a conflict of interest if
someone was still currently
employed and then could be
advocating or having access to
reasons Mr speaker gentlemen we
don't wanna make it five years
out ten years that we want them
to still have been recent enough
potentially they have relevancy
and understand like the world of
distance between the people
currently
under the supervision of the
department or working within the
department.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady that makes some
be formerly incarcerated
individuals how many of the line
would be formally incarcerated
Mr speaker gentle lady.
There is eleven total I think
I'm doing the count right there
will be three people.
That were formerly under the
supervision of the department.
Do we know where the other to
come from Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker can we confirm this
count well we continue the
conversation Sir Mr speaker I
just was curious I appreciate
that so Mister speaker gentle
lady.
appointments from Legislative
Council to Shelby formerly
incarcerated persons no longer
to supervision and then the
governor has the third so it's
three of the eleven in total.
gentleman we did not specify
that of the four for the
Legislative Council we've also
requested that one person be a
behavioral health professional
for me.
I appreciate that so then going
on page I hear on the which
starts at eleven it says the
appointing authorities shall
speaker gentle lady.
I'm just wondering why this is
here you know I I just think we
want to probably put the best
person forward regardless of any
of these concerns so Mister
Judiciary Committee we had a
much more open
Process for appointments and
folks on that committee pushed
how we are going to reappoint if
someone needed to be but one of
the things that had at first
they said that the appointees
herding cats and that it would
be impossible to do something
like an appointment eleven
member board that had that kind
of representation we might want
the simple that was sitting with
me Mr speaker and gentleman was
other concerns about how that
nominating process went so this
was my first effort to say you
all have to.
collaborate and figure out how
different appointing bodies so
that the coordination became of
less of the center and making
sure that we have those bases
covered.
But I left that in there because
believe this is shell for.
A civic appointees they must be
X. or Y. some Mr speaker gentle
lady how do we ensure that
people from across the state
that so far we can.
And I could not get to a place
where it that would be more
certain.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady okay well I just
This is this race or something
so Mister speaker generally I
think that is a little murky in
that definition which is one
concern I have about this bill
however Mister speaker gentle
Commission of individuals to
oversee.
The department because Mr
speaker and gentle lady I think
independent checking in fact
checking and fact finding is a
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
Gentlelady has some questions
about.
The make up of fuel or
commission.
Specifically with respect to.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
what is your question.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
accurate that we haven't named
educational qualities or
qualifications but we have named
professional experience
officer but someone that's had
responsibilities and and the
administrative operations of the
correctional facility state of
that and then we also have again
with these you appointment seeds
Representative one or two people
out of the.
Mr speaker that is two to three
people potentially.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
board is appointed four members
would be appointed by the
Legislative Council including
two appointments from the major
into from the minority one
all the state agencies that
touch public safety including
the department of public safety
the dust the public defender's
the corrections department so
the expectation there is that
appointed by the governor.
One member appointed by the
administrative office of courts
one member appointed by the
public defenders and then two
members appointed by the labor
union.
Speaker gentle lady.
talking about the mechanics who
selects the commissioners who
evaluates the qualifications and
Senator.
contract out or do that in house
they would I imagine just like
with the ethics commission set
up public notice telling New
the appointing bodies so then
each of the appointee bodies
that I've already named and I
can go through that again would
review those applications
two of those positions are that
we provide providers with
experiences and correctional
setting a medical provider and a
behavioral health professional
New Mexico correctional system
but maybe their entirety from
Kansas that used to be part of
the medical care for people
under this supervision in a
different state system but they
if they were a fit for the
board.
Mr speaker gentle lady justice
commission report to.
Thank you ladies.
If you will I guess my concern
is about the political
members as we've designed the
process so far would serve a
four year term with the two year
term limit we have names of the
a member shall and this is on
page six the member shall not be
in office but again if there was
a potential removal the member
there would be notice and then
of removal shall only be made by
a majority vote of that board.
those same appointing bodies so
to the Legislative Council and
others charged with appointing
members to this board truly.
Pardon the interruption there's
a.
But mostly I got worried that I
had gone to the chair thank you
Mr speaker.
Meeting for political count
ability in the event.
These folks are not doing their
job appropriately if the only
determination would be made by
the corrections advisory board
themselves and action towards
removal would require a majority
vote of the board.
Thank you
and commission.
The board consists of we can Mr
speaker gentleman there is no
The stroke.
Excuse me speaker gentle lady
also are calling this the board.
The commission so.
Is this board.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
sure but I would think that
would be the governor.
Followed by the correction
secretary.
New Mexico corrections
department secretary.
Speaker gentle gentle have
the corrections department is
committee staff members they
have.
this bill does that show up to
work every day and are part of
the operations and management of
the private facilities in
Michigan gentlelady just two
department prisons today there
are also numerous probation and
parole offices so you're looking
at the administrative level at
many New Mexicans both on the
board would have one four two
over of these folks within the
corrections department Mr
speaker and gentleman on.
and what would be the process
for having the problem resolved
Mr speaker and gentleman if the
ombudsperson walked into a
situation that potentially
somewhere a situation that feels
that something is it facing an
imminent threat including
potentially someone that is
suicidal but hasn't be been
their designees and the board so
those those two pathways that
have a different little level of
urgency.
Otherwise the key findings on
every investigation would be
connected to that investigation
whether it be someone under the
supervision of the department or
an employee has offered written
consents to say they would like
Professionals or volunteers.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's a
mix.
Overwhelmingly these are New
Mexicans that if showed up and
of for the sentencing commission
they would have the opportunity
even to at the there to send
someone that's a commission
duties as well as the person
that by the public defender's
Department the rest would be
there in a capacity serving as a
citizen in a volunteer way.
be subject to the governmental
conduct act in the gift.
Thank you Mr speaker journalist
so the answer to the question or
majority of the members yes for
potentially two of these spots
the members would be going in a
professional capacity again
someone from the sentencing
professional capacity so that
see like we have someone there
in their professional capacities
as well as this the appointed by
the public defender's.
corrections department.
Appropriate to resolve these
problems
the with no line authority to
We admire and respect the work
of today's secretary to move in
advance important conversations
happening within the department
but we believe this is another
it's again just another effort
knowing as we have as policy
makers that there have some
there have been some long
standing questions and concerns
about the efficacy of the
Mr speaker gentleman yes I've
heard that term.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jim lady for your answers.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from done in a field
yes Mr speaker I yield to the
And so.
I'm just gonna ask some pointed
questions on page two and live
in a Levin.
Mr speaker and gentle lady has
the courts and corrections
determine.
Mr speaker and gentleman of this
definition was added at the
suggestion of the corrections
department and improved in my
house Judiciary Committee
is a definition that we have
worked through but really what
we're trying to address here is
that we want to make sure we're
not creating opportunities for
amended and expanded and house
judiciary committees of.
Ladies saloons and and words
Asking for a friend Mr speaker
and gentle lady I didn't
understand that one.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if we
Mr speaker and gentle lady is I
go through the mass on this.
I count a total of thirteen.
Members.
because I'm tired and sick.
Legislative Council show a point
four members.
profession and then I get a bit
behavioral health professional
on line twelve.
together I get to now in a total
of six would you agree no Mr
speaker and gentleman that's for
the account
is clarifying that of the
Legislative Council those for a
says Legislative Council will
point but then it gives the
majority party in the minority
party.
and fifteen
what we've attempted to do here
is clarify that of the
Legislative Council and then
starting on nine thirteen the
majority party in minority party
how the legislative appointment
council would be split.
Excellent I appreciate the
clarity on that so in section
one Mr speaker and gentle lady
we agree that were at for people
Speaker and gentle lady my math
is not good.
I appreciate that.
We use the word impacted.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I did
not find a definition for
impacted in the.
don't have a definition of
impacted within this
legislation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
although I've never been.
Sorry we had a little levity in
here
With respect to that.
Mr speaker gentle and that's not
how we've intended this our hope
and again appreciate the
correction secretary and her
answer but the correction
secretary didn't.
I'm gonna correction secretary
has no choice and no solution
with respect to selecting any of
these people.
words and then hear the that
don't have definition and we
prove that and the debate that I
have last night and so
In the phrase that I heard many
times is the definition of
insanity is doing the same thing
over and over.
And expecting a different
outcome.
would be selected Mr speaker and
gentle lady for this board all
have something to do with the
corrections department the Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Put something out there to
assist in determining the issue
so if we put people that are
involved with the problem.
people with these lived
experiences and this collective
expertise have not been offered
the opportunity to sit at the
same table and problem solve
together.
concerned that we we're putting
people that have been part of
the problem that's been defined
by the legislation and so
not sure how we get to the
solution on it but with that
said.
Mr speaker and ventilating let's
go back to.
always wanted to know this when
we put these boards together
commissions together how are
these actually advertise how
because that's probably in New
Mexico how did they Mr speaker
and gentle lady actually know
that the state New Mexico's
looking for somebody to sit on
this board.
regular and then I'd also trust
each of us as we turn to
community leaders and those with
expertise from the districts we
certainly received all sorts of
emails so far from people that
are interested including
correctional administrators that
have been in the system that
have served in different states
Trust DFA to do is they do and
would ask all of us to make sure
that we have really incredible
interested applicants to these
board positions.
and it concerns me that just the
average person would not be able
to know that there's a potential
position out there and for the.
gentle lady here your your
answer doesn't give me any any
comfort with respect to how this
happens I understand Mr speaker
and gentle lady of the person
Emails about this on people that
are interested but for the rest
of us the seventy of us Mr
speaker and gentle lady with all
the different boards so we've
because we're we're are aboard.
And that concerns me and Mr
speaker and gentle lady as we go
through this so we have a loving
members.
Mr speaker and gentle lady only
one.
Of those people in this bill.
Lopsided balance scale.
Mr speaker and gentleman
we definitely took this
consideration to hard.
have the at one point or another
been survivors of the crime.
R. as in other words victims of
the crime.
For instance I had a room.
navigated through several
criminal activities in New
Mexico and other states so what
we wanted to name out loud and
realize is that yes the
are coming from and the
complexities of trauma and
surviving trauma.
I imagine that the majority of
appointed members if not all
The lady back to hear your
answer but we still have.
Three people.
behavioral health specialist
professional whose job is to
treat people that have been
inside the system.
We have.
five.
We have somebody that's paid by
the state of New Mexico to work
on the sentencing commission
More for the criminal than it is
for the victims.
And I'm trying to understand if
we're trying to improve our
only share that this process has
been years in the making
and that with a lot of
consideration this is the
membership we came up with that
move through the house Judiciary
that's unfortunate answer but I
will leave it at that
Mr speaker and gentle lady M. A.
F. I. R..
these in my conversations of
still not been dealt with and it
concerns me when we get.
The corrections department.
The bill disregards discovery
process for litigation.
The bill does not specify
bullet points and I'm not gonna
I'm not gonna read out but Mr
speaker and gentle lady we we
acknowledged early I feel like
we've knowledge and we can go
and we're there one of the
reasons why they can't stand Mr
speaker and gentle lady in full
support of this bill.
And.
But at the same time.
We're continuing to push the
piece of legislation through
this process.
While I acknowledge that there
is some concerns that were not
addressed primarily this is
legislative over reach into the
agreement those issues where
considered there was clarifying
language added in the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
in the a budget person will not
engage in employment or labor
disputes and so that in the
board positions they will not
step in to anything that would
that this is over reach of our
legislature into an executive
Substituted came from the first
committee.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
the second committee the same
concerns were raised the same
State very clearly that since
January seventeenth I believe is
the day we started here and
some of my own built many on
other people's bills where this
legislation doesn't go far
enough.
quite there and.
They were actually asked to
either pull the bill roll the
bill or fix the bill.
with it he didn't get Mr speaker
and gentle lady to a point where
this very secretary again the
you've complimented so many
times can support the bill and
I'm curious Mr speaker and
and it needs to be at tour the
very person that this affects
the department the secretary
from the secretary level can not
agree to this Mr speaker
and I agree I agree that we are
the policy makers Mr speaker and
gentle lady I'm happy to sit
down at any point in time I
think go through several hours
Because it doesn't get to the
point where it actually
addresses all the issues thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady.
Mr speaker I move that the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill two hundred and
ninety seven do now pass.
house the house could Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety seven as amended.
The.
Of the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
But those without a recorded
vote.
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Costello is
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
two in the negative.
House Bill to of house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety seven as amended
has duly passed the house.
that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
House Bill three seventy six on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject debate
medical insurance pool board of
directors
author excuse me authorizing
statute it gives the board the
authority to participate in a
determines its premium rates
basically changing this from
standard risk right to average
market rate due to the changes
in implemented in the affordable
which led to that some
incompatibility with the current
discount rates offered on the
exchange and Mister speaker I'd
like to introduce my expert
with me on the floor tonight.
and with that I would stand for
questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from captain zero support
can you just explain a little
bit more on what does the pool
want to do under this bill what
are you trying to change.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
I'd the first change simply
allows the board to work with
the state as they implement and
On page three line twelve
through fourteen.
What would fall under any health
insurance related program.
Mr speaker and gentle lady any
initiative of the state related
to health care and really
related to the mission of the
pool.
currently at the medical
insurance pool has a high level
of expertise in medical
management of people with very
serious medical conditions so
and and really need close
management of their
pharmaceuticals and their
medical care a second example
because there are a high number
serious medical conditions would
be examples of that.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so this is for the high
risk pool is that correct.
section two of this bill.
The ladies at the section two
items Hey is to update from
refax reflecting current cost of
health insurance Mr speaker and
gentle lady you will notice that
at towards the end of the letter
hundred and fifty percent of the
average market right so that's
to ensure that there's no
unintentional incentive that the
pool is truly that health
tie the rates to the current way
of calculating the range thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
and can you tell me what is the
difference between standard risk
and average market.
at the risk in an under written
market meaning when before the
affordable Care Act was enacted
offer a rate based on that and
they could also deny coverage so
those that were able to access
health coverage at that time
were healthier than sort of the
way of calculating was to also
ensure that the pool was not
unintentionally competing with
the every day market and so it
are documented here as well as
incurs losses because the
premiums don't because the pool
cover such a high risk
New Mexico insurance market.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and and how much are those
assessments on an annual basis.
lady and did you did you already
tell me how the pool assesses
health insurers.
The general Mr speaker and
gentle lady that is part of the
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
to to do that they're not
licensed as an insurance company
and and they're not able to be
licensed as an insurance
company.
the the pool is not is not able
to compete it is required to set
its premiums at a higher rate
clear on its objectives there
are four insurance carriers the
largest insurance carriers in
the state that are on the board.
Mr speaker and gentle lady those
are assessments on the carriers
due to the medical loss ratios
of the pool.
Thank you Mr speaker and gently
Over three hundred carriers that
are assessed based on their book
of business so depending on how
many policies and what size they
leveraged with the federal match
so it's it's somewhat complex
financing structures I hope I'm
answering your question gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker and
of the administration born by
the fund or the assessment on
insurers.
previously discussing but the
board in that scenario would be
working with the state to ensure
that the state was actually
covering those costs.
speaker is there a plan for the
role of the pool under the
governor's new health care
authority.
Mr speaker and gentle lady now
on page three under G.
the program and initiatives of
the state that's very broad Mr
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
The speaker does gently from
Santa Fe yield.
Wondering and I'm and I sure I I
heard I heard an explanation I
don't believe I understood the
explanation as to section G..
What is the purpose Mr speaker
and gentle lady to enter it so
it basically if you read this
line twenty one on page one in
Line twelve the specific
authority to enter into
contracts or otherwise
participate in any health
insurance related program or
be a purpose for that change
what is the purpose for that
change.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is no specific program
decided see patients or children
with very serious health
conditions are things that the
pool has great expertise and and
currently manages for its own
was interested however Mr
speaker and gentleman I would
add that there are numerous
checks and balances it within
that New Mexico medical
insurance pool including plan of
and procedures for approval of
any new initiatives through
board process.
Speaker and and gently Act I
don't know much about the high
is represented within the pool.
and it's actually a
legislatively created a non
governmental organization that
was created at a time when many
states for creating such
Mexico how many of those
insurers are there.
and Mr speaker John and there
are four carriers.
I'm not sure I'm answering the
question but there for carriers
that have seats on the board.
Mr speaker and gentleman those
carriers are BlueCross
BlueShield Presbyterian health
healthcare Molina and United
healthcare.
The patience is that correct
speaker gentle lady.
Within one entity insurers those
high risk.
Patients.
program for those members.
Speaker gentle lady the pool
itself is the insurer of high
The ability of the pool
dramatically Mr speaker and
gentle lady if I'm reading need.
Enter into contracts or
So the speaker and gentle lady I
I do I can't imagine that.
For this language.
some speaker gentle lady is
there it was what are the
potential.
section to.
Items a and B.
also.
Does the made the decision to.
management or a very specific
limited policy to individuals
that have a certain particular
diagnosis so for example if you
had patients that had end stage
plan to that and that's a Mr
speaker and gentleman a
hypothetical example I'm
extrapolation from my my own
experience but that's the
So Mister speaker gently that's
not what G. says.
Doesn't say anything about
limited opportunities for other
Mr speaker and gentle lady
Then it you know looking on on
on on pages.
Four and five.
For individuals with household
incomes of three hundred ninety
nine percent of the federal
poverty level or lower the
premium reduction shall be
seventy five percent.
For individuals without
household incomes of three
hundred percent to three hundred
ninety nine percent of the
federal poverty level the
premium reduction shall be
twenty five percent the board
What is the reason for pulling
that out Mr speaker and gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman
thank you for highlighting that
that's actually a pretty
The last sentence of section B..
Low income premium rates shall
not be lower than the average
subsidized rates available in
the market at the same income
Right now the discounts in the
pool plan are for lack of a
By comparison the exchange plans
are on if you would imagine
occur or you know as sort of a a
percent of the poverty line but
in the with the pool statute
unchanged that person would if
this program into line with the
health exchange.
The some speaker generated the
reading at the line that you
just.
Low income premium racial not be
lower than the average.
What I'm I'm I'm not sure why
that would be.
That is that is subsidized the
state the state paying for that
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
the assessments from the
carriers and so it's a it's a
mix of the two.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
is those are the two revenue
sources are insured carrier
assessments and premiums.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
just looking at this language
change and I was as always
listen to the gentle lady.
from Sierra County.
very hard to ensure.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
I see this opening up to.
Separate.
To enter into contracts for
otherwise participate in any
health insurance related program
or initiative of the state Mr
speaker gently that that that.
created for a very specific
purpose and now it just seems to
be open to.
Being a health care.
Cal health insurance provider
understand that big increase
thank you miss her and gently.
There is further debate the
gentleman from motor
tell me how many.
People are currently enrolled in
the pool at this current time Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
about forty two hundred members.
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so.
It is my understanding that with
this legislation we are
expanding the number of
individuals that qualify as high
this poll could this potentially
grow to a larger number of
individuals covered Mr speaker.
and it was approved by the board
of directors that includes
representatives from the market
and from the community.
chairman how do we pick that Mr
speaker Mr speaker John and the
our carrier members of the board
actually chosen by election so
there is a
expires of the members of the
one of the Kerry or members of
the board there is an actual
election I hate all those who
right
Okay so this board they oversee
this this insurance pool it's my
understanding and so this pool
these are this is for
four so Mister speaker gentle
lady how now can we add these
individuals what are the
parameters that requires that
these individuals be a certain.
actually probably outside of the
scope of this bill because the I
don't see that the sections of
the pool statute are included in
only for a carrier of last
resort.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I appreciate that
answer however I do think that.
This would change who would be.
provisions on page four to five
that state that for individuals
with household incomes hundred
ninety nine percent of the
federal poverty level or lower
the premium reduction shall be
is intended to always be at a
higher premium than the standard
market and so this insures that
there is no situation in which
gentle lady so then these
individuals.
This pool exists because they
cannot be covered currently
under the Medicaid or Medicare
high risk and require
coverage through the pool.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so then how did
these changes with this bill
Mr speaker and gentleman by
design the pool was actually
created as a mechanism to
protect the US standard market
the medical insurance pool
serves a role in stabilizing and
protecting the commercial
market.
Okay Mister speaker and gentle
there is a big concern regarding
low risk customers obtaining
coverage because they're driven
out of the market to the
increased costs of covering high
risk customers so is that a
Mr speaker and gentleman what
this bill would do is continue
to ensure that there is no
incentive financial incentive to
Okay Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
So.
Then what other options with
these low risk customers have if
they are driven out of the
scope of this bill but certainly
they have options under the
affordable Care Act or employer
based coverage.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
will my concern is what if they
can't afford.
Under obamacare the plans that
are available to me Mr speaker
gentle lady like four hundred
five hundred dollars a month so
Mister speaker gentle lady these
parameters there Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for sharing my concern about
the pool at an affordable
insurance is not a qualifier for
the pool and regretfully and as
that is something that I
personally seek to advance and
and solve and I am I am glad
that you raise that concern.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
any individuals so Mister
speaker gentle lady how does
this help.
You know solve these problems
that we're talking about with
the lack of health coverage
less Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman the purpose of the
medical insurance pool when it
was founded was to stabilize the
insurance market and provide
surviving cancer who had very
serious and rare medical
diagnoses the pool is the
purpose of the pool is not to
currently I believe a bomb a
care insurers that these
individuals must be covered with
preexisting conditions is that
would maintain fidelity to the
purpose of the pool.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady so going on this this bill
why are these numbers growing
and funds that we would need Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe the FIR is simply
reflecting a difference in the
calculation of that market right
these current rate as we spoke
about earlier with this also be
costing currently sixteen point
six million for with this change
that we're making because things
Mr speaker gentleman the fiscal
impact report is actually
reflecting the.
assessment on Medicaid MCO is.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so then what is the cost to the
state and if these are Medicaid
dollars that we're talking about
Mr speaker and gentleman there
there is no cost to the state
for that medical insurance pool.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so what I'm hearing is the
Mr speaker and gentleman there
there's no appropriation of
state funds to the medical
insurance pool.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so then can you tell me what the
will not change the
administrative costs of the
pool.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so how much currently are we
spending on administrative costs
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so regardless of if they're not
state appropriations are we
increasing those funds for
costs to do this program Mr
speaker gentle lady.
are about five percent
and the the changes in caps
latest house bill three seventy
six I would not change those
administrative burden that we're
making with this legislation so
this change or making that would
put more individuals are
potentially more changes in this
Mr speaker those are our
referring to contracts between
between the poor initiated by
the board or entered into by the
board issued a.
you know sixteen million dollars
which is currently here in the
bill that it would cost you know
five percent of that is like a
hundred thousand dollars so.
Mr speaker generally the FIR is
reflecting the increase in
federal funding.
that wouldn't change at all.
Mr speaker and gentleman no.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so we're talking
Mr speaker and gentleman the
medical insurance pool would be
that.
All right Mr speaker gentle lady
so the current contracts that
are happening with this poll I
believe there's an executive
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman no okay Mister
speaker and gentle lady so who
currently holds the contract for
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
we're getting way outside of the
scope of this legislation which
is just making some technical
changes but the administrator is
in on page three need it says
enter into contracts otherwise
participate in any health
insurance related programs so
Mister speaker gentle lady so
Mr speaker and gentleman value
house value health okay thank
you Mr speaker thank you to
Alexander previously was delta
consulting is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
executive office and I would
request that you return to the
the substance of the bill and
respectfully.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady the contract for
this new change in this bill
we're going going to give it to
the current entity which is
currently under the contract of
so the individual that is
carrying out this contract for
these changes is going not going
to be the current.
Senator health Mr speaker.
For example medical case
management.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady so the state would contract
through the pool and then
that is a very
Four degrees removed I'm not I'm
not sure how to answer that
question
it you know that I think your
be up to that procurement
process to determine.
How the services were provided.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so there would be a procurement
process.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady.
You know I I do have a lot of
concerns regarding the stripping
of all these.
These requirements this
especially on page four with who
pushed out of the out of the
system out of the bowl and I
think Miss Mister speaker gentle
lady is a very bad direction to
go on so thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Mr speaker to concern about this
legislative language to.
In order to the five hours being
of concern.
The.
state could you describe.
Mr speaker and gentle lady a
specific example of the
participation.
Mr speaker and gentleman
discussed so far have been for
example providing enhanced
medical case management to
hepatitis C. patients who are
medical illnesses.
Gentlelady.
This presents paragraphs is
changing.
The mission of the high risk
pool.
Mr speaker and gentleman no
because the the pool and the
plan or intention and there's
certainly no additional
authorization in this
legislation to expand that the
mission of the pool.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
is.
founded actually by a mother of
a disabled child who is unable
to provide health insurance and
so the the mission of the pool
that is the expertise of the
pool.
This question.
The last program from the fund
or.
The cap of rich
is on Medicare or otherwise
unable to obtain that gap
coverage.
Mr speaker gentleman yeah so
that to primary patient groups
that the pool currently serves a
one
a second group AZS mentioned in
the fiscal impact report.
Related to
At people under sixty five who
not able to pay for dialysis for
example so that is another.
I majority Asian group in the
pool right now.
three seventy six do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill three seventy six the vote
is now open.
The vote is about to close.
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
votes yes Representative Ferrary
yes Representative Ferrary votes
There are still a couple members
Anita Vogel vote the vote.
By a vote of thirty seven in the
affirmative thirty in the
negative house bill three
seventy six has duly passed the
house.
Is the gentleman from son of
already on item number
seventeen.
Representative Hernandez.
also this debate amendment
endorsed or substitution.
The gentleman to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
ten thousand dollars per day.
With that I stand for questions.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
The clerk to call those with a
record vote Representative
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
By a vote of sixty three in the
affirmative three of the
you ready or item number nine
Representative Lane yes the
speaker thing given to that
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for for placing
House the house.
On final passage has been taken
and is now so this debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to sign the bill thank
you Mr speaker so house bill
three sixty four being brings
parity to class eight counties
feet we have a strange rule that
prohibits it's the Supreme
prepared all classic counties
with that I stand for questions
there is debate the gentle lady
Will be done only thank you
that's only from going out of
Representative Ferrary.
Gentleman will these every
center inside the restaurant or
third party delivery guaranteed
a portion of the delivery to
restaurant that serves food and
yes requires food.
Okay and is the delivery person
required to successfully attend
server training or be over
twenty one years of age.
checking for ID's how will they
know a fake ID many underage
drinkers have in our how are
hard to discern.
place that there has to be
confirm the identity of the
person receiving the alcohol.
And I'm sorry for not to go
the intoxicated person is in
danger of an alcohol related
faller downing or domestic
violence sexual assault home
pizza delivery drivers these are
folks that are trained they've
passed the license required in
order to
distribute alcohol similar to
what you would see a server in a
training as a bartender or
server.
Okay and Mister speaker are
there during limits like many
bars and restaurants might have
Mr speaker gentle lady from Dona
Ana yes so there is limited to
two six packs of beer.
Okay and Mr speaker and
Ana so they can deliver spirits
but again you cannot deliver if
the recipient is intoxicated.
Okay
received after funding for
taking care of problems in your
county with a need rated
persons.
I think it's around twenty
thousand dollars a month and I
feel like this might be
contributing to that problem
And Mr speaker and gentleman
You know in twenty twenty there
were twenty two hundred and
seventy for New Mexicans who
died from alcohol related causes
deaths is alcohol related and
that said the seventeen percent
side from the year before and
thirteen percent I am the year
before that in New Mexico is
state student this year raising
I'll call excise taxes
economic it really and we're in
the process of doing at and then
another top action is reduced
serving someone who lose any
created so I encourage my
colleagues not to vote for this
bill thank you Mr speaker and
lady from Dona Ana thank you I
just wanted to say was a proud
co sponsor to this bill this is
the a portion of this bill was
that we passed last time and so
this is making sure that those
are all those people are
incorporated and that they can
now also run a business and get
correct Mr speaker
of Representative Mr speaker
generated from Dona Ana so yeah
I appropriation the question
contrary what was mentioned in
someone who of the could
potentially be either
interesting drinking a holler or
buying it to drink it later so
this just keeps those folks off
the street yes.
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill three sixty four
do now pass we are final passage
of house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
The clerk to call those with a
recorded vote.
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Constanta
what's yes Representative
Ferrary so Representative
By a vote of fifty eight in the
affirmative ten of the negative.
speaker I am I ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
rules be suspended and that the
wreckage said that all action
for placing House Bill for fifty
This bill for fifty nine revises
the distribution of funds to the
horse breeders in New Mexico the
bill amends sections of the
seven percent to twelve percent
for owners of stallion desired
first place winners at horse
races Mr speaker with that I
stand for questions there is
debate the gentle lady from
you of gentle lady I stand in
full support of this bill Mr
speaker and I am I want to thank
the gentle lady from Travis
participates in it so I want to
thank you
openly here this evening
Representative and thank you Mr
speaker and I hope everybody
votes for the bill tonight thank
you.
do pass we are on final passage
of house bill four fifty nine
the vote is now open.
Representative Castellano votes
yes Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
seven in the affirmative or
negative house bill four fifty
nine has duly passed this house.
Mr speaker I move that out of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business in
addition is ordered to lady from
Bernalillo.
The gentle trouble would be in
the house will come to order.
addition is ordered Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
record show that the total has
been reading following approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
house Education Committee will
meet tomorrow morning eight
thirty in room three oh nine
thank you Mr members taking
note any other announcements.
will be having a caucus tomorrow
following the house morning
session in room three eighteen.
Members taking notes from zoom
room three oh seven.
No.
The gentle lady from McKinley as
on one Representative Johnson
thank you Mr speaker your house
Arriba Sandoval and so on one
representative Lente thank you
Mr speaker house taxation and
revenue committee will meet
tomorrow at eight thirty in room
three seventeen thank you member
Any other nonsense.
Going once going twice.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Senate bill eleven as amended
introduced by senators Stewart
and Padilla and Representative
Chandler Serrato and Roybal
the paid family and medical
leave program to pay an eligible
employee a percentage of the
employee's salary the employee
to bond with a new child or to
care for a family member
limiting the time allowed for
similar programs creating a
temporary advisory committee
making appropriation Senate bill
eleven as amended introduced by
and economic development
committee.
Senate bill sixteen introduced
by senator Stefanics and
providing for transition
transferring functions person
money probation records
equipment supplies other
property contractual obligations
and statutory references
bill sixteen introduced by
senator Stefanics and
representative Thompson.
Six one six.
Senator sixteen having been read
twice by title is ordered not
For ninety four as amended
introduced by senator Munoz an
act relating to higher education
finance providing for a
reduction in instruction in
general purposes funding when
tuition or general fees are
Munoz Senator for ninety four
as amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then it's the house
appropriations and finance
Senate Joint relies Senator
joint resolution twelve
court facility Senate joint
resolution twelve introduced by
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator resolution twelve I've
been read twice by title is
seventeen as amended and act
relating to licensure and acting
the prescribing psychologists
practice act creating the
prescribing psychologists
Advisory Council requiring the
sections of the NMSA in nineteen
seventy eight Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
seventeen as amended.
Committee this the house
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one ninety eight as
amended introduced by Senator
Woods and act relating to
lotteries amending the New
Yeah Senate one ninety eight as
amended having been read twice
by title is ordered printed not
printed and referred to the
house because we're Public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
**** promoting Beastie Audi and
aggravated **** prescribing
penalties Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two fifteen.
referred to the house Judiciary
Committee.
Senator two sixteen as amended
introduced by Senator o'neal and
Representative Chasey and act
seventy eight Senator two
sixteen as amended introduced by
Senator o'neal and
Representative Chasey.
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill two
seventy three as amended and act
relating to health coverage and
acting sections of the health
care purchasing Act and the New
health care services providing
important ensure compliance
looking at appropriations Senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy three as
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill three fourteen
introduced by Senator Cervantes
endorsed by the New Mexico
financed Authority oversight
Senate bill three fourteen
introduced by Senator Cervantes.
Senator three fourteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and
introduced by Senator Padilla
and act relating to economic
development extending the date
by which statewide economic
development finance act standard
said economic committee
themselves revisions of finance
committee.
Senate bill three thirty four
introduced by Senator Diamond
and act making appropriation to
Senate bill three thirty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill three ninety six as
suspense Fund to the motorcycle
training fund Senate bill three
ninety six as amended introduced
by Senator Shendo.
Senator three ninety six as
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty five as amended and act
relating to health requiring the
creating a fund making
appropriation Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five as amended
house of relations and finance
committee.
Senate bill four thirty as
amended introduced by senators
Burr tends to fenics and act
making appropriation to the
department of finance and
Senator for thirty seven.
As amended having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
revenue bond act and the county
industrial revenue bond act
regarding how certain payment in
lieu of taxes payments are
shared among school districts
Senate bill four seventy four as
Gentleman from you.
ordered members thank you for a
productive day
stay hydrated get a lot of sleep
a lot of rest the next few days
I think I'm gonna be getting a
great for the.
Nine days with you our counting
forty nine days and as we enter
the final stretch let's keep
you have a great evening and we
will stand in recess the lady
from Bernalillo.
