Representative Zamora.
I'm here.
Representative Allison.
Here.
Mr Chairman.
Check and
it looks like a merry.
In Matthews is looking for the
league city can resend that
they're very please.
Also
I didn't know Representative is
all that that you were in the
and is this we pulled you over
so we marked you as as here but
with extremely tardy so would be
you are here thank you ma'am.
Mr Chairman.
It is that is being RT.
Inability to get on the street
in meetings the is the name.
I was as a and.
On.
Representative these are Mr
Chairman is is a rare moment of
sarcasm I think.
Calls on Affairs.
Okay with that being said we
have a pool attended today and I
am looking for Representative.
Andrea Romero in the and is this
Representative Romero you have
the two items first in our
agenda today if you are in the
attendees this please raise your
hand.
If you if she's not here we will
then we'll for then I did see
Representative I did see
Representative.
Earned in.
In order to do this we can go
straight to her bill and and
then come back to Representative
Romero because I don't see her
in the list yet.
So that being said
Representative.
Herndon's seen here.
Much of the panelists so folks
we're gonna skip around this
agenda.
Because again Andrea Romero
Representative Romero as house
bill twenty four eighty three.
She's not here yet so we will go
to that house bill one.
Armen if I may yes ma'am this is
an ounce yesterday that our
meeting would be starting at
eight o'clock.
And we do have a ten he's here.
I don't know what the problem is
we have people that are on this
meeting right now so they can
listen to house bill twenty four
being discussed.
Yeah I do and I can I can answer
for you on her behalf.
I I.
Well aware of of of what what
what's going on here and it's
well advertised but our new
start time these for this
meeting so that being said I
mean common practice some is not
here for able to present right
now when will down the list it
will come back to that Mr chair
if I may just ask one question
maybe this is just my own
inability to.
Correctly with the schedule but
I see on the first of our agenda
at the top of our agenda
Representative Lujan is bill is
that not being considered she's
not here either Representative
Hochman Vigil.
What I understand is that
Representative Romero took the
bill over from Representative
on.
That's the information I was
missing Mr chair thank you very
much orders for the confusion.
So Representative heard and good
morning this
last.
You're on mute good morning Mr
Mr chair and members of the
committee it's a pleasure to be
before you I do have an expert
witness I'd like you to bring
her up her name is Pam Roy.
You got a agency really can
raise your hand please will
bring you over.
Okay issues being brought over
Representative turning you have
house bill one eighty six
promotion expansion of
agricultural products.
And seeing Pamela Roy in the
screen now the floor is yours
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
I am extremely proud to bring
you this.
To bring house bill one eighty
six before you as we look at how
to promote expansion of products
that grow in the state of New
Mexico so I'm gonna turn this
over to my expert witness panel
role right to explain exactly
what we are doing a so Mister
chair with your permission
Pueblo why would you please
explain how we are going to be
working pursuant to this bill.
Mr Chen Mr chairman and
committee members and
Representative and and thank you
very much for the opportunity
with you this morning and we're
really excited about this bill
recording in progress I'm my
name is camera and executive
director of farm to table we're
nonprofit based in Santa Fe but
we do statewide work and I also
coordinate the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
we have been involved in this
work for the more than twenty
years in the sense of helping
farmers aligned with new
business opportunities and those
who want to really build out
value added businesses using
agriculture products from New
Mexico or produce and and new
projects and things like that
and being able to have a center
of sometimes is really been the
best way farmers and food food
businesses have been able to
build out their businesses find
a couple really great examples
one in particular is the south
valley economic development
center basin south on
Albuquerque and this amazing
organization called a critical
to the network and Miss Vigil
guess I'm hoping will be with us
to share her comments about how
this works as well.
Committee in the for instance
they serve as a hub for eight
small scale farmer of producers
in the south valley Albuquerque
area and coordinate with over
forty farmers around the state
to bring agriculture products
together for sale to various
outlets for instance schools
senior centers restaurants as
examples and so these how to
really important for economic
development growth of businesses
in New Mexico especially around
food and farming agricultural
initiatives so that's one
example in the are growing
already across the state the
south the southwest food hub the
San Juan county food hub in the
Farmington Shiprock area that
serves that region it's a really
burgeoning initiative in that
area and there's five others in
the New Mexico harvest their
based in Albuquerque but they
also really expanding their
operations to try and serve
a statewide like identical to
the network is doing and so
these hubs right now are serving
a much larger initiative across
the state which many of you are
probably now well aware of
called the food farming hunger
initiative and that is to really
brought in in a in a very big
way the opportunities for
farmers and ranchers in New
Mexico to expand their
businesses to really buy local
in New Mexico both just private
sector is customers will go to
the grocery store as well as our
schools here since early care
centers being able to provide
local as well to probably stop
near because probably some
questions you all might have as
well you will have people ensure
joining us online to talk about
and this initiative house of.
Pourtant is.
Thank you miss Roy
Representative anything else
that we go to the audience.
You're on mute Representative.
I'm sorry I was trying not to
have background noise while
while the expert witness was
speaking nope Mr chair I don't
have any other in that
additional information that
we're ready to go to the
audience and your commute your
committee.
Very well thank you
Representative.
All of the other welcome thank
you for joining us this morning
on house bill one eighty six all
those in favor of house bill one
eighty six please raise your
hand we'll go three one by one
and we will begin with all of
Garcia.
Okay sorry Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning it
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Paula
Garcia executive director of the
New Mexico state association and
we send a strong support of this
legislation we were we were
participants in and the food and
of important hunger initiative
and we really promote the idea
of locally grown food for
economic viability of our
producers as well as producing
affordable and fashion locally
grown food for our families so
we we sent on support of this Mr
chairman thank you thank you Mr
Garcia let's go to our relief
we've been up early.
Ernie in looks like.
It's giving me a prompt saying a
lot of top not available because
you have an older version of
zoom.
So earning I apologize we're
gonna have to skip over you
unless you update your resume.
Next we have steep.
Thank you good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee on behalf of the do
PNM rural caucus and at the
three fifty New Mexico real
advocacy for all the reasons
that politiker CS so clearly
articulated we are in strong
support of H. B. one eighty six
thank you thank you next we have
Craig Greg good morning.
Yes Sir can you hear me all
right we hear you.
Yes I'd like to speak in the
favor of support of house bill
one eighty six I think this is
one of the many steps that will
help strengthen the agricultural
sector while providing
additional opportunities for
value added products and and
businesses and I feel it's a win
all for all the consumers in New
Mexico so I speak in support of
this bill thank you thank you
Craig next we have different E.
Rivera Tiffany good morning.
Chairman Lente members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning tip more very registered
lobbyist for New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau
I'm we support the legislation
before you this morning which
will allow the New Mexico
economic development department
to contract with community
economic development centers to
promote the expansion insisting
growth of farms ranches
community kitchens and food
entrepreneurs as well as product
and distribution of New Mexico
agriculture products.
Creations like this are needed
to help expand and strengthen
New Mexico's agriculture and
value added sectors and we must
continue to invest in support
our state's agricultural
producers of all sizes we
appreciate the support and the
Sanchez work on the bill and we
hope to secure more funds like
these in the future so we
respectfully ask that you
support house bill one eighty
six.
Thank you Tiffany let's go to
and McCartney and good morning.
Morning chairman and committee
members speaking today as co
chair of New Mexico interfaith
power and light and we stand in
strong support of this bill for
the many reasons that have been
stated it's it's much needed to
support farmers in New Mexico
across the state.
Okay thank you for that thank
you and politics for speaking
over you next we'll go to
Christopher Christopher you're
with this good morning.
Good morning chairman ninety
members of the committee my name
is Christopher go blah on the
executive director for New
Mexico winegrowers up on the
former a director of the
downtown growers market in
Albuquerque.
And it worked extensively in the
local foods movement
I am firm believer that
legislation like this supports
are small businesses and
manufacturers value added is a
great return on investment for
the state of New Mexico and I'm
very well the work of the great
work that Pam really has done in
the New Mexico's former
marketing association to get
small businesses the opportunity
to get their product to market
I stand in support of this
legislation hope you will
support house bill one eighty
six thank you very much thank
you Christopher Joan brown Joan
good morning.
Good morning chair and a
committee thank you so much for
hearing this bill my name is
John Brown Franciscan sister and
I'm the director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light as we
talk about economics in the
state and job diversification I
think we need to continue to
look at creative ways to support
and bolster the good work of
agriculture and are traditional
and other farmers in the state
so this funding is very
important and
thank you so much for all the
work and for sponsoring this and
for supporting it.
Thank you for your comments of
the gentleman by the name
Anthony just Anthony Anthony
you're up.
Good morning.
Entity you may need to meet
yourself.
Okay they are okay hi Mr
chairman and members of the
committee this is that a Wagner
with the Wagner farms I have
forms of both gross and so coral
we we support this bill we think
it's a great opportunity to the
performers throughout the state
Senate where we can do value
added products and so forth so
we ask your help for the on this
bill thank you.
Mr Wagner thank you thank you
for joining us good morning
let's go to Allison.
And that's a good morning.
You need to meet yourself.
Hello Allison.
okay let's move over to Jessica.
Just because one good morning.
Twenty Mr chair.
My name is just this one and on
behalf of agriculture the
cooperative network we are
standing strong support of house
bill one eighty six for all the
reasons that have already been
mentioned.
This bill also supports our
mission of keeping farmers and
food in production and growing
our capacity in urban and rural
areas in New Mexico house bill
one eighty six helps create
value added products and markets
to create food security and
health initiatives here in New
Mexico these are life sustaining
programs.
Thank you.
Thank you very much gonna
butcher this name and I will to
spore to sport.
Good morning you're with us.
This morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Secora nefesh and I am the
registered lobbyist for covenant
pathways which is a
demonstration farm checkerboard
area of the Navajo Nation and
covenant pathways stands in
strong support of house bill one
eighty six thank you.
Thank you very much is going to
Ernie Rivera Ernie good morning.
Hello you there.
You will need to be yourself
Sir.
Okay let's go to and
Representative and I
read it either good morning.
Good morning Mr chair broadband
I get agriculturists from the
canyon a member New Mexico soul
Water conservation district I
serve on the board
I encourage you to support this
bill I think anytime that we can
as agricultural us put new tools
in the toolbox to value added is
one those new tools that we
really need to use in New Mexico
we ship such a high percentage
of our agricultural products
out of state and then bring them
back if we can value added and
keep those products here it will
allow us a more access and those
who can not be themselves to New
Mexico food product I encourage
you to support this bill thank
you thank you Representative
it's going to bill bill good
morning bill make at.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
hearing me to this point
I am Representative recommend
farmers union which stand in
strong support of this bill for
a lot of the
reasons mentioned but you know I
I think what's being left out is
a lot of our members really and
enjoy the product that you're
supporting some maybe more than
others but the please support
this bill the value added part
of this bill is something that's
all we we really thank you for
your support thank you bill will
try early Rivera once again
before we go to opposition Ernie
good morning are you there good
morning chairman to thank you
and other members of the
committee of I stand in strong
support of this bill it'll help
us create more of a demand for
local products statewide and the
it is something that's needed
across the great state of New
Mexico thank you again.
Thank you thirty let's now go to
all those in the attendees
listed in opposition for house
bill one eighty six anyone in
opposition of house bill one
eighty six before we go to our
committee.
See no one in opposition we will
not come back to our committee
first on my list I have
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
That she may have stepped away
from her computer for a second
next will come back to her table
go to then Representative
Matthews Representative Matthews
the floor is yours
Representative.
You very much Mr chair and
members of the committee and all
of those
attendance
I am very much in favor of this
I was on the board of the parent
organizations agency staff only
economic development center for
number of years which is called
the Rio Grande eighty community
development center and at that
time there focus was not on
agriculture but I had the
opportunity before the session
to meet with a state also a Ali
there is an Jamie Chester who
are the.
The executive director and the I
guess the deputy executive
director of
the sap alley economic
development center and they
brought me up to date on the
incredible work they have been
doing in establishing food hubs
throughout the state I was so
impressed that I ate included
money from the junior bill that
I had to them for upper excuse
me for appropriations so I am
like a hundred and twenty
percent behind this bill I do
have a couple questions
When I'm.
First of all my my first
question is whether the four
hundred thousand dollars is
actually in HB two at this
point.
Madam chair members of the
committee a panel would you like
to answer that it would you like
me to respond.
Okay would you like me to seven
please answer.
Madam chair representative
Matthews and committee members
thanks so much for the question
actually so not specific to this
bill yes we're hopeful for
funding there is funding for the
food farm and hunger and mission
over all so that producers
that's eight million dollars in
house bill two and three so that
produced all this coronation can
happen and across state agencies
that would be working together
to provide the resources to
farmers and ranchers food op you
know
food business operators as well
to build out these not only the
food has but the coordination as
Representative nasties just
mentioned as well so we're
really excited about that and as
Representative Matthew said
we've seen a little bit of
junior money as well and in also
at Senate Bill this Senate bill
forty eight as well that would
would bolster this initiative.
Great thank you and then it Mr
chairman
Members of the committee I I do
have one kind of a technical
question when I did the
the junior money to the
organization
There funding typically gate
typically comes through
Bernalillo county.
And I was instructed that I
should make it to the department
of finance the FAA and for
distribution to them and I
noticed in the bill that this is
through.
Economic development department
and I just.
I just wanted to be at risk it
wasn't quite sure how the
funding was going to get there
if we did that I assume you've
investigated that and it's all
set up correctly and it's just a
difference between junior money
and other kinds of money.
Yes Representative thank you Mr
chair but members of the
committee what what would you
please answer the question.
Yes Mr chairman and committee
members and Representative
Matthews thanks so much to
actually be the initiatives I
mentioned the food Fryman hunger
initiative that larger portion
of funding that eight million
dollars actually we'll go to the
are at the department of finance
and administration it's highly
coordinated this is a
partnership across those
agencies and so there's a clear
pathway for funding to get to
the agencies that are involved
in that program so I don't see I
I I don't see a reason for it to
get held up let's for that way
you know I think it'll work well
so thanks for asking questions
it's a different approach but it
also speaks to the coordination
of organizations farmers
ranchers and and the agencies
across the state working
together on what is now really a
five year plan you know that
this this is a commitment that
nobody's gotten out of it so
hope that helps answer the
question.
Thank you thank you Pamela and
thank you Mr Mr chair just my
final closing comment on this is
I think that what these folks
are doing can actually be
trance.
Create a management
infrastructure transformational.
Entity to really.
Help grow our agricultural
community and healthy foods
throughout the state it's really
an impressive
organization and what to do and
so I am as I said I said I think
I said under twenty percent I'm
two hundred percent favorites
thank you.
Thank you Representative I was
gonna ask you just one twenty
but I'm glad you brought that up
to two hundred appreciate that
it looks like you to the
question do you propose are you
asked we're hoping be hills
questions so we will go and go
to Representative Brown
Representative Brown foragers
then.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative heard and thank
you very much for bringing this
bill I think I'm like probably
every other legislator in that
we really promote our.
local locally grown produce and
meat and things like that up Mr
chairman and representative I.
I would just like a little more
information about
where the services are being
rendered so I'm I'm looking at
the bill title and it's it says
that the purpose of the
appropriation is to contract
with community economic
development centers and then the
operative word after that is to
promote what we're talking about
here so could you give me a
sense of
how many community economic
centres you work with and where
they are located in the state.
Thank you Mr chair
representative brown of.
Hello would you please send you
an answer that question.
Mr chairman committee members
Representative brown thanks so
much for that question I think
also in in as in the fiscal
impact reports at state economic
development department we
defined that framework right so
the criteria so I think it
depends on how the economic
development department does to
provide that criteria currently
there are about half a dozen
economic development centers and
again definition so south Ali
economic development center
being a great example the task
county economic development
center that's been in business
for over a quarter century
inTaos and San Juan college
which is newer they've been in
business with for several years
others the southwest food.
they also or where there public
private sector coordinated
initiative in south southwest
part of the state the surface of
the so that he'll catching
County Grant County Hidalgo Luna
region
and I think there's an
initiative will this for
instance blasphemy of food
center in Anthony New Mexico and
the action of a farm to table
food etcetera and again it
really probably comes down to
whether how the economic
development department would
define either narrowly or
broadly our hope is that they
defined more broadly because the
centers are unique the needs of
their region
and they're addressing those
unique initiatives and issues in
our region as well
the one other aspect of this
that the south valley economic
development center did a few
years ago their former director
work on a on a little bit of
research around we call lights
out buildings around the state
and so thinking about community
centers in our very rural areas
potentially that may not be used
or at this point time those
types of facilities could be
either activated or those or
could be expanded.
To provide the kinds of economic
initiate alike for processing
value added processing marketing
and and that kind of
coordination that's where the
south valley economic
development center comes into
play because they are an
excellent example and just one
other quick points is this one
who is with us who is with
practical to the network you're
bursting at the seams they've
outgrown the center and are
really hoping to develop a
facility another facility action
south Philly area because
they're gross hope that I know
that state but it would be it
will be up to economic
development department in their
definition.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative thank you miss
Roy for for that information so
you know I I represent a rural
area of the state and I I know
there's the need everywhere for
for what you're doing and sure
like to see a little more
spreading of that the good will
here
because but you know again we
knew we needed everywhere Mr
chairman and Representative and
I guess ms Roy so this is all
about promotion it looks like
I take it that means your
advertising
Something here could you explain
what the promotion part of this
it looks like.
Thank you Mr chair R.
Representative Brown this what
would you please answer the
question.
Mr Chairman representative brown
again I think that would be
really the Economic Development
departments focus on on how they
would find a promotion
and yet promotions as highly
needed as as you stated it's
it's one of those things where
we want to understand how these
kinds of programs work and how
they benefit our procedures and
and food businesses across the
state so I I can't directly
answer but we could certainly
find out more for you if you'd
like.
Yeah thank you Mr chair
Representative and in this race
so I I think it really matters
you know we I know when I go to
the grocery store if I see a
sign that says local produce I'm
going to buy that over anything
else that's being offered so and
I'm and we're home gardeners in
my family and and we think
homegrown and close to home
taste best but I just wanna make
sure we're making this
opportunity available to as many
communities as we can and I
think how we promote is is
really going to matter let me
just pull up with them one at
one last question and could you
explain and and maybe you can't
because it's within the
department of development but
what is the process by which
these contracts are established
is there for example outreach
from the department to known
economic centers equally
you know are reached or and by
that I mean is it being offered
to everybody and let them come
forward and say yes we want to
be part of this or is it
specifically targeted to groups
you're already working with
madam chair Mr chair and and
that Representative printed.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Brown
Why would you please answer the
question.
Mr Chairman representative
ground again I'm I I'm not aware
of exactly how the economic
development department will need
the average yet as advocates for
this bill and I know like Ernie
were better was here with me on
Mexico and highly Chavis for
rural coalition who really
worked with the economic
development department to see
this this bill come forward and
with Representative parenting
if there's I think it that we
have a real pathway with
economic development department
taxes conversations and and
really work together to make
sure that these these funds are
broadly distributed and she said
in particular the committees
that may not be well served at
this point in time but could
really adequately used services.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chair and thank you for all the
answers appreciate it
Representative Brown
Representative a vice chairman
Allison what was your Sir thank
you Mr chair my question was
partially asked by
Representative brown but a but
in other words
do farmers have to participate
for do farmers have to join
before participating and then
the second part of my question
is what is the name of the
organization in the four corners
area.
Thank you.
Mr chair representative Allison
for that question I miss what I
would do please answer the
question.
Mr chairman and Representative
Allison great questions so do
farmers have to join if I if I
understand your question of the
food hubs in these economic
development centers are really
there for farmers to.
Come to you know and to they are
centers that help to I when the
state aggregators where we use
which is bring together produce
in particular an agricultural
products in particular for
instance for small scale small
size for me no use the example
of the schools school districts
and senior centers purchasing
local.
Sometimes a commuting between
you might not have farms are
large enough we're one farm can
serve a whole order by school or
senior center so these
aggregation centers are food
hubs for economic centers really
provide that opportunity to pool
those farmers resources and
they're highly coordinated to do
that so that so that the farmers
one get the business and I'm you
know Mr Anthony Wagner from
Wagner firms to create simple
they're a slightly larger scale
of farming they do do a lot of
direct delivery but they also
also provide
fruits and vegetables into the
centers the centers to build out
those orders to be able to then
provide to the restaurants
schools senior centers and other
other operations like that and
your second question yeah the
it's the San Juan county food
hub you'll be happy to get more
information for you on on that
it is House at San Juan college
and the San Juan cooperative
extension service
happens you know she's involved
in that chili Yazzie with the
ship rock farmers cooperative
also is well informed and very
active in the ship rock San Juan
County area in helping to
coordinate with farmers and
ranchers that region.
Okay thank you for that.
Mr chairman miss road thank you
for that my second question is
on the first page of your your
bill of.
Under the appropriation section
the four hundred thousand it
says to be appropriated for
expenditures in fiscal year
twenty twenty three to contract
with community economic
development of.
And then right under that
expansion and so staying growth
of local farmers ranchers
community kitchens and food
entrepreneurs
The latter part of caught my eye
so what about the weekend.
Family vendors that come out
selling their of Navajo tacos
and mutton sandwiches and sets
do they qualify for any
assistance.
Mr chair representative Allison
thank you for that question this
morning.
Mr Chairman representative
Allison actually great question
I think it's a great great
example of why economic centers
these economic development
centers and food Hobbs R. eight
exist and are actually expanding
because DA really many of them
exist for in that order that
family size or individual sized
business is burgeoning and once
that opportunity details
economic development center and
staff alley and economic
development center both are
learning centers so they provide
a service that a see a small
business or burgeoning business
an individual might not have in
San Juan County food is a great
example of that where they can
help a person know what the
rules and regulations are how to
promote their your product and
how do maybe as I mentioned for
aggregate with someone else so
that they have enough product to
be able to sell but the centers
are really many of them are set
up for that very individual that
you're that your state speaking
about which is to help that
person to the next stage of
their business and understand
food safety all kinds of
different things like that and
promotion as well hope that
helps.
Yes yes thank you very much so
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr.
Vice chairman that's going to
Representative L. Representative
Ezzell for your.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative armed and metro I
think you all for being here
today I just got a message from
the love some fishes are.
Community kitchen down in the
high committee that does serve
Hagaman dextrin like are there
in and they're very appreciative
want me to support this I don't
have a problem is support.
And the we do have a need in our
community kitchens and in our
food banks as well as to help
with the.
Farm state hundred initiative I
think it's very important that
all of our New Mexico citizens
have enough to eat at the end of
the day.
And Mr speaker Mr chairman and
members of this committee.
That we have a problem in our
state right now as we speak Mr
chairman and members of the
committee you guys all of you
all signed on to this letter
that we sent to the for service
on Monday.
And what the for service.
Was planning on doing and if
anybody's shocked you might want
to mute your.
The device right now because
what I'm fixin state is not
going to be pretty.
The for the US Forest Service
has ordered.
They are commencing they were
planning on commencing and
aerial shooting of cattle.
In the healing National Forest
and they were planning on
leaving them where they drop
because these were as strays and
we have laws in New Mexico that
protect the strays we also have
the definition of wanton waste
and what the for service.
I was planning on doing with
slaughtering these cattle from
the air without reading into
brands or anything it is up to
this New Mexico livestock board
to impound these cattle to check
for brands to find the rightful
owner if not they have the
ability to sell these or process
these and we thought we had this
stopped yesterday we got word
from Washington that it would be
put on hold.
And last night I got word.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
The US Forest Service began at
eight o'clock go flying over the
healing National Forest.
Representative Ezzell it.
Eighty six no Sir we're yes Sir
we are because this this gives
me great concern because these
cattle could have been gathered
and they could have been
processed to be have the meat
distributed to our community
kitchens and our food banks.
It is right now the US for
services thanks is perfectly
fine to stick deal scandal with
that any sort of inspection and
leaving them to rot our forest
Mister speaker whenever we have
hungry people in the state of
New Mexico I am mad enough right
now I could buy nails Mr Mr
chairman and I hope for is the
committee feels that way you I
want to see anybody in the state
of New Mexico great and the
United States federal government
does not care what goes on in
our state we have this
initiative is being pushed by
the center for biological
diversity.
And Mister speaker.
Like I said.
It is on a different subject but
it has direct correlation to
what we're talking about on
house bill one eighty six.
And I hope people are mad enough
that they start all in.
Representatives and whoever else
because we had a whole list of
agencies this letter went out to
everybody was supportive of it
with the exception of one
congressional Senator some is
just Mr chairman I will stop
right there ladies thank you for
what you're trying to do.
Representative Ezzell thank you
for your comments anyone else
questions and comments from
committee.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the committee.
On this urgent issue that the
Representative Ezzell just
talked about a minute ago Mr
chair.
Is it proper.
Now during the session that the
committee would get together and
and and the other letter
together to the forestry
service.
I know there's there's been a
letter put together but.
What about the committee get
together and and doing something
like that in.
At this time.
Representative Zamora on on that
issue we do have it comes up
with H. M. forty four that's
that's that we stick to the
merits of house bill one eighty
six okay thank you Mr chair and
thank you members of the
committee I do I do have one
question.
Representative Herndon.
Is.
Well I have a few questions what
what your background in in in
agriculture.
Representative you're on mute I.
The poll so Mister chair
Representative Zamora.
My background in agriculture it
probably stems back to the
hundred acres of farm but by far
their own when I was growing up.
But I didn't spend a lot of
travel that far away but that's
where it built in terms of
looking at growing things
however I am most interested in
making sure that individuals
have access to food and locally
grown food is highly important I
will tell you that during the
twenty twenty census one of the
things that are absolutely
focused on was making sure that
there was distribution of
locally grown food to
individuals as they feel that
the census forms because it was
important to make sure that they
were also not being deprived of
any type of food our nurse noted
that they might be.
Thank you Representative the
Zamora and Representative turned
in I don't know sometimes as the
new legislator we get a little
nervous and stuff but do you
realize that's the first
question you answered on this
bill.
I do.
Chair representative the more
you know when I have an expert
here I do bills the step back
and that the experts take the
take the role so I I always
recognize that.
Okay then and thank you for that
answer I'm I'm kind of giving
you a hard time there but the
this is unusual or or
Representative the person
representing carrying the bill
doesn't answer any questions I
wanted to make sure you answered
one.
This is that would support thank
you and and thank you for that
and thank you for bringing this
bill fourth and that.
The it says a I'm number one
section section one after.
Page one line twenty four says
the expansion and since
sustained growth of local farms.
Ranches.
How does this bill.
Affect the growth of farms and
ranches.
Mr chairman and Representative
Lujan.
Mr chair representative some
more if you don't mind I'm gonna
let of Pamela ward and so that.
Why please press the.
Mr chairman and Representative
Zamora thanks so much for the
question insisting that this one
of the other things I meant to
mention about the economic
development department as their
homes that healthy food
financing initiative which has a
really amazing criteria around
building out this is like this
in very rural and underserved
communities in particular.
and the goal is to really
provide the best services and
again across where needed
agencies.
Mexico of agriculture great
promoters and
and they'll work hand in hand
they working with Economic
Development Department station
on the healthy food financing
initiative to really provide
opportunities for ranchers
farmers and community kitchens
and much that directly answers
your question I'm sorry
representative Lara.
No that was a good answer and
and thank you and and thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
Mr thank you for the record
represent Herndon.
If I have an expert again so my
question I will do that all day
long every single day but
Representative small.
Thank you Mr chair I I would
definitely agree Mr chair
representative Herndon
it seems like you're working to
expand the local market for
producers in New Mexico large
and small is that fair to say.
Mr chair representative so that
is correct okay thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
I'm excited to support this I
think it fits in the same bucket
as things that this committee
has probably pushed forward
including in state meat
inspections and other efforts
that are looking to connect
local producers with New Mexico
markets and to serve New
Mexicans so I really appreciate
you bringing info thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
small vice chairman schools to
me I see no the question the
comments from the committee what
is the pleasure of the committee
for house bill one eighty six.
You just okay they want to do
just that and her base unit
housing the loudest at this
point who is a second second
second by Representative Hochman
Vigil is there any opposition to
house bill one eighty six from
the committee.
Seeing no opposition
Representative earned any of a
do pass on house bill one eighty
six thank you Representative
thank you miss what during this
morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee yes
ma'am at this point in time
focusing back around to the the
two agenda items that we have
scheduled for today.
We will bring in Representative
Romero as well as it looks like
Representative two hundred on if
you're still here as well we can
bring you back in as well there
you are.
Representative Romero
Representative Lujan have house
bill twenty four and there was a
question asked by Representative
automobile and whether or not
Was that was the leader not and
so I had the misunderstanding
excuse me that Romero had taken
it over but they both the more
here on house bill twenty four
house bill twenty four if you
recall folks we had a lengthy
debate discussion with the
audience on this matter and at
that at that point in time it
was a suggestion from then
senior adviser for water water
Mr make him and to change the
dates are from two year twenty
twenty three to twenty twenty
five is now state engineer
Hammond but I don't want to have
to explain the amendment we just
brought it back for the
consideration of the committee
so very briefly either one
Representative Romero
Representative Lujan if you can
explain your amendment on house
of.
The some of the committee want
to move the amendment for house
bill twenty four.
Mr chair of the amendment the
motion made Representative
Lujan.
House thank you.
Mr chair and.
We do have my
The state engineer Mr Hammond R.
if you wanted to move item as a
panelist as well Sir.
At this point we we've already
gone through a we'll debate on
this matter which one you.
Thank you Mr chair.
You want to clean your amendment
yes and I will defer to
Representative Romero who is
here during the act the
conversation on the amendment.
Thank you Mr chair so as
prepared we basically looked at
extending the twelve million
dollars over
the five year period that we
wanted to spend it and we've
also allowed that we have Indian
Water Rights as part of the
expenditures well
so so just clarifying where the
funds can go and over what time
period thank you and for all of
our references can you please
also reference the the to to to
number.
It's.
Either one of you is one two two
two four three eight point one
Mr chair thank you that that's
what I have I think that's what
we all have let's go to the
committee for question on that
amendment Representative Hochman
Vigil sorry Mr chair my
questions on the bill okay very
much right thank you very much
okay any opposition to the
amendment.
Seeing this you have an amended
bill and house bill one to house
bill twenty four and going back
to Representative Hochman Vigil
on the question on the bill
thank you very much Mr chair
Representative Lujan and Romero
we already have some money
included in this year's budget
allocated for water planning and
so I was wondering if you could
maybe explain a little bit more
what this additional
appropriation would be used for
and why we should think about
giving more money for at the
exact same thing which is water
planning.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Hochman Vigil so
we're essentially when we made
this appropriation
recommendation in out in the
interim this was approved but
based on the fact that we were
uncertain about what the budget
would be of course and as we
knew what was being submitted at
that time it was insufficient
for a many of the programs that
we believe needed additional
funding so are in the inner the
water natural resources
committee did approve that's
additional appropriation for
that matter we have essentially
a a laid out additional budget
for the needs that LFC has for
for performing on an annual
basis so this would have been at
an additional fund we hear heard
in the news I think many of us
that there been underfunded for
years based on the you know
capacity that we're asking of
them and the growth that we're
asking of that department and so
this would have helps that as we
know hello this is an
appropriations bill the tea
leaves are there so with that Mr
chair representative we'd love
support to have the conversation
but we kind of know what the
outcome will be.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
the Representative Romero so is
this bill going to House
Appropriations next.
Okay all right thank you Mr.
This Madam Mr chair
representative thank you thank
you any other questions or
comments from the committee
before we go.
To a final vote.
Representative Ezzell.
Yourself Representative Ezzell.
Maybe it's sometimes better I
doubt Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman representative it's
up you didn't know Mr Chairman
is a currents stated your my
cam and inquire on the audience
I'd like to hear his up this.
I don't know if he is or not
because I don't have he is there
and we did read M. right now at
their.
Yeah right here Representative
Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
as state engineer Hammond of I'm
assuming that you have read the
amend ment that went with house
bill twenty four it is now
amended not like to hear your
thoughts on this.
Thank you Mr chairman members L.
I a I think of the the
amendments to provide an
appropriate range of of a
opportunity to use these funds
in a very wise and and
deliberate manner to address on
going needs in Indian water
rights settlements in addition
to the possibility of a
settlement in the Texas The New
Mexico that will require
additional activities down in
the missio basin such as
metering of wells and
monitoring.
To assist the Ph.D in the state
of New Mexico and implementing a
potential settlement in that
area in addition there's a lot
of added workload associated
with the cannabis bill on water
rates administration so there
are a number of things
Representative Ezzell that that
our agency can utilize these
funds for and the amendment
allows for that to happen over
the proper period of time.
Thank you very much for that
explanation.
Mr chairman and the.
Near Hammond whenever we are
you're talking about.
Let me see if I can find the
twelve million dollars.
When we're talking about that
twelve million dollars that
they're wanting appropriated
from the general fund to the
office of the state engineer of.
This is funding to the office of
the state engineer to carry out
its duties to meet the water
planning Indian water rights
settlements administration and
management needs of the state
I'm assuming some of that money
will go to the divisional staff
that you're going to have to put
in place is that correct.
Mr Chairman representatives of
the that is correct there would
be a certain amount of because
of the the length of the funding
that that would be extended over
it would allow for some
additional staff members to be
added in addition to what
the house bill two is providing
this also fill some other gaps
that that with the maker agency
stronger.
Okay M. Mr chairman along the
same lines Mr Hammond's
with this include additional
attorneys and engineers that
would have to be employed by the
office.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell I I I think we would be
looking at more technical
positions.
hydrologist water rates and
administrative experts and and.
Possibility of.
Of additional field staff to
implement monitoring programs
etcetera.
Okay and Mr chairman the reason
I'm bringing that up to the
committee right now I know that
Not necessarily due to the COVID
of our I'm tired of COVID just
like everybody else is but I
know that there was.
I'm more decrease in the number
attorneys that working for the
state engineers office in the
past and it was it was causing
some problems here I just want
to make sure that whenever
people are enquiring about water
rights trying to transfer water
rights the list goes on and on
and on that that.
Is being filled in an
expeditious manner.
In the districts where these
water rights are being moved so
I just want to make sure that it
is going to be.
All inclusive of every problem
that water right owners do have
Mr chairman thank you very much
Mr chairman thank you very much.
Thank you there is no and I
don't think this committee
hasn't had an opportunity to to
congratulate you Mr Hammond on
being appointed the status of
the graduation Sir well thank
you so much last time I visited
with you at another add on but I
look forward to working with
thank you Mr chairman and all of
the committee members going
forward and tell and and
tackling these challenging water
issues that we all know our our
needed to be addressed in a very
expeditious manner given the the
the situation with our.
are up impending drought that we
are are probably gonna
experience even this year so
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Mr J. state engineer
seen over the questions from the
committee Representative on
Representative Romero the final
comments.
Thank you Mr chair I just the
thank you for letting us put
this bill on again today with as
amended in to mind.
This is this is an opportunity
to to help our our water
Management Agency interested
Robert New Mexicans as we're
looking at.
How we're going to address the
drought more scarcity at this
time during the COVID.
Issues that we're having thank
you again we appreciate the time
thank you very much
Representative the onset.
Okay thank you what is the
pleasure of the committee.
This past Mr chairman second
okay there is a motion for a do
pass on house bill twenty four
as amended.
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
The property motion and second
it.
Seeing none Representative
Romero Representative do on you
have a do passed house bill
twenty four as amended thank you
for if we're keeping in with us
but you thank you thank you Mr
let's move on then to house bill
eighty three house bill eighty
three that is Representative
Romero Representative Romero.
The floor is yours then.
Thank you Mr chair so we have it
in the a substitute for this
committee hearing today that was
at the request of the committee
with the confusion that was had
about
basically that what we're trying
to keep consistent with ensuring
that engineers can absolutely.
Be at the head of the table for
this job if they would like to
apply for this job
so I wanted to introduce this
the sub today based on the
conversations that we do that
have in our last Committee we
didn't really get to talk about
the bill so I would love to move
the committee sub first so that
we can talk about it actually
for reference please list the to
to to number.
Mr chair just give me one minute
I am the.
Government docs open the not the
do do do number.
It helps for the committee and
and to to to move this along
what we have received from the
Legislative Council is two two
two six zero six point one.
Yes that's correct.
Thank you very.
So we liked was elected make the
motion to move our a committee
substitute for House Bills
eighty three.
The center at house agriculture
the state is in water substitute
for House ability three thank
you thank you have a motion the
second we now have a Committee
subsidizes let's go back to
Representative Romero on the
committee substitute for house
bill eighty three.
Thank you Mr chair so to discuss
the bill as we
New at the beginning of the
session we did not have a water
engineer in place this was a
priority for me and for our
communities to have someone that
was qualified to be in this
position when we opened up the
water engineer's office in
nineteen oh five we we created
this position in statute and
limited it to a water engineer
as we know in changing times
and.
With education with experience
at such a that many of the jobs
that we know in water today have
involved there are hydrologists
there geologists
there are those that are experts
in water that don't have to be
specifically water engineers so
we wanted to look at this
position as it was that a
vacancy as it is now thinking
about the future of course it's
it's an election year we don't
know what happens who comes in
who stays who goes I'm so it's
important for our for our
community and for I think
hopefully for this committee to
think about what the future
holds for this office for this
position and for moving forward
and how we manage water in the
state so basically what we're
looking at is is updating the
credentials that are available
for this position to have this
office and to move forward with
what we've seen in other western
states Arizona Utah Idaho that
have basically involves this
position from water engineer as
many did
in the early nineteen hundreds
to being able to be more broadly
water expert and so if you see
what we're doing in this bill is
it's it's following that best
practice and and as we all know
it's been very challenging to
hire for experts across the
board in state government so
this allows for a broader pool
of candidates to be vetted for
something like this as well and
so we just wanted to bring this
fourth in front of you it's it's
been attempted a few other times
of course at those times that
was you know other
administration's it's address so
this is something the
legislature has seen and
attempted before and would love
to have the conversation here Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative Romero.
At this point in time we have
moved and seconded the committee
substitute at this point I would
like to go then to our attendees
to allow for public comment on
this matter we will begin with
all of those that are in support
all of the support of the
committee substitute for house
bill eighty three.
Looking at the attendees list.
That's going to go first to
Joaquin Baca working Baca good
morning Sir.
Morning Mr chairman committee
members need Baca professional
hydrologist and current board
director for real grant
Conservancy district.
The brief excerpts from the
larger email and previously
submitted first passed in
nineteen oh seven are waterproof
is built for the science of
hydrology existed for statehood
since then our world's
changed both figuratively and
with climate change literally.
One engineering degree be enough
to dress very starts.
After all of our water
distribution dispute settlement
have been insurance analytical
approach to managing waters and
memorable special agents are
focused on building two thousand
dance world is changing ways and
for C. one hundred years that we
simply do not have enough water
today our agency must work to
develop sort of sure and Shane
Water user interstate compact
remains addressing major
litigation.
Assuring protection of existing
water right holders addressing
healthy workers supporting our
economy and understanding the
cultural aspects of water in
many ways we're behind other
states in addressing the same
issues solving water issues will
be difficult nearly impossible
same seeking that helped create
the world we need to retrieve
how we manage our water step one
is expanding our policies
ability to reach into the
diverse talent pool all side
missions and encouraging the
committee yes thank you.
Thank you Mr then go do great
Peter Greg Peters good morning.
Great.
Yes apologies Mr chair just
immunity hello good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee on repeaters senior
advocate for land water and
wildlife conservation voters New
Mexico your stand in support of
beach the three couple modernize
the office of the state engineer
and better position it to
support and drive forward water
projects their finals for drugs
the state I think the bill
sponsor representative Romero
for work on this committee so we
respectfully urge eight two
passed vote thanks committee to
provide comments that.
Thank you Mr Peters is go to a
phone number that is eight eight
seven nine phone number hello
are you there.
You have to meet yourself.
Lou.
Okay that's the move for David
to Britney propellant good
morning.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Britney Fallon I am the
policy director for New Mexico
wild in New Mexico while action
fund we support this bill and
the primary reason for
supporting it is I don't think
that we live in a world any
longer or where a specific
degree I'm.
Tells us who is able to manage
such an unwieldy agency we have
a lot of flexibility these days
and professional degrees for
example I think a hydro
geologist would be a great
state dinner as it were and I'll
use my own background as an
example I have a PhD in biology
because when I was young and
naive I intended to be a
university professor and as you
all know hi now right
environmental laws and I am not
a lawyer and I believe that my
qualifications still I'm how we
do a good job at that and I
think that we could do the same
for New Mexico's water
management and thank you to
Representative Romero for having
the courage to bring this.
Thank you for your comments.
What we're trying to the phone
number calling in it five of
five eight seven nine seventy
two sixteen are you there.
Okay seeing no one else in
support of house of the house
committee substitute for house
bill eighty three all those in
opposition.
To the committee substitute for
house bill eighty three.
We'll begin with the Mr John de
Antonio former state engineer Mr
Antonio good morning.
You will have to make yourself
Sir.
Can you hear me OK Mr chairman
you now Sir yes Sir thank you
good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
There's the the existing there's
limits on the New Mexico's water
code on who may services state
engineer requirements for
replacing him or her or
insulated water management and
policy from from being fit
dictated by the politics of the
moment which I observed to be a
common problem in those states
that have compromised the
independence of the state
engineers by making position us
subservient to political
appointees and so by training
and experience engineers are
analytical problem solvers who
assess every a very able to
ensure that even the most minute
detail this taken do into
account I I've served under
three different a governor's
estate engineer actually four
different governors as as
another cabinet level secretary
the state engineers they're
increasingly utilize rely on
their lawyers geologists
hydrologists and other experts
as part of the problem solving
process engineers look at the
total picture get input from
other specialist is appropriate
to a given problem and no other
profession in my opinion is and
is as objective in weighing
competing opinions in solving
problems I I'm I don't want to
make this too long but there's
if you do a quick review of the
water code it reveals numerous
duties or responsibilities that
are assigned to the state
engineer that only a
professional engineer qualified
by experience in specialized
fields related to the
construction and safety of dams
and other water works can
perform and there's a list of
about ten statutes and I will go
over all those are all of the
chapter seventy two dash five
and and several numbers there
the point being is that I think
this is the wrong approach and I
I agree there's a lot of really
smart hydrologists your
hydrologist other folks out
there that that could run could
connect actually run an agency
but that would require of
department of water resources
most of the other states that we
talked about they have state
engineers to at.
They held they still have state
engineers within those
organizations because we have to
deal with the statutes
associated
you know with the requirements
of the state engineer position
so merely changing of the
opportunity for somebody else be
the state engineer is not the
right way to do it it's so you
know I'd like to be the Attorney
General the state in New Mexico
but I'm not an attorney I mean
so it's just you know you start
getting into just a lot of our I
think ill conceived two issues a
better approach would be to work
during the sixty day session I
look at reorganizing if possible
the water or a water agency
which would bring gas and water
quality surface and groundwater
from the environment
department's and looking at the
water you know the Water Street
issues associated with
educations in the state
engineer's duties and you could
create a department of water
resources with somebody other
than a engineer that's the head
of that particular organization
but it still opens it up to
political conjecture the state
engineer is one of the only I
think it's the only unique
position appointed by the
governor that's appointed for a
term two years but can only be
removed for cause which takes
out the political implications
associated with the importance
of administering the water in
the state of New Mexico Mr
chairman I'll stop there is
always the I'm a opposed to
this.
Like I said there's a this is
the wrong vehicle to change and
and I'm and brought in the state
engineers position so thank you
thank you Mr staging there let's
go to David Jon Rahm John good
morning here with us.
Hello my name is John mom I am
on former US state worker for
the state engineers office as a
water master of oil or trauma
and also a former water planner
for the Interstate Stream
Commission for New Mexico and
past experience of the state
engineers office of Wyoming I
agree with the former state
engineer John deed Antonio on on
the subject
just because your professional
engineer doesn't mean you can't
be a hydrologist Sir geologist
with those kind of degree such
as myself you can go and get
your your license it takes extra
work to get that license that
license has backing of ethics in
further training that's
continued which isn't something
you know you that that can be
just don I think the bill needs
further research into the into
the office of state engineers
procedure statutes and policies
without that the backing up of
of an actual P. a lot of the
applications and permits and
paperwork that as the former
worker requires to do we we can
actually do a lot of the
paperwork and approvals without
the support of a licensed
engineer and because of that
license it has a liability and
expertise that supports those
approvals and without
researching that this is just a
quick you know step around
possibility I think that those
statutes and paperwork need to
be looked into and and that's
something that needs to be
looked at first prior to
changing the qualifications of
the state engineer this is a
this chart because a large issue
for your workers and actual
water users I believe yes it's
important to hire state engineer
that is a modern water manager
that is up to date on we're
planning water management and in
the changing climate but that is
kind of the expert you know
behind where the governor in the
state Senate need to look and.
Find those high standard
engineers and it doesn't mean
that you can't find that on this
position is supposed to be on
bison nonpolitical and it is
important to keep that in mind
as it is set up with that a
license that has that back in in
affects so I think the the new
state engineer as use it as as a
licensed engineer shows it is
possible to find a professional
engineers that are knowledgeable
in hydrology geology and and
water management and I think it
should stay as is.
Thank you John but reminder to
folks in opposition that we have
a lengthy list of those folks in
line so you can keep your
comments brief we would
appreciate it Mexico Howard
Hutchinson Howard with morning.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Howard Hutchinson I'm chair
of the San Francisco solemn
water conservation district I
have to say the the the Mr
Dantonio and Mr moms statement
being Campos much of what I have
the state as well so I'm not
going to expand on those issues.
I did not get the benefit of
having the substitute bill in
front of me but I I looked at
the original bill.
And the language in years says
or qualified and appropriately
credentials.
And this really troubling when I
I see this type of language in
the statute
who decides Cruz appropriately
credentialed.
I suppose that is up to the
governor making an appointment
and it would be up to the Senate
in and
In confirming that appointment
well.
The other problem that I see in
this and maybe that language is
still there the the substitutes
didn't get explained very well
by the sponsor
I would hate to see an attorney
occupied this position and
therefore am opposed to the
legislation unless that language
has been changed.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for joining us it's
going to Travis date Travis good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman can
hear me you you.
Now we can you're on mute.
Okay actually the C. are you
there.
Or go Mr chair me yes sorry
about that.
Mr chairman committee members
try to stay executive director
New Mexico Chile Association
speaking with you today to
express our opposition house
bill eighty three I want to take
a whole lot of public whole lot
of your time our reasoning for
opposing this those been already
stated by former state engineer
we appreciate the Sanchez
amendments that would provide
specifics on the definitions of
qualified and appropriately
credentialed however we believe
that the a master's degree and
five years experience do not
meet the same standards the
qualifications of a professional
engineer so we have to commit
propose house bill eighty three
thank you thank you Mr Davis go
to Representative Abbas Akhil.
Representative good morning.
Good morning.
Chairman Lente and committee
members can you hear me we can
hear you thank you Sir I'm
speaking today too but on behalf
of the as the legislative
liaison but the New Mexico
society of professional
engineers I'm a registered
professional engineer myself and
really want to emphasize that
degrees and training do matter.
So with that of the stand
strongly in opposition to HB
eighty three and again as a
point of order Mr chairman we
have not seen the substitute for
this bill so I'm speaking from
the point of the farmer of bills
that we had on the table in the
last meeting
I just want to point out that
NMSC seventy two dash to dash
one is very clear that this
position requires a licensed
professional engineer this is a
statutory requirement and has
not changed in a hundred years
so we are questioning why there
is a need to do that well.
Thank.
As pointed out the shortage of
qualified candidates is not
because of the limited pool of
qualified engineers but this but
because it is because there's
not sufficient funding and
resources to allow the state
engineer to do his or her job in
a proper manner so changing the
qualifications does not correct
this through because.
And.
and as you have heard the former
state engineers testified and
speak to you today we are ready
to work with the biz boxers well
I deeply respect as my former
legislative colleagues to
address these issues and instead
of seeking a statute to change
perhaps come to some acceptable
compromise on this bill thank
you Mr chair and committee
members good to see you again
Sir thank you thank you
Representative let's go to Wendy
Austin Wendy good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman a good
morning committee my name is
Wendy Austin on the governmental
affairs chair for intrepid
potash and Travis strongly
opposes H. B. eighty three
intrepid is one of the largest
employers and Eddy County
intrepid mines and produces
potash potash is primarily used
in agriculture and as Adam as
animal feed without potash the
food source would suffer
tremendously chairman as many
companies across our great state
interprets operations are
dependent upon water dancing
production we feel strongly that
the state engineer should be
just that an engineer with the
PC certification managing New
Mexico's surface and groundwater
should be performed by a person
with a very scientific and
technical background Mr Chairman
intrepid strongly believes in
the PED code of ethics and that
code of ethics is specific to
the technical merits of
industrial practices in addition
there is an expertise that comes
from the experience education
and special training that PED
has gained over many years that
is specific to industrial safety
water administration and among
many other things rules and
procedure writing finally Mr
chairman I'd like to add the
majority if not all western
states require that the state
engineer be a person with an
engineering degree and be a
certified Pete intrepid supports
this consistency for New Mexico
as well thank you Mr chairman
for allowing me to speak in your
community committee this
morning.
Thank you Mr Austin let's go to
Stewart joined.
Duty their.
Yes can you hear me you for yes
I'm cert joy I'm a licensed
professional engineer in the
state of New Mexico as well as a
board member of the haggis
valley artesian Conservancy
district and I'll speak on
behalf of them as well I'll just
go all of the comments made thus
far and add to home and slightly
as well
in direct opposition to this and
I will reiterate the comments
been made that we have not seen
be substituted bill but I doubt
that it would change many of our
opinions because any expansion
beyond a licensed engineer I
think would be very dangerous
precedent for state and for the
administration of water rights
in this state
The state in G. S. I. I
professional engineer it is more
than just an education and
engineering it is a very high
standard of code of ethics and
which in those other professions
I don't believe have a licensing
boards that hold on to a St
similar standard M. what the the
most important one is that ace
an engineer Boller paramount the
safety health and welfare of the
public there to the issue public
statements only object to pull
objective and truthful manner
and conduct themselves honorably
responsibly ethically and
lawfully so as to enhance honor
reputation and usefulness of
that profession
You can't get a degree that some
non engineering degree and
become a licensed engineer at
that that was mentioned earlier
and some people say you know I
don't think it just needs the
engineering degree but but the
licensure goes beyond just the
degree she received it's looking
at the experience and expertise
and and the ethics as well it is
a longer process but this
possible I would also point out
that there's going to be other
issues yes thank you many and
the Legislature shape in record
with this because it will create
many circumstances of violations
to the engineering answer
surveying practice at and in
less you intend to resend that
act all together you're going to
have some major problems because
no person except a licensed
professional engineer shall be
eligible to hold any responsible
office or position for the state
or any political subdivision of
the state that's according to
section sixty one twenty three
twenty seven of the engineering
surveying practice act
and in addition to that I I I
have to ask the question and I
and I can ask questions on just
it you know this resort.
Ask you to do to wrap up the
comments.
Yeah I'll go faster there is
currently on the roster for
professional engineers and state
New Mexico there is nine
thousand four hundred eighty and
this is the notion that we
cannot find a qualified
individual for this position is
simply ridiculous we cannot
allow us such an important
position of public service to be
dictated by the politics of the
moment I believe this is a
concerted effort to make this a
political position and and for
those reasons I'm strongly
opposed to this I thank very
very dangerous for the
administration water rights in
the state thank you thank you Mr
joiner reminder please do keep
try to keep your comments brief
let's go to Alison Smith Allison
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Allison Smith I'm the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of sorry the New
Mexico groundwater Association
the office of state engineer
oversees many technical
operations including the
licensing of water well drillers
association feels that someone
with a professional engineering
and technical background is
critical to fill the role we
have specific concern with the
fact that that an attorney who
does not have an engineering or
technical background would be
quote would be qualified for
this we do not feel they would
be or would be appropriate to
lead this agency for this reason
and many of the other reasons
previously stated we stand
opposed to this bill.
Thank you Mr Mrs go to Erin
good morning.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Erin
balik and the superintendent
with tickets Valley artesian
Conservancy district I will be
brief most of what I wanted to
say has been said but I think
the amendment the biggest thing
for us is our introducing an
opportunity for politics to
influence this position and I'd
ask that you entertain a
hypothetical situation where a
single party assume it's the
party that you're not a member
of has it
has the governorship and the
Senate and they decide to
appoint someone to that state
engineer office more than likely
it's going to be needs your
search to find one of their
political cronies that is in
fact an attorney and with five
years experience imagine
somebody that is been practicing
law for no more than five years
natural resource lawn not
necessarily water law and they
would be eligible for that so
that the worst case scenario
alone for me is is a big enough
reason to stand in strong
opposition thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Aaron that's going to
list Liz good morning.
Good morning how are you
my name is Liz Taylor and I've
been in New Mexico water lawyer
for thirty years I'm here today
to represent of the San Juan
water commission for in San Juan
County and select energy
services in Eddy county and both
oppose house bill eighty three.
there are many reasons to vote
no on this bill you're just two
of them as has been mentioned
before the bill conflicts with
the New Mexico engineering and
surveying practices act which
makes it unlawful for anyone to
hold himself or herself out as a
licensed professional engineer
and less stable that credential
so as others have said.
The term state engineer would
need to be changed throughout
the water COVID elsewhere in New
Mexico statutes you simply can't
do that a thirty day session.
Reason and I speak now as an
attorney is that if the state
engineer is an attorney he would
be faced with many many ethical
conflicts attorneys have a duty
to keep confidential information
from former clients confidential
and importantly not to use that
information against the former
client.
If such confidential information
appears on an issue and should
be considered in making a
decision the new state engineer
would be prohibited from using
that information in other words
the state engineer could not do
what's best for the state if it
would hurt a former client this
creates huge ethical conflicts
for an attorney and further it's
hard to overcome a whole career
advocating for or against
particular interest.
The trust the state engineer who
changes his position on issues
once he's in office when he has
represented the other side for
years and years and this is not
a theoretical problem any
attorney who is qualified under
the amendment.
Who has five years of water
rights litigation experience
will necessarily have
represented clients to appear
before the state engineer and
we'll have that confidential
information that has to stay
confidential this creates
problems for the for the
attorneys who becomes a state
engineer and more importantly
significant problems for the
state of New Mexico please vote
no on the bill thank you thank
you Liz that's going to Tiffany
Rivera if any good morning.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me the opportunity to come in
this morning Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we represent farmers and
ranchers across the state and on
behalf of our members we oppose
house bill eighty three the
office of the state engineer and
the duties entrusted to that
agency are extremely important
to the agriculture industry
requires a great deal of
technical expertise and targeted
experience we believe that this
position is best filled by an
engineer and we have concerns
that broadening the description
will open up the door to
individuals who will not have
the immediate experience to
execute the duties or possibly
even have previous viruses based
on their previous experience.
Additionally we have concerns
about the potential for
political pressure place
that could arise with the
eligibility expansion
specifically the attorney and we
must ensure that this position
is as much insulated as possible
from political pressure so that
the best choices and practices
can be put in place for New
Mexico water resources based on
these concerns as well as those
listed by my colleagues and we
ask that you do not passed house
bill eighty three.
Thank you to me for doing this
this but a motor see Apollo
you're back.
Good morning Mr chairman member
of the members of the committee
I'm Paula Garcia with the New
Mexico seconds Association and
we have decades of experience
working with the office of the
state engineer and we have been
advocates of properly funding
agency for many years we do
appreciate the intent of this
bill as part of an effort to
reform water governance in New
Mexico we support reforming our
water agencies but believe this
bill is putting the cart before
the horse what is really needed
before we update the job
description of the state's top
water official is a revamping
and re investment in the office
of the state engineer and our
other water agencies our state
our state needs a water agency
that has resources and expertise
to make independent decisions
grounded in science we also
needed agency that recognizes
that water policy is public
policy and the decisions about
water rights have profound
consequences for communities and
future generations.
In time were open to reforming
our agencies and having
interdisciplinary teams manage
or water this would include
broadening the agent agency had
to hydrogel just however we do
not support having an attorney
as the head of the office of the
state engineer especially at is
as it is currently configured we
strongly believe that the head
of the agency should have
extensive experience in not just
five years we appreciate this
initiative would like to work
through a stakeholder process in
the interim to develop suppose
three forms that can modernize
our water agencies and have an
approach to water management
they can address our complex
water issues as they are in the
twenty first century that are
complicated by groundwater
depletion and climate change and
the need to share our share of
scarcity in New Mexico these are
very difficult of policy issues
and we think this is going to
take more time than can be done
in a thirty day session thank
you Mr chairman.
You Mr see let's go to Jerry
Ruiloba though still about the
good morning.
Good morning a gentleman
Montaigne.
Board members my name is Gerry
lavado I am the executive
engineer for the Albuquerque
metropolitan Arroyo flood
control authority or a master
and we are in opposition to this
bill the state engineer needs to
be a professional engineer
The issues about water rights
are issue but for a mask is K.
we are protecting life and
property on under the dam safety
bureau so there's other things
that the state engineer is
responsible for this is more of
an issue concerning the funding
of this office and.
affects crime completely
supports funding this office to
the fullest extent but at this
point of the board of directors
and a master are against this of
this bill
as a as a side note this would
be a shame to see the New Mexico
state engineer with an asterisk
by his name the sense he's not
and an engineer this would be
very similar to having a heart
attack and needing to have a
heart surgeon work on you and
then have been asked by that
person's name it says I'm not a
heart surgeon again we are
opposed to this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr about the let's go
Ralph.
Good morning.
Good morning can you hear me
your update we can hear you Sir
yes Sir okay great.
Thank you chair gentleman that
day and and members of the the
the committee in the opportunity
to comment my name is Ralph runs
a resident of house district
twenty four in Albuquerque.
I want to thank
my chairman for agreeing to
become the state engineer these
very challenging times and the
climate of the climate emergency
at are looming water scarcity
crisis.
I also wanted to state now that
I agree wholeheartedly comments
just made by Paula Garcia.
Thanks Representative Romero for
bringing this board and I think
that it has been good despondent
so discussion we've been hearing
now however I am in opposition
to this bill for the reasons
given by former state engineer
John de Antonio I think it is
not necessary at this time to
make this change I also agree
with Mr the Antonio saying this
could be addressed by department
of water resources which is a
very well developed concept from
the Rio Grande water applicants
this concept is now being
socialized to be promoted
interim for more consideration
and all.
Thank you committee matters
thank you committee members and
I think it is appropriate to not
pass this bill.
Thank you Ralph let's go to
Wendy Wendy Austin good morning.
Okay.
Okay okay thank you sorry my
mistake that's going to Joe.
Joe good morning you with this.
Yes good morning Mister chairman
do you hear me yes Sir.
My name is Joe Culbertson I'm
vice president large New Mexico
cattle growers association.
And I too don't have a copy of
the committee substitute finally
but going by discussion the
other day
we're going to stand in
opposition to this this
legislation and the especially
those comments about attorneys
and and for those of made those
comments now will repeatedly of
that thank you very much thank
you Sir let's go to the norm
gone norm good morning.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee on norm
gone I'm a retired licensed
engineer.
I was director of the Interstate
Stream Commission in the late
nineteen nineties and early two
thousands when the title was
Interstate Stream engineer.
I personally agree with the
purpose of this bill but think
it is premature especially since
Mr Hammond's agreed to serve as
state engineer.
It is very hard to find a
qualified water engineer who
also has experience in
administering a large
organization.
I'm present in the middle Rio
Grande water advocates water
advocates believe it is
essential that New Mexico create
a water resources department as
Mr John Dantonio described.
By a qualified cabinet secretary
who need not be a licensed
engineer.
The state engineer would oversee
the regulatory division of the
water resources department the
state engineer would be
responsible for administration
of the versions for all water
rights permitting and for
functions such as dam safety
that require an engineering
license however the needs of
water are too great to be a
singular singularly administered
by a single state engineer.
One benefit of the water
resources department is that it
would have several division
heads who would focus on a
collected.
Areas to practice in the
agencies such as completing
educations and getting data and
and records in line so I thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward I think the the
qualification should be of
broadened the leadership
qualifications but I think this
is not the right time for this
bill and the concepts of
creating water resources
department require much
discussion over this forthcoming
interim thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr gone is gonna Tom.
good morning.
Good morning.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee.
Most of my comments have been
stated I I'm opposed to this
bill I'm a registered
professional engineer in New
Mexico with some experience in
water infrastructure and
administration.
And I'll just jump to the end
here of the additional
disciplines proposed geologists
hydrologists and geo hydrology
fit into several of the twenty
one engineering disciplines that
are licensed as engineers New
Mexico the board of licensure
will also consider other
disciplines so there's no need
to change the statute is
proposed thank you thank you Tom
is going to grow Petersen.
Hello good morning.
Mr chair and the members.
My name's Carl Peterson I A. B.
Q. this position must remain
outside political informants we
propose the changes and this
bill thank you Sir the girl for
you privative that's the move
see no other when the switch in
the COVID will then come back to
the committee on debate for some
of the list is representative of
small Representative small our
reserves.
Thank you so much Mister chair
Mister chair representative
Romero
thank you for bringing this
forward Mr Chairman
Representative Romero
do you see the the state water
challenges as as basically sort
of similar to what we've
experienced in the in the past
or do you see them changing as
we go on to this era of human
caused climate change.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for the question
I think I definitely agree with
many of the commenters about
revamping the entire structure
of our water resources
management for exactly what your
question I think is getting at
is that when we set up our state
engineers office and early
nineteen hundreds it was about
engineering our water management
and how we were managed our
resources waterways bridges
etcetera in order to basically
depend upon a resource that we
thought would be in abundance
for ever that in current time
and shifted quite a bit for
drought management for climate
change its address so as we're
moving with those times Mr chair
representative you know we want
to make sure that we look at how
we manage those resources with
those times as well so
I I don't disagree that we need
to really shape the way we you
know we manage those resources
in that way Mr chair
representative.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Romero
just a couple other quick
questions Mr chair
representative Romero in this
time of drought it is it your
understanding that that much of
New Mexico is is in our is
entering into some of the most
severe as levels of drought as
defined at the federal level.
Absolutely Mr chair
representative.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you representative so some of
the the ways that you outline
the policy expertise in the
current in your current approach
what are those do you think Mr
chair representative role metal
specifically kind of tune to
helping us manage during a time
of you know unfortunately kind
of extreme scarcity.
Mr chair representative yes I I
do believe that the broadening
of credentials you know allows
us to look at these folks that
are experts in those fields that
may not specifically be one
category of engineer but rather
there's there's so many folks
that are that are experts in in
water management in water
resources management and that's
what we're seeking to do here is
to to bring those that really a
poll of candidates into our our
state government to solve our
biggest challenges okay thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative others others
Really appreciate what you said
Mr chair representative which is
that that saying some of the the
feedback questions and critiques
and how Mr chair representative
with you bringing this piece of
legislation fourth and that
effort really seeing that
actually welcoming and growing
from the input of folks
including folks who have
questions concerns and currently
stand in opposition so I think
it really validates the approach
that you're taking the
collaborative approach that
you're bringing before us
and points to the direction our
state needs to move thank you Mr
chair thank Representative.
Thank you Representative small
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
and thank you Representative
Romero for bringing this bill
I need to to continue the train
of thought that I think are vice
chairman small was talking about
I think that this bill is trying
to treat a symptom rather than a
cause I think that from all the
information I received from my
constituents want my
constituents is actually a water
expert attorney and you know a
lot of that there are I think a
lot of arguments on both sides
of this but I think really
perhaps a better approach to
kind of get more consensus on
this would be to maybe do a
memorial are steady on the
resources of the office of the
state engineer all together to
kind of see what exactly as a
modern job requirements would
look like for a person in that
position perhaps we need to hire
more than one person maybe
needed engineer and an attorney
or an engineer and a hydrologist
and so I think also
consideration of the proper
resources that the state should
allocate towards the state
engineer should be put it from
there as well so I I think you
know we're looking at just a
tiny nuanced part of this issue
and in a right now Mr chair
representative Romero I I don't
think based on the feedback I've
received on this bill that I can
support it in its current form
but I think a broader study
would be just what the doctor
ordered here I'd be happy to
help you or work with you on
that if it's something you would
consider but I think we're in
the right direction on this Mr
chair just not with the the the
bill in its present form even
with this come this us
substitute this ammendment thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative let's
go to Representative Matthew
Representative Matthews floor's
yours ma'am.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
L..
Present Romero for bringing the
bill forward and for everybody
who participated in the.
Comment period this morning
I'm gonna echo what I think some
of the others have said
including Representative Hochman
Vigil
it's you even this late I'm
covered.
And covered it maybe is the
wrong word but but you've
obviously hit on something that
is a major issue which is how a
water and water planning should
proceed given the drought and
climate warming and our but it
is a bigger issue in my mind
then who's the head of the
agency should be and we need to
look at a more holistic approach
I think and I like the idea of
possibly having a study or
something like that to figure
out what those resources should
look like how the Interstate
Stream Commission should work
with the state engineer and
other organizations that the
state that are related to water
so I'm I'm not gonna vote for
your bill but I really encourage
you to keep up the good work
these are important questions to
be asked and I'm really glad
that you have started this
conversation thank you Mr chair
Representative Matthews anyone
else question the comments from
committee.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative tell you arm you.
Mr Chairman move to table.
Been a motion moved the table.
B. B. B. before we we take that
motion if I could have a quick
second this Madam real quick on
on your on your bill
Representative Romero I I I to
apply your efforts to applaud
your your your bravery in the
course of talking about these
issues in a very public matter
manner and really just want to
offer my support as well and has
a as the saying goes if it ain't
broke don't fix it but at the
same time that goes for concepts
that are the same every single
year every single day where as
we know we live in a society now
in an environment now that.
Where I live it hasn't it only
rains maybe once a week it only
snows maybe twice a year at this
point and so I know that's the
same probably in every other
part of the of our state and I
think that with this water
agency in this water Madam some
of that we look forward to and
look up to to protect our water
rights in our state that we have
to do anything and everything
possible he or she anything and
everything possible to make sure
that we can support that office
and that charge to the best of
our abilities as lawmakers as
policy makers so I apologize I I
applaud you and thank you for
bringing this this piece of
legislation for for public
comment in public discourse so
there is a motion to table
Representative by Representative
Ezzell is their second I'll
second second
This call the roll
representative
of America if you would please
call the roll.
a motion to table.
Representative Brown.
Yes table.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative Hochman BA.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes the table.
Representative small.
No.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Allison yes to
table.
Mr Chairman.
Yesterday.
Thank you Representative Romero
by a vote of of seven two one
your your house bill eighty
three committee substitute has
been table thank you for joining
us and thank you for your about
what to do in the interim thank
you Mr chair created thank you
have a great day.
Folks move on to house bill one
seventy seven Representative
Sweetser I see with your hand up
let me bring you over.
Representative Sweetser is with
us now good morning
representative thank you for
joining us we miss you on the
committee glad to see a smiling
face and I have house bill one
seventy seven without further
ado the floor is yours.
Thank you Mr chairman and I do
have an expert witness stand
weeks if he could also be
brought over.
Weeks if you can raise your hand
will bring you right over.
Okay.
I definitely miss the committee
so thank you for the comments Mr
chair
I'm I just want to start bureau
vino.
House bill one seventy seven is
the vineyard restoration Fund
and it's calling for two million
dollars to re plant four hundred
acres of vineyards across New
Mexico.
That would be approximately four
hundred thousand vines five
dollars for every bein planted
and you may not realize it but
we are coming up on the two
hundredth anniversary of wine or
vineyard in New Mexico and so
we're trying to get our
vineyards replenished in
anticipation of that COVID
nineteen has not been easy on
any of us and it has not been
easy on the wind industry the in
nineteen ninety there were
nearly three thousand or
actually over three thousand
acres of vineyards in New Mexico
in two thousand twenty that
straight to a thousand eight
years so we are looking for some
are both funds some
appropriation contingency fund
money to help our wine growers
and our vineyard managers to
replace the vines that have
frozen and deteriorated for
whatever reason so we can be
ready in anticipation of the two
hundredth anniversary which will
be.
In twenty twenty nine so with
that we will stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative let's
move on then to
our audience those in attendance
in favor of house bill one
seventy seven the raise your
hand will call you one by one
this first start with
Representative and thank.
Good morning.
Right good morning.
Good morning Mr chair hope you
can hear me broadband die from
Lee County and I encourage you
Mr chair and the board members
and the committee members to
vote in favor of this bill as a
vineyard owner I understand the
value that grapes can bring to
New Mexico as an example I have
been an alfalfa farmer in Lee
County pulling water of the
alcohol and my wife and I
realized we had to have a after
cultural product it took less
water and with more resilient
and so we chose grapes and had
calls all year long wanting to
buyer great so I think there's
also an opportunity for for New
at vineyard producers in New
Mexico New Mexico and that will
diversify our ag economy thank
you and I hope you support this
bill thank you Brett that's
going to Christopher.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Chairman and members of the
committee I Christopher go play
executive director for New
Mexico winegrowers association
I'd like to thank Representative
Sweetser for caring this
legislation bringing to the
table but I I do want to clarify
one item our four hundredth
anniversary of planting and
growing grapes New Mexico will
be and twenty twenty nine so we
started this venture in sixteen
twenty nine we are asking for
these
these funds to help us plant
four hundred acres in advance of
our four hundredth anniversary.
the investment that this will
make in re planting and
restoring our vineyards will
have a significant impact.
It it takes time for grapes to
mature and grow and so by
planting these now three years
four years down the road we will
see an influx from these four
hundred thousand lines to the
tune of twenty five million
dollars in gross sales returning
funds back into the general fund
to excise tax and through gross
receipts tax these funds are
available to existing vineyards
as well as new vineyards these
projects range from all the way
down the southern part of the
state and skied hatch I need to
all the way up to the northern
part of the state and I I
represent fifty different
wineries and vineyards that grow
grapes both on private property
and on on on Pueblo as again we
we see that this is gonna have a
long term impact for the
industry and it's a investment
today that will pay rewards for
decades to come with that I ask
for your support of this and I
have a few grape growers who are
on the phone call with me Mr
Jasper riddle and I believe Mr
Sam Eragon our actual growers
themselves to speak here to the
the importance of the bill I
thank you thank you Christopher
Tiffany Rivera if any good
morning.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee again to me
Rivera registered lobbyists for
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau we appreciate
Representative Sweetser is a
work on this bill New Mexico's
wineries are some of the oldest
in the nation and are an up and
coming component of our
agriculture and agritourism
sector our state's wineries not
only provide an opportunity to
sample deep Reds and crisp
whites also provide an
opportunity to connect the
public with agriculture through
the growing and winemaking
process learning about great
varieties soil conditions and
the deep history of New Mexicos
winemaking heritage provides a
unique and meaningful hands on
experience additionally many of
our wineries across the street
state are located in our rural
communities and this
appropriation will help support
the resilience of those
communities thank you for the
opportunity to comment and we
request your support on house
bill one seventy seven thank you
Mr Vera let's go to Jasper
Jasper good morning here with
this.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee thank you all so much
for the opportunity and for for
reviewing this my name is just
right on the ways you are
wondering of reduction in Mexico
and also vice president New
Mexico winegrowers association
what this bill Doss very
critical because it's going to
help rebuild some vineyards and
and and help help rebuild some
of our great growers as just
mentioned earlier it's a multi
year commitment to get vineyards
reestablished and that's that's
more multiple years that figures
in wineries are R. put pour
money out to get this rebuilt
the demand is there are
neighboring states requesting
rates I think this is a great
segment for New Mexico to be
able to move to a sustainable
low water use crop and to help
build resiliency back in the
industry that goes directly from
farm to bottle which is so
vertically integrated we should
be very big for our economy is
the state as a whole I
appreciate your time in support
of this bill.
Thank you Jasprit christen
Eragon center good morning.
Good morning I am Sam are going
and I am up president of the New
Mexico Winegard Association I'm
also our winemaker at creek or
up to what and one of the things
that we're looking at what this
is we're looking cute for at the
future of our Ag industry and
our wine industry and tourism as
we develop into the next you
know Hey at and this really
helps us look and invest in in
our futures and so we can go
ahead and have something to pass
on to our children and the
legacy and also encourage people
to come here and enjoy this
wonderful place we call New
Mexico at and so I certainly do
appreciate your support and all
those what that we've received
so far and look forward to the
adventures we go forward thank
you Mr going thank you for
joining us this morning we have
Pamela Roy Pamela good morning.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee members I'm here
representing the rocky mountain
farmers union when it say thank
you so much to Representative
speech referring this bill
forward for the many reasons
that have already been stated we
stand in full support of this we
think this is good business for
agriculture in New Mexico
appreciate the stories that have
been shared like with most of
student I think about transition
from higher water use to crops
and that might have some lower
water use and have real market
viability so again thank you
very much for bringing this bill
four we look for to support.
The agency Roy.
Is there anyone in the attendees
list that is an opposition house
bill one seventy seven.
All those in opposition of house
bill one seventy seven.
Seeing none has come back to the
committee for questions comments
per person listens
Representative Matthews
Representative Matthews the
floor is yours meant.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to all the participants to share
their thoughts
I haven't prevented I would.
Me that I would question the
wisdom of growing grapes for
wine but.
But I do have a serious question
I am curious whether it what it
you whether growing.
Grapes for wine is it what what
kind of level of water used to
set up does the
does it take.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Matthews good
question there are certainly a
lot of the advances have been
made in and adapting to the the
grapes for our area Clemente I
will turn over to
Crisco Blay if he is still
available or or to Mr weeks for
some specifics on that but I
will will confirm that the arid
climate has been really good for
grape growing because of the
conditions and so that's one of
the reasons we've been able to
prosper as we have.
Okay I just promoted Christopher
to our panel and then if either
him or Mr weeks lead COVID.
Mr chair this Dan weeks
that's a very good question I
don't have the tech strong
Christian are one of the growers
probably will I will say this
that I believe one hundred
percent of our growers are
actually doing trip and there
are some incentive for doing
grip of addition and the wind
legislation we've been able to
pass throughout the the last
twenty or thirty years so I will
defer to somebody that actually
does this work.
Yeah Christopher give answers
for us yes Mr chairman and
members the committee and
So are we we have as part of
some legislation you all passed
a number of years ago a state
but the culture is to use based
out of Los Lunas and he's been
doing a lot of research on on
vineyards and and water usage
currently there is a study
taking place in Santa Ana pueblo
using micro sensors to track the
uptake of water through the
lines and so seeing just how
efficiently these lines are
being able to transpire water up
into their
throughout the buying a recent
study the doctor DC sent me
yesterday it showed that grapes
can survive on twelve inches of
water annually so the amount of
water required to keep a great
plan to live at the minimum is
twelve inches of water annually
with drip irrigation being so
specific and as Mr weeks pointed
out all of our vineyards are
operating under irrigation
than the control of this water
is is extremely important to the
industry.
Grapes actually thrive when they
are starved of nutrition and
water the higher the the lower
the water use and the lower the
amount of nutrition the actually
harder the great struggle to
create room your body and so
again lowest water use of any
crop and harvest R. O. Y. when
it's converted into wine as a
value added product.
Thank you very much for that
answer and Mr chair and
Representative Sweetser I'm glad
you brought this forward is
sounds like it's a win win.
in terms of both the amount of
water and the efficacy of the
use of the water and a great
product.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you Representative
Matthews any other questions or
comments from committee members.
Semen was a pleasure the
committee members for house bill
one seventy seven.
Representative Ezzell.
The day pass.
We have a motion by
Representative Ezzell in a
million seconds for everyone
else in the committee sounds
like is there any opposition to
house bill one seventy seven.
See none representative we need
to have a due passed house bill
one seventy seven thank you
again for joining us again
missing the committee for the
good to have you around thank
you Mr chairman thank you
committee I'll be back with the
official question for New Mexico
to be changed from is it red or
green to is it red or white
thank you.
Very good thank you let's move
then to house memorial house
memorial forty four I just
brought over I think about over
Representative David us us
Representative at that office
are you with us.
We're here.
There you are.
Representative us good morning
here with us.
I am Mr chair how are you good
morning Mr chairman again good
morning good morning you have a
house memorial forty four there
are no branded cattle
the floor is yours Sir.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
I want to introduce well I'm I'm
gonna talk about this a little
bit we have been having
discussions about these Istri
cattle Mr chair and a committee
of.
Up in the healer area and
surrounding the Hilaria on
private and private land and and
and surrounding
a yes land this building is
being used to.
I'm sorry somebody walked in
hand you something to why
constitutional but anyway the
strongly lands we're for their
past ring or whatever and so
there's been issues there and
and the purpose of this memorial
Mr chair is that we want to
bring all the parties involved
together to have a conversation
so that we can resolve the
matter.
unbranded cattle up in that the
healer and surrounding areas and
as if you've been watching the
news Mr chair representative and
and and and committee they are
planning on shooting those
cattle this morning and so I've
been in conversations Mr chair
committee with the chair of this
morning and radio stations and
so forth because of the public
safety that it in that it causes
with the lack of notice we we
don't know if there's any hikers
up there we don't know
you know as far as we don't know
if there's anybody out there
second of all Mr chair and
committee we also I think that
this is a very inhumane way
we've got a helicopter up there
chasing cattle all over the the
forest.
They are designated to shoot a
hundred fifty cattle anything
from a from a cast to a bowl.
I would just roughly estimated a
hundred fifty cattle anything
from a two thousand pound bull
to three four hundred pound calf
averaging out to probably eight
hundred to a thousand pounds and
just for the matter of easy
master thousand pounds times a
hundred fifty cattle hundred
fifty thousand pounds of of
carcasses that we have all
scattered throughout the.
throughout the force there that
would pose a threat in in in in
in the next few months I would
say two to three months of our
carcasses decomposing and an
attracting predators in the area
that could pose a threat to
hikers going through their
possibly seeing that as a threat
to their food source and so
hi that this is a conversation
that has been kind of cheated in
my area Mr chair and and
committee
conversation between ranchers
use for service and.
You the agricultural department
and so forth our livestock board
in in trying to resolve this
matter there has been Mr chair.
A.
Effort in the last few weeks of
gathering some of those cattle
hundred fifty cattle didn't just
magically appear in a short
period of time and in in the
last three weeks my
understanding is they have
gathered they're targeted thirty
a group of thirty part of thirty
and the other twenty cattle so
with that Mr chair I'd like to
introduce the committee
substitute for House memorial
forty four because I wanted to
include the language because of
the time restraint
I I just wanted to introduce out
with your with your permission
Mr.
Thank you Mr asa's can you
please read that to to to number
on that case of selected yes Sir
the to to to number is two two
two five oh seven point three
thank you and it should all be
in our shared files you don't
have dental.
At this point that does this
year comments reflect anything
in the committee substitute
differently.
No Sir all but really the only
the only difference Sir is we
did Mr chair which is some sort
of con federal we wanted to use
the the actual
Language in the in the statutes
which is a stray so we cleaned
up some of the language there
added the word these on on line
nineteen and then of course the
substitute as that the bank the
on line sixteen on page two that
that be it further resolved that
the aerial shooting of a
straight red kettle is cool and
dangerous and history of branded
cattle should be gathered the
most humane manner possible
so that was just very just
cleanup language Mr chair thank
you very much
with that their their motion to
adopt the precepts to.
I made a committee steps to
state or house memorial forty
four.
Second thank you for we have a
committee substitute any else
and on this Representative us.
Not the substitute Mr chair what
do you want to introduce all.
Some expert witnesses on this if
that works for you Mr chair if
we have any questions will close
expert witnesses we will
different estimate at this point
in time I think it's safe enough
we can go to the attendees list
and then if there any technical
questions at me perhaps you can
answer we will ask them to join
us.
Thank you so those in attendees
regarding house memorial the
committee since two thousand oil
forty four please raise your
hand those in support of house
memorial forty four.
Let's begin with general
Billings Gerald good morning.
No good morning thank you Mr
chair members the committee.
I'm mad good speak yes.
I'm a county commissioner in
Grant County and I my family
also produces be fair and Grant
County not on forest land but
this feral cattle issue needs to
be solved and it can be solved
and it gives all
cattle producers a black guy.
We want it solved beef
production in Grant County alone
provides an annual economic
impact of twenty five to thirty
million annually I don't have
that number for the state but
the economic benefit.
It of beef production in New
Mexico is significant.
managed grazing also print
provides other benefits such as
removal of fuel.
Which aids in the prevention of
catastrophic wildfires.
These are problems that have
been solved through proper
managed grazing the problem is
these feral cattle are not
managed and they need to be
removed.
and I think Representative trust
us trust us for a.
Presenting this memorial
this is a problem that has been
solved is really recent problem
because in the past the agencies
responsible for dealing with
that have dealt with that.
and now you have a hundred and
fifty or how many ever cal's and
I would like to add.
two Representative trusses
comment on the hundred fifty
thousand pounds.
That's a hundred fifty thousand
pounds of wasted be for.
That could go into the economy
is just gonna be shot and left
lie I hope that to.
Members of the committee you'll
pass this memorial forty four.
And encouraged the
The parties that be to come
together and.
Job back on the solutions that
they've had in years past take
care of this for our last.
Cattle issue it's a.
It's a detriment to the eco
system and to the beef industry
in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Mr billing that's
correct our Hutchinson our good
morning.
Good morning and Mr chairman our
Hutchinson chair of the San
Francisco solemn water
conservation district of this
this is an issue of that isn't
just.
In the Hilo
And we could see this play out
across the state where there is
livestock grazing so we feel
that this is a an important
issue to address salute of
Representative Terrazas for
bringing the memorial forward
and we support it thank you
thank you Howard it's going to
start.
Good morning.
Good morning can you all hear me
yes Sir okay sorry I'm using my
wife's account here this is my
name's Ryan McCauley and I am in
support of the memorial
In pursuit of legislation on
this matter the memorial was
developed from a proposed bill
which was developed by producers
in pursuit of protection of
property on the issue of
trespass on branded cattle is an
issue statewide site the member
for said and it's rare but
whenever that a producer does
have to deal with this issue it
costs a lot of money and a lot
of time.
And I just as a closing thought
I agree with Representative as
al on her comments on H. B. one
eighty six that I'm against the
shooting of these cattle it's
both unethical and illegal thank
you all for your.
Thank you Mr Bronson.
Let's see Bronson good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman element
Committee members my name is
brought into court I am
the president elect of New
Mexico cattle growers I want to
thank Representative Geragos
very much for the work that he's
put into this I was in his
office a minute ago and he is
working so diligently and we're
so thankful for what he's done
this memorial that he's put
forward is basically trying to
get us is that producers and the
for service to sit down and have
communications with the total
that's that is what we want the
main thing we want right now is
for this to stop we don't want
any cattle being shot that is no
good for anybody but what we
really want is we want to be
able to sit down with producers
and with our government and we
want to be able to have
conversations to wear something
like this could not happen again
this is an atrocity and not I
urge the committee to both the
support of this memorial thank
you thank you run to Mr Ralph.
Ralph good morning.
Good morning gentleman day and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
comment I actually have hung
around on this committee session
after hearing Representative
these else friends law that was
completely unrelated to house
bill one eighty six I want to
say that I am in support of the
change of language from Cheryl
to straight because I think it
does doesn't knowledge and
demonstrate that this is a
problem that has been occurring
over on the multitude of years
by in many cases the
irresponsible actions of
ranchers in that vicinity that
do not keep track of their
cattle and some have become
feral perhaps.
These are straight cattle and
our and I also want to correct
Representative Weisel on her
statement that the center for
biological diversity that the
keeper comments okay all right
well the the environmental
community is actually opposed to
this as well because they do not
want to be sorry the border
opposition of house memorial I
am I am speaking in support of
the house memorial.
Especially because it's been
changed to the to stray and I'll
just leave it at that and.
Thank you Ralph let's go to all
those in opposition for House
memorial.
Forty four.
Lows in opposition let's go
first to the John frost John
good morning.
John we have to meet yourself.
then opposition house memorial
forty four John.
Okay let's move on then to to
Britney.
Pretty good morning.
Chairman and good morning
members of the committee Britney
Fallon policy director for New
Mexico wild action fund I wanted
to review a little bit of the
historical context because I
think that a lot of members of
the public and a lot of members
of the committee are not aware
of the twenty years of work that
has occurred on this issue and
my understanding is the purpose
of the memorial is to request
consultation on branded feral
cattle from the healer and I
don't know if everyone knows
that removal is already
happening and has been happening
since nineteen ninety eight with
on going contracts for both
around that and aerial shooting
and there's been repeated
consultation on all contracts
over the course of many years
specifically I'd love to direct
your attention to an email from
me this morning with a copy of
the department of justice filing
in yesterday's District Court
ruling which ruled in favor of
the department of agriculture
continuing to remove the feral
cattle.
Thank you have a cold.
And they're filing walks you
through the details of the
public decision making process
which I believe shows the
purpose of this memorial has
already did that further I
definitely want I cannot see the
committee subject right now but
it is not the opinion of the
USDA or the District Court that
these cattle meet the legal
definition of a straight and
therefore they do not fall under
the jurisdiction of the wives to
accord .
And since nineteen ninety eight
the US Forest Service has issued
eight contracts to round up the
federal and branded cattle for
which that is possible and
there's one on going contract
for a combination of roundup in
the Philippines on site and
that's in recognition that it's
not possible or safe to round up
all of the cattle a contract for
on slightly full shooting of the
remaining title was approved in
September of twenty twenty
including public meetings and
public notice and that has now
begun the healing National
Forest will be issuing closers
for public safety and the
removal process is only going to
occur in the month of February
and for all of these reasons and
I really encourage you to look
at the department of justice
filing because it goes through a
lot of a lot of facts twenty
years of facts on this issue and
we do not believe that this
memorial is necessary or
appropriate at this time thank
you very much thank you Britney
let's go then let's let's try
John frost and Johnny there.
Yes Sir I'm sorry I don't know
why money came in so late but I
am for the memorial and money
for some reason the phone didn't
let me get through it time to
say that I'm for oil thank you
your comments are noted
appreciate you Sir that that to
those that are in opposition is
going to Patricia Patricia good
morning.
Good morning thank you chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Patricia straight at the line
New Mexico representative for
defenders of wildlife I'm here
to date of ways defender strong
opposition to HM forty four the
issue of feral cattle as Britney
has mentioned in the healer
wilderness has been under
consideration for many years now
in those years the feral cattle
have content caused extensive
harm to the water and wildlife
of the left and more discussion
is not needed at this point
action is what's needed to
protect the water and wildlife
of the liver so we respectfully
ask you to oppose H. M. forty
four thank you Patricia let's go
to the top.
Good morning.
Hi can you hear me yeah.
Thanks my name's touch okay I'm
a co founder of the center for
biological diversity
I'm a former recovering Iowa
farm boy whose father is a large
animal that I personally branded
thousands of cattle and we have
spent hundreds of hours in both
the area where the the the feral
cattle are and he will to stand
outside the area where there are
trespass cattle on rivers in the
healing National Forest and
others and we have never
documented a single grand echo
in this area of the wilderness
where the for of house are so
it's a fairly unique situation
we see this as a a narrow unique
approach to a a terrible problem
and as for the outlined the the
the state and federal statutes
for quite clear going all at
without repeating what she said
is that there is an Attorney
General opinion in New Mexico
outlining the the fact that
these are not a stray animals
and so for that reason alone the
memorial is inappropriate
because it uses
inappropriate language and so we
are opposed to the more thanks
thank you to our I see no other
people in the attendees list is
go back to our panelists
questions comments from our
committee.
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you Mr chairman I happen
to see a friend the attendees
list the of the head of the New
Mexico livestock borders on
Belinda garland
I would like to make sure that
we did have statute right.
One moment let me just let them
get back grants each year.
Thank you Mr chairman for the.
I'm out
I just want to verify you Mr
garland that the livestock code
on it to provide to straight
it's what we have in the letter
that was sent all the agencies
that I named earlier in the
prime in a previous bill if
miss what did you go away I'm
not sure now she still there
will over thank you very much.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Mr secretary garland.
This letter that we sent you all
the agencies on Monday if we
are.
We take it out of the last code
defines as straight as livestock
found running at large a public
or private lands either Fenster
and chance to center is no and
we are siding seventy seven dash
to dash one point one nineteen
seventy eight is that correct.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you
Representative Ezzell for that
question yes that is correct
there are service specific
statutes under chapter seventy
seven which outlines the
handling and actually the the
rate for the New Mexico
livestock board to inspect all
livestock which are gathered.
Thank.
And Mr chairman thank you very
much director garland and it
also says that when it in the
event the livestock board cannot
determine the owner of this
straight destroy will be
settled.
And I think that our livestock
blows in the state of New Mexico
regarding the strays are quite
clear and they should not be
violated by any agency of the
federal government Mr chairman
and as it stands right now that
is happening.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee of miss garland
What these animals that.
First off.
I'm not really sure that these
cattle that are being.
Kids.
Through aerial means I don't
feel like you need these cattle
can be identified by any brands
from helicopter Mr chairman.
there was no notice given to any
of the agencies prior to them
taking the United States for
service taking it upon
themselves to do this maneuver
I.
I'm just appalled at what is
happening right that right now
of.
If there are hikers in the
forest right now have they been
notified that any.
Any action along these lines is
going to take place.
Mr Chairman there's lots of
questions that are here.
But in essence it boils down.
Whenever there is watering of
New Mexicos livestock in this
manner it's in direct conflict
with the article I of the United
States constitution and that
article states no person shall
be deprived of life liberty or
property without due process of
law.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee of it is depriving an
individual of the liberty or
pursuit interest and the court
has to follow factors and
determine what administrative
safeguards are required by due
process Mr Chairman.
The livestock board does have
control over this if those
cattle were to be gathered they
will to impound them they will
check for brands if not they
will be sold Mr Chairman
whenever we're just want really
going out there to kill these
cattle to leave them to rot in
our force it is not only an
environmental concern it is also
encouraging predators come into
that area Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Whenever we have wildlife.
On the forest and I'm not saying
just the low.
Are we also endangering the
lives of the oil last of all of
that that there what is game and
fish doing as far as that goes
Mr Chairman also in our lives in
our a.
Livestock code under thirty dash
eighteen dash twelve this as
entry to livestock injury to
Lostock consist of willfully and
maliciously poisoning killing or
injuring livestock that is the
property of another.
And whoever Committee is injury
Lostock is guilty of a fourth
degree felony.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that's why this
particular letter that went out
Monday and it went to the
substation of sheriffs
throughout the state of New
Mexico.
Mr Chairman.
Being a renter.
There are several of them that
are listening in.
There are several of actually
we're all involved in
agriculture you know how I stand
on that if you eat you're
involved in agriculture.
Mr Chairman.
Strangers.
We do everything we can to
promote.
Good habitat not only for our
livestock but for the wildlife
that does reside there.
And Mr chairman.
Their incidences that do happen
specially whenever there's
people that are.
Want to trespass thank up fences
we're not always aware that that
has happened until we get a call
from one of the neighbors Hey
you've got a cow over here.
At things like that happen Mr
chairman.
But if the Forest Service had a
contacted anybody even.
Anybody that's member of the New
Mexico of course Association
lives control if there had been
an effort.
I.
Federal service to go out and
gather.
I think there would have been
some.
Effort on our part but the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico to get the job done.
Mr chairman thank you very much.
Representative Ezzell is the
representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'd like to first start by
saying that I am is in support
of this memorial in my area.
We do not have too many stray or
unbranded.
Okay.
I am the.
Our local control we call them
wrestlers.
So we usually don't get too many
of feral.
Cattle.
The feral problem that we have
is our is so
I just thought I'd throw that
out of for information we suffer
from feral horses but never from
of cattle because like I said we
got would you mind calling
wrestler control when they're
branded or unbranded they'll
take him anyway.
Just for you thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr vice chairman it
would also questions or comments
from the committee.
Representative Ezzell.
You're on mute then.
R. Mr Chairman while ago I said
director garland pandemic.
Yeah I'd expect down again so
with this it's a questions or
comments further from the
committee if not what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Move your.
Okay motion by Representative
Deborah do passwords and Allison
that is.
Very very good thank you merry
can you please call the roll on
a two passed for Committee
substitute for House memorial
forty four.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative Ezzell yes.
Representative Hochman begin
now.
Representative Matthews.
No.
Representative small.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Allison yes.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
By a vote of one two three four
five two two you have to do pass
on your committee substitute to
house memorial forty four thank
you for joining us
Representative us us.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee thank you for your
time yes as you all but you do
thank you Sir moving on then to
no other Canadian items on our
agenda today we don't have any
more referrals for a committee
at this point in time so this
may or may not be our last
meeting for this legislative
session unless of course we get
anything referred to us from the
Senate so we will be waiting for
that but should nothing else
happened thank you all so much
for your hard work in this
committee I hope that we have
all served our our state with
them.
With the best of in a most of of
of pride for the things that we
stand for related to agriculture
