Representative Zamora is here.
Representative are.
Let's see madam vice chair
Johnson.
Morning present.
And madam chair would.
Your.
Great so we do have a quorum
thanks to everyone that joining
us today we're having our
organizational meeting so I
think we'll start with an
introduction of our members and
our staff and we can talk about
how the committee will be
working especially during this
hybrid motto that the house is
moving forward with that let's
go ahead and begin with
Representative Chasey.
Good morning everyone it's good
to be with you and.
Forgetting the circumstances
yesterday as that I would bring
donuts this morning.
I did bring them there in my
office if you could stop by.
There are judgments for for all
of you.
I look forward to seeing you all
in person on the house floor I'm
Gail Chasey I lived in
Albuquerque my district is in
the area of University of New
Mexico and not feel.
And neighborhoods surrounding
their hi I go all the way up to
interstate twenty five
interstate forty and themselves
from their.
I really enjoyed being on this
committee appreciate our work
thank you.
Thank you Representative Eli.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee pleasure to be
here I really love this
committee almost equally with
Judiciary.
So so this is what my chairs are
online I want to be politic
about
Representative district twenty
three which is southern
paralysis a bunch of northwest
Albuquerque into tiny bit of Rio
Rancho
and I'm really looking forward
the work of the committee and
out of committees and reforms
it's gonna be fun I'm looking
forward to the session thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative bagels.
Thank you madam chair and
Thank you to the committee I am
during a ghost I represent
district fifty two I'm one of
the newer members to this
committee I have really enjoyed
being on this committee it's a
fun Committee it's a good group
and I think there's a lot of
camaraderie and a lot of them
just discussions of issues that
are important to me and to my
constituents so I I look forward
to another good session and
thank you for for
allowing me to be on this
committee so.
Thank you Representative Nibert.
Good morning madam chair.
You are more kind of a long term
holdover on this committee have
been here by the Senator terms.
Being here appreciate the
patience of the chair and
particularly the vice chair
health for me hi Representative
the.
District fifty nine which is
Chavis terrible waking counties
kind of the central part of the
state so we're corona all the
way down to Rossell and
enjoy
Being on the committee I think
we're going to have our work cut
out for us are the same at
Google rather large bills have
the word election
in their title and I'm concerned
that we're going to have our
reading
Help for our sister short
session so I guess I better get
my reading glasses.
Working thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Christine or yes I
represent house district forty
two most of Taos County I'm
really grateful for the chair
for convening such a
streamlined and awesome
Committee I got used to waking
up at five AM to read all of the
bills that are coming through so
I anticipate more of that I'm
also grateful for the other
madam chair for bringing donuts
I will be in your office is done
I learned a lot about government
in this committee I am the
second session freshman still so
thank you for your patience and
I I especially learned a lot
from the representative who just
spoke before me so thank you.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
glad to be back this is a fun
Committee and works closely
together as we current joke it's
the judiciary junior committee
but
I'm a state representative from
the fall our northeast heights
of Albuquerque it's district
thirty one and glad to be back
with us.
Thank you Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Martin
the more I live in Clovis
Representative district sixty
three I cover the south half of
curry county north have for
Roosevelt all of the Bach all of
Waterloo been attacks on me and
County I'm glad to serve with
you guys thank you.
Thank you madam vice chair
Johnson.
Good morning madam chair and all
my wonderful colleagues and
guests who are listening and
I'm Representative Wonda Johnson
I represent house district I we
and San Juan counties a lot of
that wonderful community
chapters and the scallop.
And this is my fourth term so
completing my eighth year and
I've been on this committee for
awhile I enjoy and this
committee and working with all
of you and and continue to get
to know here and we have a great
time.
And that gonna miss
Representative Eli.
Thank you and good morning.
Thank you.
We're gonna have to have a
celebration for presented in
light.
During our one of our leader
committee meetings
so thanks everyone I'm judging
though as I turned the committee
I'm serving my term and the New
Mexico house I'm a member of the
public act and then I'm a lawyer
so we do have some years on the
committee as the.
Representative Rehm referred to
as being the
judiciary junior so we have some
fun with that
We are one of the committees
that has many many referrals so
I anticipate that that will
continue.
To
To occur and we'll see once the
speaker rates out some bills
this afternoon
I'm super fortunate that we have
such a great committee I can
honestly say that everyone is
very respectful and I think that
really leads to the committee
operating and fair and effective
manner so thanks to all the
committee members for doing that
and we do have some new staff on
board as well as a couple of
others that have been with us
for awhile you make it just have
them introduce themselves we can
start with our Canadian analysts
and then if you want to say hi
and then divine.
Hi I'm Amanda I'm the one of the
committee assistant.
So if you need anything please
contact me it's I'm chair gone.
The three email.
Yeah.
The committee assistance and
honored excited be working with
you all the session thank.
Right and Polish.
Hello.
Yes so I worked in twenty eleven
session so that was quite awhile
back
And I am looking forward to
working with everyone this
session.
Your call is our committee
analyst.
Hi.
Marianna.
Hi my name is maryann
Hendrickson this is my fifth I
believe session with this
committee and I live in Los
crucis so I'm retired navy and I
really liked this committee is
it's awesome you guys cover some
great stuff and it's great to
discussion so thanks and it's
great to be back.
You George.
Well you get the.
I can't get to get the there is.
We can hear Mr.
Okay well my name's Georgia that
I'm been analyst but what first
of all good morning The madam
chair and the committee members
and staff.
I've been a committee analyst
Arnaud Committee and listed in
major analyst for the last
fourteen years or so
intermittently I work with many
of you on many different
my committee assignments.
Before this committee I I'm
really.
What goals you want to and the
election
Into the just
to be back would you would
elections and I'm looking
forward to serving you as best
they can.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I'm hearing a bit of an.
Your.
Right thank you
Okay great so I'm we will begin
a hearing bills on Friday
morning will generally start
around eight thirty eight folks
get rowdy that will start at
seven thirty in the morning but
generally we start at eight
thirty
and what we'll do is we'll hear
are built as they're referred to
the committee unless we have
certain bills that we can group
by topic so that any of the
advocate that wanted to and can
join us or bills that are
grouped by topic.
This committee and all other
house committees will be only in
zoom so
Your continued to CS on your
screens I know folks have
referred to it as pledges to do
so we are happy to the public or
viewing and
The prices will stay the same as
last year.
Meetings by zoom will take all
public comments by zoom so if
folks want to comment on bill's
just raise your hand and we will
call on you and if you are
calling in by telephone I think
is star six nine if you want to
I'm it yourselves so will have
options at any time if you have
any questions just feel free to
reach out to us there won't be
any kind of chat function
if there are bills that need
some transportation or excuse me
of theirs from committee
meetings are translators are
needed we can also accommodate
that as long as B. R. asked was
sufficient notice and
The only thing that you know I
really let us folks to keep in
mind and we will tell all the
bill's sponsors that we'd like
to have substantive amendments
as well as Canadian substitutes
for hours in advance that's
really to give the analysts time
to review of the bills and
provide that information to the
committee members that we just
want to be respectful of their
time and I think for the most
part as long as we don't have
A large amount of folks wanting
to speak during public comment
we likely won't time it but if
we have a large group of people
that want to state then we will
have time to public comment
addition to that in addition to
that
I like the following function
that we've had in the past so
we'll continue to do that that
way folks will have the
opportunity to
you know virtually raise their
hand if they're in favor or
virtually raise their hand if
they're opposed just like we
went to and committee so we'll
have that function available as
well.
I'm I think otherwise we're just
gonna operate pretty
straightforward and of course it
wouldn't be a complete committee
meeting every Representative Eli
didn't have his hand raised so
I was going to go to questions
and comments from the committee
so I'll go first to
representative Ely and madam
chair I just wanna respectfully
point out that would be
Representative night what you
would expect a question from so
I am yeah I was interested in
who should we contact with
respect to documents that are
not necessarily the bill or
substitute to make sure the
public and committee members
have the documents in advance
I'm thinking of supporting
documents for bill or a bill
that might come up depending on
what what's going to be up
referred to this committee there
may be built we are we need
outside information or at least
I'm gonna wanna provided or
other members who we work with.
Thank you Representative I and I
expect that Representative
Nibert will raise his hand.
Instead of today
yeah so are committee analysts
are Amanda and seven so.
Their emails are and the link.
excuse me in the emails that.
Everyone received with the same
link so if there are handout
if there are amendments all of
that we need to go to the
committee assistance and then
from there the committee
assistance will give it to you
know whether it's the analyst or
they'll ask the chair permission
to have those documents in the
shredder I but everything should
be in the share drive by the
members everything should be on
the website for the public and
I work with polity day to get
the schedule out for Friday I am
hopeful that we can get the
agenda published later today if
not early tomorrow morning so
we're just waiting on the
speaker to.
sign the bills that were pre
filed and then we'll get those
going but for the most part
please work when the committee
assistance and if they're not
the folks that.
Are in charge of doing certain
things then they'll get it to
the folks that are.
Great Representative Chasey.
Thank you
madam chair my question is.
It is as if the members of the
public who wanted to attend
would actually being president
or can be present in the
committee room.
I'm kind of wondering how in
state and out participating and
providing input through still
and this may this may have to
evolve I I I don't quite.
I can't foresee the logistics
myself.
And that so that's sort of part
of the question so here's a
consideration madam chair I did
hear a Senator suggesting in a
conversation with other members
of the house and some other
senators on logistics that.
When.
You have an agenda and.
There are people in the room
want to speak on a certain topic
and we we encounter this in in
this particular committee
because the real for the
audience is fairly small.
And so.
the senator was suggesting that
it be very clear.
What the next item is so that
people can leave the room and
come into the room to reduce the
number of people in the room
waiting for a bill and I'm
necessarily being
too close to others.
So it seems like we have some.
Figuring out to do.
What else to say.
Yes thank you Representative so
it's my understanding that the
committee room which I believe
this three zero five eight will
have a computer I don't know if
it's a laptop I don't know if
it's a desktop but there will be
some kind of computer that will
be set up in the committee room
so that the public can than
participate that way
What we can do is find.
Probably like a small white
board that says what bill we're
hearing and organized folks that
way and and.
Maybe have like when we and our
one way out that committee room
is so small but we can probably
figure that out and we'll
probably have more our test run
on Friday I don't know if a lot
of people will be in the coming
around because folks can really
provide public comment anywhere
but that is an option if people
are in
are at the capitol and want to
do it that way we will have that
situated and ready for them.
Great.
And I think representative Ely
your hand still up from earlier.
Sorry madam chair yes I'm
lowering my hand now thank
right.
Representative Nibert.
I told you madam chair see I
just want to say I'm just
calling on him he has.
Only put by the for a moment
just to get back at you.
Yes you called me L..
I'll have to talk about I have
to talk about this with the vice
chair and we'll get back on I'm
I'm just please of the by the
next year my niece will be fully
recuperated.
How great.
Okay anyone else have any
questions.
Okay I am not seeing any one
with their hand raised and I
just want to thank the members
of the public for joining us
today I think we're gonna have a
very productive thirty day
session it's gonna go by really
really fast but
we are excited to hear from the
public especially when we're
talking about you know bills
that are affecting our
communities and our families so
until Friday we will adjourn and
again I just want to thank
everyone for your time have a
great.
Wednesday.
Take care.
Can get.
