Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
Yes everybody senator Michael
Padilla and all the different
circles.
I'm here with that on the sofa
who's acting General Services
Department secretary before he
was in a joint resolution
fourteen it is a piece of
legislation allows the General
Services Department to transfer
a piece of land from.
To the City of Albuquerque and
exchange would receive a call
for redevelopment agency as.
Equal in value a portion of the
property state really would like
to get a hold of it's right
there for the guys twenty five
and forty the reason this is
important is because of the
state police and five different
locations in around central
Mexico area this is going to get
the right by the all the
facilities proficiency
ease of use the development of
employees to try to get training
so as well really at work they
do Albuquerque is going to be
utilizing the piece that they're
receive for and the secretary
told me this yesterday and.
And secretary want to settle
this ongoing transferred for the
move.
Property as well as the team
will properties ways to the a
economic development
opportunities called the bell
trail addition to the great
thing about the transaction
manager members of the committee
is we have that both pieces of
property assessed right keep in
a couple weeks of each other and
they came in just a smidgen
state are different so it's
right that about state to
receive this land regarding city
both sides and roll the
transaction itself will be
handled by the General Services
Department and so we have to go
through a drug resolution to
maintain our legislative
authority over transaction.
Thank you let's go to the
audience those in support please
raise your hand.
Those in opposition.
To the webcast.
Do we have anyone like me
support of S. T. R. fourteen.
Seeing none committee members
Representative black the madam
chair to the location where do
this second have a second.
Do you have any out.
Seeing now and please share our
present voting in the
affirmative Senator you have to
pass thank.
Right.
Four.
You wanted us cost.
Senator.
I can't I just but thank you.
Yeah well I don't know there's
any office.
Thank you good job yeah.
That is for the right policy.
I will take.
I will make sure expertise back
on okay.
To work.
Okay.
You can't have a.
All.
Senator.
she's.
It.
What.
Okay.
All there.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank.
this is house memorial twenty
eight it is a memorial from our
state legislature to the United
States Congress the ad
supporting admission of
Washington DC And even as state
of the United States of America.
Thank you Representative and
this is something that we
discussed.
Testimony in.
In a previous committee where we
didn't have a quorum to
actually.
This morning.
And we take a look at.
No we didn't have quorum.
This is so we.
Using this before we have seen
this before we've done the
public yes we will not do that
again this morning you have a
different expert witness with
you this morning would you like
to introduce so the yes thank
you very much
if
we call it this is a call you
can see the name better than I
can
senator Paul.
Also drops the Senator manager
portal.
Representative madam chair we
have here is a new as
well as the so the voting
machines that do not fail is a
do not pass fail to tell act
there was do not pass motion and
the failed there was no action
thank you for the correction so
this then that means we have a
quorum.
We must have.
We have a form and then
correct okay I read that over
the phone sorry nope you are
correct I imagine this remember
thank you for that thank you
Representative that so.
What you're asked would like to
leave a comment.
Of.
Yes yes please of the center
would you like to make a brief
comments with this we've already
present this bill at one point
and and so we're just getting
ready for we have a form now.
Thank you very much I do
appreciate you taking this
measure up it is important to
your fellow American citizens
who live in that capital of the
United States to.
Like so many New Mexicans serve
this country in uniform serve
this country in the whole
service but more importantly or
just trying to live their lives
and would like the same rights
and responsibilities and
privileges that a citizen of a
state like New Mexico
I have been at this issue for
many years would be pleased to
answer any question that the
committee would have but thank
you very much we are watching
with interest here in Washington
DC And it just world of us even
have your attention on our
issue.
Thank you Sir thank you
Representative and to clarify.
More time.
House memorial twenty eight.
Which is apparently floating in
the air over this because it has
no completed.
Did.
The.
Do not pass motion that failed
and so it's hanging out there
committee organised close up the
for the.
So what is the will of the
committee back to you madam
chair thank you Russian
Representative right.
Yeah madam chair and
Representative and Senator
Strauss.
Some can you tell us the origin
of Washington DC is one of the
founding fathers made it the way
it is.
Thank you very much
the origin stories.
But if I.
The general emphasis is that
there was a great compromise in
which the north agreed.
the Celtic reducing the north is
revolutionary war debts and the
southerners insisted on having
the nation's capital located in
the south be on the the Mason
Dixon line one of the problems
and frustrations that
The the early.
Mostly Virginians who are in
national government had with the
Congress building located in
Philadelphia was that when they
would bring their insulate
people to Philadelphia the
Commonwealth of Philadelphia
wouldn't necessarily cooperate
with them and returning
those enslave people to them
when they would just skate or
were freed under the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
manumission losses so the
musical Hamilton doesn't quite
do that story justice with.
it was never really explained
why it was important to have the
capital in the south but it does
have to do with the unfortunate
history
one of the things that the
constitution set up with a
federal district under the
exclusive jurisdiction of
Congress and at the time
Washington DC was a sloppy
population with barely enough
people for a congressional
district the site selection was
less depressed left president
Washington personally and it was
thought that
The other two cities that were
in the district of Columbia
Alexandria which resided in
Virginia in Georgetown which is
on the Maryland side each have
their own separate.
Governments the idea was that
there would be a seat of
government not to exceed ten
miles square which was an all
timely way of saying a hundred
square miles which Congress did
exercises booster jurisdiction
over that federal portion and it
was actually Congress that took
away the right of DC residents
to be represented in their
national government not the
constitution from the beginning
of the creation of the country
from seventeen ninety to
eighteen oh one Washington DC
residents were represented in
the national eight.
and the district was paid a
hundred square mile diamond.
In eighteen forty six the
district where strong because
portions of land were richer
ceded to the Commonwealth of
Virginia who was worried that
act as Congress was using its
federal power to abolish the
slave trade in the nation's
capital and so.
The part of the district that
had an active slave trade was
returned to the state.
The rest of the district remain
under federal control what this
bill does is actually shrink the
size of the federal district to
part of Washington DC that is
actually federal right now we
have an area of jurisdiction in
the national capital service
that functions very much the way
the framers intent Congress is
basically the local law
enforcement there there's
federal police federal employees
mow the grass pick up the trash
and provide safety services but
the rest of the district of
Columbia is now a city with a
population that exceeds several
state it functions very much in
a way that Congress never.
Which is over seven hundred
thousand American citizens being
denied the basic rights that the
revolution was fought for it
namely the institution of
taxation without representation
is alive and well despite it
being the tyranny that inspired
a revolution and it is this
basic bifurcation of the
district that will allow the
American citizens in the non
federal questions to join the
union is equal citizens on
footing with the citizens of the
fifty states and allow the
national capital service area
functions of federal district
which Congress very much
intended and so this bill
through simple legislation
achieves both purpose preserving
the framers intent of a federal
district but also admitting
seven hundred thousand US
citizens to full stated in the
U..
Madam chair may I add to this is
not a bill this is a memorial it
is a way for thirty were you
wanting thirty five or more
states to Simone's statement
legislative memorials to our
nation's Congress in support of
go of following what the voters
have already voted on in twenty
sixteen that they want to be
come state.
Madam chair
so of representative and senator
so was the original full Ossipee
that the founding fathers we
need to have a seat of
government that's independent
from a state that if we have it
within the state that that same
benefit immensely by of a fight
having the seat of government in
their state.
Well let me just say that one of
the bill is crafted creates and
maintains a seat of government
that is not in any state the
shrinks the size of the existing
state of government so that your
senators and your members of
Congress aren't wasting the
precious time they should be
spending solving the problems of
the people of New Mexico
intervening in local city
affairs
I think the.
Founding fathers didn't intend
for.
The citizens of the capital area
to be operating at such a
detriment are and so what this
bill does is balance the needs
of an independent federal
district which is reserves with
the ability to take the
surrounding territory and make
it an equal part of the United
States
there was a fear based on a a
Aggressive protest early on in
the Continental Congress well it
was meeting in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania that suggested
that somehow if the United
States wasn't in control of the
federal district it might not be
able to defend itself but of
course history has changed and
that has proven to be a moot
point all of our most sensitive
defence installations the
Pentagon our nuclear missile
sites are located in the fifty
states and in fact it was
residents of the district of
Columbia that had to come to the
aid of the national capital the
last time the Congress found
themselves under attack by a
group of
angry protesters so.
I I think up the the founding
fathers in their infinite wisdom
have given rise to a brilliant
document our constitution that
in our wisdom is that people had
to be amended multiple times
over the years.
The idea that so many Americans
live without fundamental the
quality is an anathema to the
principles of our democracy.
And allowing statehood for the
area surrounding the federal
district would be a way of
solving all of those problems at
the same time federal
representation for the American
citizens who live here self
determination for the part of
the area that's not connected.
In preservation of a federal
district under the exclusive
jurisdiction of Congress.
Madam chair representative and
senator Strauss.
So.
Where did the lowincome.
To make the district of
Columbia.
The original land was ceded by
two new states at the time the
Commonwealth of Virginia seeded
apportioned and the state of
Maryland ceded the remaining
portion of Virginia's land was
retro seated through the same
process by which we intend to
shrink the federal district and
the portion of Maryland
District is is land would be
what ultimately the new status
created out of similar to the
way land has been created out of
other states Maine from
Massachusetts West Virginia from
Virginia and so on.
Madam chair representative and
senator see I think that's one
of the problems if we're going
to change the philosophy.
You know we're not gonna have an
independent location.
Where
you know we couldn't benefit you
know now obviously Congress
appropriates money your district
and takes care of it why don't
you make a of moved to go ahead
and move the winds back to what
they were originally.
If you want to state.
What we want to join the union
as we don't want to join anybody
else's state not only do we not
want to rejoin Maryland Maryland
is kind of made it pretty clear
that we don't want it back
the state of Maryland
legislative line that separates
us from Maryland has existed
since seventeen ninety
far for many years in line that
separates New Mexico from its
neighbors dating back to
nineteen twelve I do want to
correct one thing Congress
doesn't pay for the city in fact
the city actually subsidizes the
national government we are a
donor jurisdiction or contribute
over four billion dollars to the
federal treasury locally raise
money is federal taxpayers
despite not having federal
representation and most
importantly per capita we are
the top tax paying jurisdiction
in the country if you were to
aggregate us in terms of the
federal dollars we contribute
we're number sixteen out of
fifty one and so we are very
much a donor jurisdiction we
subsidize the federal government
the federal government does not
subsidize us in any way and
one of the things that is
unfortunate is that what even
constitutes bad or federal
spending on capital areas
there's no one to really
advocate effectively for the
region so parks like the
national mall and so forth which
so many of your state residents
come here and enjoy visiting
don't get the kind of resources
that they need.
So and and remember we're we're
not changing any philosophy this
is really at its heart a
redistricting bill we are
bifurcating the way the national
capital area to the part that's
exclusively Federal up much in
the way that Vatican City is a
smaller part no longer the
entirety of Rome
this is a a
a function that would certainly
work like that the federal
district would remain federal.
The residential portion would
become the fifty first state.
Madam chair and representative
if you don't mind I I would like
to add to that that it's
it's in the great state of New
Mexico here we have a balanced
budget when we are working with
our state budget but DC is at
the mercy of the federal so if
they are delayed in raising
their ceiling then this the city
itself is delayed in getting
their funding they need to be
able to operate as well and so
they are very much at their own
mercy.
Who are self governed that
state.
Madam chair representative and
senator Senator what who do you
your end because if you're in
the Senate Hootie
Representative.
I represent the registered
voters of the district of
Columbia that have been kind
enough to entrust me with the
responsibility of being there
nonvoting representative to the
U. S. Senate we also have non
voting representation in the
house of representatives as well
and so my role unfortunately is
very limited despite going
through the same process and
procedures in meeting the same
constitutional requirements is a
U. S. senator from the fifty
states when DC residents go to
the polls and vote for me as a
U. S. senator I'm not able to
return the favor and vote for
them when I go to the United
States Senate.
M. Madam chair representative
and senator I think that's the
way the founding fathers wanted
to do have a voice
and so you input but you don't
have a vote that goes back to
the original preface that I was
speaking about they wanted an
independent
location.
I don't know if you have a
response to that.
I think I I do I I first of all
the founding fathers and for the
first part never addressed the
issue of federal representation
in in fact in the early Congress
the fourth Congress for example
the district of Columbia
residents were Representative in
the third district
the member of Congress that
lived physically within the
capital district within the
district of Columbia and he was
a full voting member of the
house of representatives at the
time Washington DC didn't have a
population that qualify it for
its own congressional district
of the federal representation
continued into late you know
what it was only the incumbent
Congress of the United States in
eighteen oh one that voted to
strip us of our federal
representation using the power
that
the constitution gave exclusive
jurisdiction over the federal
district so what Congress took
away in eighteen oh one it can
restore in twenty twenty three
but we're counting on the
support of the good people of
New Mexico to urge Congress to
do the right thing by their
fellow Americans is.
Madam chair of Representative
and Senator
can your essential workers vote
for the president and do you
have a lot for your votes that
go with that but.
well as a technical matter no
American citizen actually vote
for the president they wrote for
members of the electoral
college.
He can vote for members of the
electoral college under the
present scheme DC residents vote
for a number of electors that is
assigned to the least populous
state which is currently Wyoming
so DC residents get three
electors because those are the
number of electors the Wyoming
gets
and we do get to participate in
the electoral college through
the twenty third amount once DC
becomes a state however are
electors would come through the
the process of statehood and the
the national capital area would
no longer have electoral votes
one because it has no residents
to vote for them but the bill
provides for an expedited repeal
of the twenty third about.
Thank you madam chair I think
that's all my questions from
them.
Thank you next to have
Representative on your nor new
and Representative little
mention make a motion to pass
secretary Katie Representative
Chasey.
To
check.
Sorry.
Sorry be late so this was
interesting to me Madam chair
and senator I.
I guess I don't realize I did
not realize that.
In the initially the citizens
were eligible to vote for twelve
years under the constitution
that's that's what the founding
fathers.
Let.
And what led to the change
that's by statute I understand
in eighteen oh one.
Congress at the time decided to
pass an organic Act and
basically substitute itself for
the government of the district
of Columbia and so as the
government of the district of
Columbia for many many years
Congress did a variety of things
that that suited the privileges
of the congresspeople but not
necessarily the district
residents for example Congress
passed a law that says even
today but if your member of
Congress anywhere you park in
the city is automatically a
legal spot
and before I was elected to this
fine office I used to really
resent.
Thank you troops.
So madam chair and senator so I
guess we didn't have any real
original us and eighteen of one.
Thank you madam chair.
Sure.
Chair representative and senator
so.
The people get to vote the power
colleges is not there.
And you don't get a vote.
On the on the house floor RT
service center for.
Is that correct.
That's correct and and I'm like
are nonvoting house delegate I
don't have the same prerogatives
in committees or the speaking
privileges that the nonvoting
delegates from the territories
get in in the U. S. house.
There are.
That's a complicated issue it in
a lot of it has the rules of
each particular body
the in house debating on the
house floor is something that
you get when a controlling
member yells time pursuant to
will just by the rules committee
on legislation.
Are there in the Senate the
right to speak particularly with
our filibuster system in some
ways is considered more of a
valuable right even then voting
and so the idea of the speaking
with non voting Senator debate
and filibuster
would quickly evolve so.
What you you have it right DC
residents select non voting
members of the Senate and house
representatives to the Senate
but none of them can vote on any
of the major legislation and in
particular our judiciary is
federal and so it's the
president that nominates even
our local judges the ones that
would preside over a divorce or
a small claims action and it's
the Senate that has to confirm
them and so that means that
members of the congressional
delegation senators from New
Mexico we're taking time to
interfere in our local issues
often not with great the
expediency on the schedule we
would like and that's made it
difficult for us to deal with
local law enforcement issues and
have control over a third branch
of government the courts because
there exclusively under federal
control and madam chair
representative and senator so on
the seven hundred thousand votes
to choose the two.
said earlier are those the post
code are the state or of those
some of those bones are actually
from somewhere else in the state
some of those voters.
Now all of those people who are
eligible live in the district of
Columbia I don't get all seven
hundred thousand of them the
state in the last few elections
but the.
I've I've I've got enough.
Okay and what does wonders how
many of those were from other
parts of the of the United
States that that might be
resigned earlier now and
everybody who votes in the DEC
election lives in the district
of Columbia at the time they
were voting and we have a a
significant portion I dare say
the majority of folks that are
native Washingtonians they've
lived in this area and have
family that stretches back
generations but we do have a
fair number of of transplants I
came to Washington DC as a young
college student inspired to
learn about their government
and I was stunned to learn that
when I move to study our system
of government by moving to the
capital of our nation I lost the
the fundamental democratic
rights I had if I had chosen to
stay in my native New York so we
would like to rectify that wrong
we are not the people that care
about this country lest we love
it like us so many Americans
from the fifty states the
service we want to contribute
and we would like to be a part
of the national solutions you
know when you have a a part of
our democracy that's not
permitted to participate in that
democracy the entire national
democracy is diminished it would
be easy if you've had the
orchestra and you decided to not
let the violins play you're not
really punishing the string
section what you're diminishing
is the beauty of the music is
all and when Americans are
underrepresented national
government the symphony of our
democracy is diminished as a
whole and by your resolution
you'll be sending a powerful
signal to the rest of the
country and to the Congress that
we want to hear all voices of
Americans because we have too
many problems right now as a
nation not to let everybody
participate in those important
solutions.
And the madam chair and
representative and senator I'm
sure you've counted your votes
in Congress what's what's the
supported Congress from this.
it's it's a little bit fewer
this year than we had in the
last Congress
in the house of representatives
but we we are hoping to add your
voice to ours and continue to
focus on making this a principal
issue and not a partisan one and
madam chair and senator Senator
what is it across the United
States as far state by state.
I would have to
since I'm here as a witness I
would walk my testimony to be
accurate we do know that when
most Americans are holding asked
if residents of the capital city
should have the same rights as
everybody else the answer comes
back with high favorables and it
is only when partisan politics
gets put in the mix that this
issue gets confused.
So madam chair thank you the
journal short and on state by
state.
I don't know that we have the
the votes to pass it in this
session of the house although it
is passed the house twice
already and one of the problems
is that in the United States
Senate even if you have a
majority of senators that are
willing to pass legislation
you need under the current
filibuster rules a super
majority of sixty and in fact if
we want to go back in touch on
that for a minute with the
original intent of the framers
you know when they were writing
the constitution the framers
wait wait in on a variety of
issues what should be a super
majority what should be a simple
which are for example to impeach
the president and and recalling
from office they said H. two
thirds special if you're
The admitting new states however
Congress could have weighed in
with a super majority of what
they decided to set the number
in a separate article on
admission appreciates to a
simple which are so there's a
lot of us that feel the by
requiring a filibuster proof
majority for the admission of
new states you're really
contravening the original intent
of the framers and.
If if you are an originalist
new state should be admitted
with the simple fifty percent
plus one threshold.
Areas thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative thank
you Senator.
Thank you thank you next we have
Representative block thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and Senator so
I'm wondering did does this
require a constitutional
amendment to pass.
Senator.
I'm sorry Senator for rural.
So what is in front of you today
is a memorial it is not a vote
to bring us the.
District of Columbia into
statehood it is a memorial that
we send to Congress as a state
legislature saying that we
believe that they should listen
to their voters who voted eighty
six percent that they wanted to
be a state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'm asking
regarding the federal
legislation with that need to be
like a joint resolution to make
it a constitutional amendment
**** that this piece of
legislation madam chair.
Representative center.
if I may answer the answer to
your question is no the new
Colombia's stated admission Act
is not The Washington DC
admission Act does not require a
constitutional amendment because
what we're doing is not
abolishing a federal district
under federal control we are
redrawing the boundaries of the
federal district to include only
that part of the district that
is expensive the federal a so
what you know if you visited our
fine city there's a pair part of
it that has the national mall
the White House the Smithsonian
museums some national monuments
this area is exclusively federal
there are no active people
living there and less you count
that large very elegant public
housing project which is a a
lovely family from Delaware
staying there now.
the occupants change depending
on who we select so other than
them nobody lives in the federal
district but Congress could
continue to exercise its
exclusive jurisdiction over the
territory over the buildings
over the facilities just in the
way that the framers intended
And we know because the district
was strong once before in
eighteen forty six without a
constitutional amendment and
because the constitution uses
the words not to exceed ten
miles square it's at a maximum
size but not a minimum order so
if you're an advocate of us
smaller government if you're an
advocate of cutting bureaucracy
and cutting red tape this is a
bill for you there is nothing
more conservative in principle
than shrinking the national
presents to only necessary and
allowing the rest of the
jurisdiction to join on equal
footing with the fifty state as
the fifty first state.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I guess that I will I
will have to re read that
portion of our pre constitution
what I'm reading I don't see it
but I appreciate the time madam
chair Representative something.
Hey can it's article of article
one section eight clause
seventy.
Madam okay thank you committee
members we have a motion on the
table what was image that we
have a motion by you pass by
Representative on in our new and
a second by Representative
little.
So please call the roll
Representative on in order yes
Representative well known.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
now.
Representative little yes
Representative Rehm.
notion.
Representative more no.
Madam bye Senator yes.
Madam Johnson yes to do that so
you have a do pass by five to
four.
Thank you thank you very much
next we will hear from
Representative Herndon.
What to think.
Yeah.
Would like to thank you we
appreciate your consideration.
And.
And then a real quickly before
we hear from I Representative
and and after her presentation
I'd like to ask the committee
and staff to stay in the room.
the punishes.
We got hold of the.
Good morning Matt madam chair
members of the committee
Representative.
And I'm here to bring you House
memorial eighty three with me
today is an expert witness's
name is Robert Scott he is if
you can bring for that would be
greatly appreciated.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee the
house memorial eighty three ****
to convene a study to to review
the compensation and speaks
authorize not a statue providing
workers compensation to every
single person in the state and
that's a brief summary and I
stand for any questions madam
chair members of the.
Thank you let's go to the
audience those in support please
raise your hand.
Okay Senator.
Thank you.
Share my rich young general
counsel for New Mexico mutual
we're the largest workers
compensation insurance carrier
in the state and I stand today.
We are grateful to sponsor for
bringing this the workers
compensation act is a delicate
balance our mission is the
quickest the benefits injured
workers controlling costs the
Chinese capital is an important
part.
Insures that the patient
guidelines two thousand four.
and years of.
Very small special.
Thank you.
we all have to work together and
we all have an interest system
and.
And so that's what we're paid
for the sponsor for legislative
catalyst for these discussions
system works better if we both
have good cop in the council
representing workers and for
yourself we stand and support we
look forward to.
In our time and resources to
these efforts months
For.
Thank you.
Chair members of the committee
this is a personal this action
contractors association of.
Association the sensations then
as managing self insured workers
comp Fund and we really want to
thank Representative affirming
involved doctors witness met
with the couple weeks ago the
stock of the memorial has I
hated dropping the more we
really do look forward to
working on a more more data more
conversation about the tables in
the old city to build a good
system some states for thank you
okay comments on the webcast.
In support of.
House memorial eighty three.
Michael Doyle go ahead.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and sponsor for bringing
this forward it's rare that
insurers and workers agree on
workers attorney Representative
solar workers for about sixteen
years.
And it is rare that insurance
companies and workers
compensation attorneys
representing workers agree on
something but this what we saw
on house bill four fifty five is
it made its way through the
legislature is is there are lots
of questions about the necessity
of changes to the schedule and
to raise the issue and I think
that's why this is being brought
forward that it needs to be
studied and look at what changes
need to be done so I agree I
stand in strong support of this
memorial and hope that our
passes thank you all for your
time.
Lisa Curtis go ahead.
Good morning the madam chair and
members of the committee and my
name's Lisa Curtis I'm happy to
be appointed or to know many of
you it trial lawyer in the state
I wanted to stand in support of
this bill and I really are
excuse me this memorial one of
the things is important to us as
lawyers is that young lawyers
have an opportunity to do this
work to help workers out in the
field that are injured and our
young lawyers are coming out of
law school with a hundred
thousand dollars in debt they
they need to be able to make a
living doing this job and and
pay off their student loans and
I think that's one of the ways
that
the fee structure for change can
help
also bring those lawyers into
the fall so I'm I'm glad that
this is forward in being studied
and I I hope that all of you
will support it thank you.
Says do we have any.
Comments in opposition.
And I'm assuming that in the
audience committee members.
Representative no emotion to
affect seconded and motion
question Representative Zamora
and Representative block thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you Representative this bill
forward so is this about Cappy
the P. or being able to take the
cap off and racing fees so that
madam chair members of the
committee thank you very much
this is looking at all of the
that are mentioned in and the
statute regarding workers
compensation because what it
states is that if I'm operating
person to receive a P. R.
payment to be made unless it's
approved under the workers
compensation and so what we're
gonna be doing because it's been
ten years since any of these
have been looked at to determine
what is right and just under the
circumstances now we're ten
years later are we doing things
that are in the best interests
of the people of New Mexico and
madam chair representative so
will this help.
The people that file for some
kind of compensation does this
help the.
The system to pay out lesser
players so madam chair members
of the committee Representative
Zamora what this will do is many
times there are individuals who
are five requests can
compensation claims but they
have extraordinary injuries and
the caps that are in here within
this legislation right now are
in place no matter how difficult
your areas and so what happens
is some people are able to get
the services that they need
because of the caps that are in
place we want to make sure that
everyone has access to justice
and the compensation that they
should have if they are indeed
an entitled to it under the
workers compensation thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative thank you all
right we have a motion on the
table.
