You may have a seat.
The joint session of the house
and Senate will come to order.
Mr chair.
Representative is asking us NMAA
consent that we resolve
ourselves into the committee of
the whole house and Senate for
the purpose of receiving
addresses from the members of
New Mexicos federal delegation
senator Martin Heinrich
Representative today SO Leger
Fernandez Representative Gabe
Vasquez.
If there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Committee of the whole house and
Senate will come to order.
Members in the chamber and those
in the gallery please rise.
Well we give the pledge of
allegiance we led today by
Representative a little.
And the solution Mexico flag to
be led today by Senator yes.
Representative Ortez.
Thank you please join me
everyone I pledge allegiance to
the flag of the United States of
America and to the Republic for
which it stands one nation under
god indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
I salute the flag.
Thank you like to welcome some
of our guests who are here with
us today in this joint session.
Guest of senator Martin Heinrich
as we have Julie Heinrich.
Representative St Joseph's
children's hospital Mr Allen
Sanchez.
New Mexico was for children and
one.
Representative city council
eighteen Carter Bundy.
Looking for for plumbers and
pipefitters coordinate I course.
The National Institute of
flamingo eva and seniors.
Sandia national labs
representative Alex king Donna.
Representative Kamal pueblo
former governor Riley.
The pueblo governor Janelle
Roybal.
In New Mexico while Garrett been
across New.
The New Mexico wildlife
federation Jesse able.
UNM health sciences Dr Lee S.
C..
For New Mexicans against gun
violence Rendova schooling.
Will county sheriff Mr John
Allen.
Guests today of representative
to this alleged for non this is
her brother Mr Martin Leger.
M. CD used CD three your divisor
Council Leila this on a.
Santa Fe police department chief
pol.
Tells we will governor Lujan.
Under the national veterans
healing wellness center colonel
Chuck how.
Jolene Schneider.
The schools represent the
Phillips.
Representative Science Center
the fire department alone Lopez.
Representative Lente council Dr
Jaco Coble Baca.
Neighbors helping neighbors
Representative Jennifer Lopez.
Earning County fire department
Robert to solve this.
Due to some of those.
Wake county economic development
path bendable.
The Paul the council of
governors chairman Mr mark
Mitchell.
And and Linda squire.
From bilingual early childhood
education center hi Tara Hughes.
Michael Joshua Jones.
Yes the representative gave
Boston's former vice chair of
the Democratic Party New Mexico
can't the mid Duffy.
And we have just of
Representative gave us his Mr
Ricardo Campos.
And now.
Share wishes to welcome and
thank our first speaker today.
To the New Mexico legislature
senator Martin Heinrich.
Good afternoon.
You know before I start today
I want to take a minute just to
recognize and to honor the life
of long time educator and state
representative J. Paul Taylor
I will.
For ever look up to J. Paul
Taylor his leadership was
inspiring as was his kindness
and his love of our state and
our culture was really fun
matched his legacy will live on
in every corner of New Mexico.
Lieutenant governor hi moralis
Senate pro tempore a Mimi
Stewart.
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Wirth.
Speaker of the house of
representatives of your Martinez
and distinguished members of
this legislature it is truly an
honor to be here to address you
today and I am especially
grateful that my wife Julie to
join today.
I want to start by thanking you
for your partnership for your
collaboration and for your
leadership.
We have faced extraordinary
challenges over the last two
years and yet we have
accomplished so much together to
directly improve New Mexico's
future.
From passing legislation to
provide paid leave for all
workers to raising teachers
wages to taking on predatory
lenders and building a more
equitable revenue base.
But no decision that has come
out of this legislature will be
more consequential than last
year's passage of house joint
resolution one.
The New Mexicans agreed a
resounding seventy percent of
New Mexicans voted in support of
the early childhood
constitutional amendment.
After more than ten years of
advocacy approval from the
legislature and approval by the
voters there was still one final
hurdle.
Authorization in the US
Congress.
It was such an honor for me to
lead that effort.
With the clock ticking at the
very end of the last Congress we
have one shot to get this done
the omnibus budget bill.
But we face some pretty stubborn
opposition.
So our federal delegation got to
work.
With the support of the
advocates here today we
literally spoke to every single
member of Congress who would
listen and more than a few who
would.
We insisted that Congress honor
the will of New Mexicos voters.
And yet when the final agreement
was reached on the on the bus
our kids are const our
congressional authorization
we're still left out of that
deal.
So we we went all in.
We put our case directly to
national leadership and over
opposition we convince them to
believe in our kids the same way
that we do here.
Because no one leaves New Mexico
new Mexico's kids behind on our
watch.
And because of the tenacity and
dedication of this legislature
and the tremendous coalition of
parents educators and children's
advocates from all across our
great state went all in we
succeeded.
From the New Mexico roundhouse
to the United States capitol are
Norstar must be the future of
New Mexico that we are building
our children.
I want this rising generation of
New Mexicans to receive an
education that gives them a fair
shot at the jobs tomorrow I want
them to be excited about
building a career and a family
right here in New Mexico.
This is on president of
enrollment of opportunity for
our state.
It is also an unprecedented
moment of responsibility for all
of us as elected leaders.
A moment where we must commit
ourselves to building all in for
our kids.
Our collective future.
And to be all in we have to
recognize that is it is only
encouraging in this moment that
stands between the impossible.
The possible.
This is not a moment for half
measures for the way we've
always done thanks.
We have a historic state budget
surplus and billions of dollars
of federal investments heading
to our state from the
infrastructure law the chips and
science act and the inflation
reduction act.
What you do with these resources
during this legislative session
will be measured over the
lifetime of a child not an
election cycle.
That means investing this one
time money in things that will
last.
Several of the bipartisan
proposals before you right now
meet this moment like those to
establish longer term or even
permanent funds to address
critical conservation and water
infrastructure and to invest in
rural health care.
We also need to invest in
staffing up our state agencies
if we are going to take full
advantage of the opportunities
in the funding before us.
From enforcing methane emissions
rules to delivering the eighty
seven million dollars allocated
to New Mexicans for rebates on
zero emission home part
appliances staffing levels at
our state agencies should never
be the limiting factor in
delivering results for our
constituents.
And we need to modernize the
legislature.
To limit the reliance on special
interests and ensure that all
New Mexicans voices can be heard
in this round house.
Going all in also means we must
broaden our base not just in the
revenues that we're taking in
but also in the economic engines
that we grow that we attract and
that we build you're in the
state.
That requires going all in on
our work force.
We must address.
We must address chronic staffing
shortages in health care in
behavioral health child care and
education and then go further.
To create economic stability and
a bright future for our children
we need to uphold the dignity of
work.
That's equal pay that's paid
family leave that's affordable
health care and affordable child
care.
It begins by raising our state's
minimum wage.
In order to prepare New Mexicans
for the good paying jobs of
tomorrow whether at our national
labs order community health care
clinics we must provide quality
technical education and
workforce training and we must
work hand in glove with the
unions that train so many of New
Mexico skilled workers.
We need to align our public
schools are community colleges
and our universities with growth
industries like health care and
bio sciences aerospace and clean
energy where we are already
seeing thousands of new jobs
created since the inflation
reduction act became law in
August.
Going all in requires that we do
more than a daft.
We need to prepare New Mexico to
lead.
And that requires us to take on
the challenges that have been
written off for far too long as
unsolvable.
Those are the challenges the
ones that need our leadership
the most.
Last year after what we saw play
out involved a Texas buffalo New
York.
I sat down with a bipartisan
group of senators small group.
Nearly thirty years have passed
since Congress had taken any
significant action on gun
violence.
In that time the political
divide at only widened.
And very few outside of that
room I believe that we could
possibly find a deal.
But we did.
And the resulting bipartisan
safer communities act though
wasn't perfect and none of us
thought it was.
We knew we had a choice.
We could take the risk of
accepting progress over
perfection.
We can go all in and make the
impossible possible.
Save lives or not.
We went all in.
We did the hard thing.
And this legislative session I
am pouring all of you to do the
same.
You have an abundance of local
initiatives to turn to for ideas
and solutions to some of our
state's most pressing
challenges.
In the public safety space alone
I've been proud to send federal
investments to some of these
innovative programs a rapid DNA
machine for the Dona ana county
sheriff's office.
To expand the gunshot detection
system for the Albuquerque
police department for.
To finance trauma informed first
responders at Albuquerque
community safety department and
the Los crucis fire departments
project light.
We need to take many of these
ideas statewide and to work
together to develop more
capacity thank you munity is all
across the state through a
combination of local state and
federal investments.
The Albuquerque gateway center
is a good example of what shared
investments from city and state
and congressional delegation to
me.
The gateway center will provide
everything from emergency
housing to sober and Services to
violence intervention.
If we can scale this type of
life saving work across our
state we can make sure that all
New Mexicans who need help can
actually get.
New Mexico has all the tools all
the resources the amazing
families and communities that we
need to deliver a brighter
future for everyone.
And if we commit to going all in
and building a stronger
foundation for kids we can build
a New Mexico that they will be
proud to call home.
Home where they can start their
careers and raise our kids.
We have a once in A. generation
opportunity to shift from
surviving to thriving as a state
and as a community.
We cannot let a scarcity
mentality or incremental
approach dictate our policy
choices in this pivotal moment.
We must be creative.
We must be bold we must be brave
we must be all in.
Thank you.
Thank you senator.
The chair now recognizes today
second speaker Representative
Dennis a Leger Fernandez of the
third congressional district of
the great state of New Mexico
welcome.
Ben the stillness Inverness
database go what's done hello
and good afternoon
Thank you so much lieutenant
governor for presiding over this
and thank you speaker Martinez
for the invitation and to our
senators our leadership all
gathering with us here today you
know I'm I'm kind of really
excited because this is the
third time the third year
they've actually been serving in
conquest for you have gathered
my first time coming up we could
do is pretty darn excited me and
again we are first timers so
we're taking a lot of lessons
from our amazing senator Martin
Heinrich who has been such a
gift to the state and to me as
he has taught me so many lessons
and Representative again I ask
as is vowing everybody in
inspiring them in the little
time that.
The wonderful blessings of being
able to serve the third
congressional district for two
more years and I'm going to try
to make the most of it up
because we have so much that we
need to do as you know I'm a
seventeenth generation new
Mexican between them a little
bit of everything that makes New
Mexico amazing and beautiful I
understand what it's like to
grow up in rural communities W.
and a second commission only
also to bring community
development for places that
sometimes get left behind and I
take the blessings history and.
With them of sixteen problems
the Apache nation the Navajo
Nation ranchers farmers
entrepreneurs and inventive
scientists with me to the
people's house in DC in Congress
I tell our stories of sometimes
deep pain and often times great
opportunity I'm grateful to you
all to the leaders legislators
and heroes here today who love
New Mexico and who dedicate
yourself to our beautiful state
we are a small state but we can
do big things joining me today
as you heard for the educators
law enforcement firefighters
dairy farmers land grants tribal
leaders neighbors helping
neighbors Veterans youth leaders
and my dear at a mono blasting
so I want to thank them again
for driving from all across New
Mexico.
Ways
to hear.
Our greatest accomplishments
just as the senator pointed out
our greatest accomplishments
happens when every level of
government federal state tribal
local work together with the
private sector on behalf of an
always on behalf of our beloved
communities if that happens the
challenges we face today only
present us with opportunities
for tomorrow because of what we
have done what we have done
together the last two years I am
full of hope.
Together we lived through those
dark times when we face the
COVID nineteen pandemic the
pandemic killed our loved ones
shut down our businesses
impacted our schools involved as
of the most precious thing that
we can give to anyone our time
together we were on the edge of
economic disaster when I joined
Congress two years ago I'm just
my third day on the job I lived
through an insurrection which
threatened Our Democracy.
That's not the important part of
our story is it important part
of our story is what we did in
response to that crisis.
What we did the first thing we
did a lot the first thing we did
was that American rescue I talk
a little bit about that because
I have been able to write the
American rescue pan with the
historic legislation which saved
the economy from collapsing
address the pandemic had on
expanded the child tax credit
for working families and
invested and small businesses
struggling to stay afloat in my
district alone we spent we sent
twenty four million dollars my
district to phone this model
district when I have not like
the smaller district twenty four
million dollars to restaurant
every time I always shop local
you'll never see a Starbucks in
my hand for the bodies of our
local businesses much mocked
Federal not days right and every
place I went I would ask did you
get the PPP actually I knew
right but did you get it what
did of me and whether I was in
Farmington and Aztec or in
Espanola you know over in Clovis
he said was the lifeline we
would not be here today and our
employees would not be with us
if we haven't done that.
So what are we without those
small businesses we are not
community so I am so proud of
what we did there
The American rescue plan
provided significant money we
also delivered money's speak to
our title one schools I Collett
of bill and because of that
effort with.
Hi this is so new don't
understand like the spurs spurs
okay I got it all use this thank
you so much for a.
Hello.
Thank you so very.
So what we're talking about
we're talking about one and a
low unemployment rate jobs like
right so but dominate because we
need to stay on the job and
finish the job right up because
we need to bring down the cost
there are hard working families
face and expand our economic
base as the senator pointed out
to many places up but we didn't
just respond to that crisis by
we recognize that for
generations we have failed to
invest in our infrastructure if
we fail to invest in our
infrastructure we can not have
communities and businesses and
thrive not just survive we want
to thrive as well as the senator
said but to many places didn't
have running water children
can't find on the bus to school
in my district because the
bridges on state broadband we
all know that we're not
connected in response to these
problems we passed the
bipartisan infrastructure law to
make historic investment in our
roads airports tribes and public
transit I also want to point out
that we saw in the American west
you plan to send money I got a
little confused by want to point
out because we sent money to
tile street area to boardwalk to
assist read.
Education on indigenous
languages because of the fact
that we had lost so many elders
we knew that we needed to
reinvest and provide additional
resources to the tribal
languages and I am proud that we
lead that in education and and
labor so New Mexico is getting a
lot of money and formula funding
right.
Funding is already going to work
rate it's going we've got a
hundred million dollars for
broadband we got money for roads
we got money for the efforts we
guess I the biggest amount of
money is an informal of funding
it's in competitive grants and
we need to go after those
requests we need to win those
requests because other states
are doing it and if we don't do
what we're going to lose out in
fact New Mexico we see use fewer
federal grants than other
states.
This legislature can change that
right and I've talked to many of
you about that about the fact
that our nonprofits in our
smaller government and are
smaller organizations don't have
the resources to fight those
requests to manage those grants
to provide the delegation The
New Mexico delegations like we
walk and come with an Italian
Regis to bright stuff together
we actually pay a grand finder
Lisa can find federal grant and
that haystack of federal monies
available but we cannot find
that grant nor could we provide
matching funds but you can.
You can set aside the money to
help with those matching funds
you can support Representative
at I. than others in this house
House Bill three eleven Richard
part about one point four
million dollars to have helped
the costs right those requests
don't we want to do that what
what I would say let's do that
let's do that.
Thank you things were things of
you I would ask that you
increase that amount that you
increase that amount when you
think of all of the subdivisions
yes yes the land grants the
small communities the mutual
domestics we need to make sure
that they have those resources
because for every dollar we
spend at the state it's going to
come back to you a thousand full
there's a lot of federal money
we can not let a single dime of
it stay in DC when it could go
into our pipes and our broadband
and our fiber optics so please
support that effort I would also
encourage you to put more money
into the Indian Affairs
Department because the costs
operate separately from the
tribes and they also need help
and the federal opportunities
are everywhere you know we have
the opportunity now to
potentially send community
projects back home in my first
two years in Congress I brought
home nearly a hundred million
dollars for community projects
these projects will help the
water flow and kids learn
they'll create homeownership
brochures they'll improve one of
our biggest gorgeous which is
our lack of good behavioral
health you know my story you
know my by the story we lost two
brothers
two brothers to mental health
conditions and suicide and
addiction this state does not
prioritize that like it must and
so I'm very grateful to the
bipartisan safer communities
that because that will put
significant funds not just into
addressing the scourge of gun
violence our inability to date
to address our lack of
behavioral health services so
once again we're gonna be trying
to make sure we bring that money
home I took as my guest to the
state of the union.
I'm Terry Lee Cartier from the
vase well casa.
You know that cost those are
some of the most heartbreaking
work if you are working with the
children were being abused for
bring traffic we're suffering
who are most at risk and
vulnerable we have an amazing
asset down in Roswell I wanted
to learn about the federal
opportunities more importantly I
wanted at the national level for
people to learn for created for
for doing in New Mexico New
Mexico is doing amazing work.
So you know that I also carry
the stories of loss and anger
with me to Congress and the
White House.
Following.
The fires in San Miguel mata
Colfax towns counties.
Everybody.
Could make a difference.
Everybody I knew on the floor of
the house heard those stories.
And they delivered.
They delivered in the house and
the Senate and the White House
they delivered Justice they
deliver justice in the name of
three point nine five billion
dollars three point nine five
billion dollars.
And the permits are insistent
that.
Thank you.
Senator Heinrich then Senator
Lujan for their amazing working
getting that out of the Senate
we passed it three times in the
house so we knew we had it there
but this this is its own very no
very amazing powerful.
But the that it right they got
it they work together and we got
it but I want to I want to thank
the senators who've already
passed a hundred million dollars
to provide some advance loan for
that thank you very much.
The creatively what the Phoenix
rising from those ashes could
look like when the federal
compensation starts flowing
later this spring and summer
what can we do to assist the
community to build back using
the latest technology for fire
proof homes with the latest in
energy efficiency and generation
what kind of local businesses
can we can emerge as we wait for
the forests to regrow New Mexico
has agencies and expertise and
small business for tree and
innovation that could help that
being expressed its wings I'd
encourage funding of an economic
Senator have died that
rebuilding help guide those
small businesses so that money
stays in our communities and
definitely.
I want to talk a little bit
about service.
Service would you all do service
is fundamentally an act of love
when you come here today and you
are coming as volunteers you are
telling your constituents in
this state that you truly love
them it is the end of love
service.
We also have our military
members who find that act of
love and demonstrate that love
for country tomorrow me and my
team will deliver a thousand
valentines that school children
made and colored red hugs to
around for our veterans but we
must not only thank our veterans
we must honor them with actions
the policy and budget decisions
I make in DC are meant to honor
that service I voted for the
pact Act which we know helps
veterans exposed to burn pits
and substance and other toxic
substance and American rescue
plan we recognized the service
our veterans and delivered
seventy billion in support to
veterans that pop that the
senator Senator Lujan we went to
every single one of those world
clinic that they intended to
close down we listen to their
stories we got the bosses that
are spread that honest and we
kept them open that is low.
We also secured huge wins for
New Mexico on the planet when we
pass inflation reduction act to
lower yeah we love their
information direction at a lower
health care costs for seniors
fight climate change and create
a fairer tax system I think
everybody should pay their fair
share but we know that health
includes the world around us the
places we live our lives and
raise our families New Mexico
has the second highest potential
for solar generated electrical
diction Power intend for wind no
one understands that better than
you you have been passing
forward thinking bills for while
on the subject and I just
encourage you to keep doing that
to pass those funds to provided
so that there is money to braid
with the federal funds so that
we have we knew of the Energy
threw out in every part of the
state let's braid those
resources together and as we
adopt to this changing climate
the building inflation reduction
act also allocated four billion
dollars for drought mitigation
here and the rest are ranchers
need it for and I drive we have
a dairy farm is here I drive to
the eastern part of our state
there is a line for the state
did not get the monsoons we need
to be able to help them and what
we're going to be doing also
this year which is key and we're
gonna have a hopefully here and
wrote for a lot of pressure on
Representative day Bosque is
because we're gonna pass the
USDA we're going to pass the
farm bill to pass the farm bill
and it's going to be a part and
get the part is going to bring
significant resources in the way
we craft that farm bill it can
either be sort of more of what
we already have in this a lot of
good stuff already there but we
need to be able to regional lies
our food source we need to be
able to set it up so there are
ranchers don't need to take
their cattle across to Oklahoma
and Texas so that they can and
when they do that right this
selling them to monopolistic of
slaughterhouses.
When all the hard work but these
big slaughter horses are making
record profits on the back of
our ranchers and our hard
working families who cannot
afford to buy that meet and put
him in the and there.
In Chile's doing their job as
vice so we need to change that
and we can do that we can create
regional based of sustainable
agriculture that help solve some
of our issues of on the climate
crisis agriculture it's part of
the solution not the problem to
our provide prices.
I also want to talk about the
chips in science act the chips
in science act that we passed
will invest in next generation
science and create more advanced
into chips in America like those
made right here and you'd on
show we need to manufacture what
we need in America here in New
Mexico Colorado right let's do
that what do you think I think
if we actually rent after in the
chips of Science act there are
innovation hubs the only a
certain amount of innovation
hubs New Mexico is the perfect
place for an innovation hub
because we are a place where
there has been an needs to be
transition like we're seeing up
in San Juan by but with the
closing of the of the power
plants there we have minority
serving institutions we have
technology we have our labs we
have our colleges we need to go
after and create an enchanted
innovation how really help us do
that and and chanted innovation
hope for New Mexico.
So we know small places can do
big things.
And I am so glad to be here in
this beautiful capital with you
to recommit myself and our I
know all our delegation we are
just the best of that I just
love our delegation have I said
that already right there really
wonderful
because you know we need to do
what we can so that we can
continue to grow.
You know I often talk about
my twenty nine eleven Jeremiah
twenty nine eleven says that
god's plan for us is not to
suffer would prosper.
I hope in future.
What
legislators whether it be here
in DC is to help complex that
plan of course parity hope in
the future let's do it we need
to address.
Thank you Representative this.
And now the chair recognizes
today's third and final speaker.
Congressman Gary bosses of the
second because congressional
district in the great state of
New Mexico welcome home is.
What is not assisting on all
right.
Well what is that is the New
Mexico they tell negative two
guests in two minutes to speak
and so I guess that's what
happens when your freshman.
Next thing you know they're
gonna be make me sing a song
before introduce my first bill.
it no but when I started this
you know my name is Gail baskets
and I'm so proud to be able to
represent us when we are present
that it's that when the state
The New Mexico as your newest
member of Congress of.
I can't tell you what what an
honor it is to be walking
through those halls in the
chambers of the house in
Washington and thinking about
the owns the story of my
grandfather have yet doctor
meadows who started out as a run
gentle as a rancher and who
should be the second thank us
later on became a mail man and
then became a TV repair shop
then and all ten of his kids and
later his grandkids including
myself that learn how to fix
those TV's and part of my job
was to sell those TV's on the
curve in the Chevy of shelf
waters and for my family and my
grandmother for her and for the
first time she's ever anywhere
besides apostle Texas in this
country to be able to be in
those house chambers with me and
know that New Mexico provided me
this opportunity means the world
to me and to my family and I
know that you share those
stories with your consent.
And so it's not lost on me that
this is where a lot of the work
in New Mexico get stuck because
one of the the realities of
being in Congress in a minority
is that we have a lot of work to
do and we can certainly do a lot
of good and that is what I
intend to do but this is where
the important ideas that we can
carry to Congress or that are
being discussed in our building
legislator being proposed really
affect the state of New Mexico
this place that we all love and
those responsibilities that we
all carry as legislators are so
important and more important
than ever.
New Mexico has always faced many
obstacles in the challenges
today that we must overcome are
more important than ever in my
lifetime.
Our strength and our resilience
have always proved stronger.
Where there's a challenge to
overcome there are many
communities willing to work
together across the state to
fix.
That's why I commend the
legislature for supporting a
modernized legislative body.
One that operates more
efficiently govern for greater
clarity and purpose and allows
anyone in the state to raise
their hand and to serve
regardless of their income for
their background.
And we've heard from many
communities across the state as
well that they would like more
time to me and they would like
to operate more efficiently and
with greater independence and
that's why I believe that giving
communities of local energy
choice something that should be
support.
Allowing local governments to
purchase and to generate and
price electricity is a step in
the right direction to help
lower energy costs and encourage
more aggressive for renewable
energy development.
Without question the fossil fuel
industry has been key to our
economy and America's energy
independence but we must also be
good stewards of our environment
and our public lands.
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
has led the country in
tightening the state's methane
emissions standards to protect
our air land water and the
health of our frontline
communities.
What we can do more.
We can support our oil and gas
workers.
Across the state and
particularly in my district the
communities that depend on them
and small producers while also
holding big polluters
accountable.
That will be the cornerstone of
my working Congress.
I believe in taking a two track
approach to energy independence
supporting the workers in our
energy economy but also speeding
up our capacity to generate
renewable energy in the jobs
that come with a pathway to
healthier and safer communities
was also include commonsense gun
safety laws that help protect
our youth and the lives of too
many New Mexicans who have been
unfairly impacted by gun
violence in our streets our
homes and our schools.
As a hunter as a responsible gun
owner myself I support common
sense reforms that make our
community safer and that keep
high powered weapons out of the
hands of those who seek to do us
harm thank you all for the work
that you're doing on that this
year thank.
Or schools in New Mexico should
be a safe haven for children a
place where they can learn where
they can thrive and build the
foundation for happy healthy and
long lives that's why I also
support the governor's plan to
make sure that our teachers are
among the best paid in the
nation and don't have to contend
with the rising cost of health
care to make a decent living in
the state.
When we treat each when we when
we treat our teachers well our
students and our families
benefit.
Not just recently in New Mexico
and Texas reach an agreement
tentative agreement to manage
water delivery from the Rio
Grande coming to terms on a
decade long battle for water in
the south there's nothing more
important and more precious and
more necessary for us to deliver
the future that we all want for
our children to to have the
water that we need our most
important resource of all so as
they say I was the the and
that's why intend to help ensure
that our future generations do
not suffer from the consequences
of the choices that we are
making today we must bring Texas
V. New Mexico to a close we must
protect our water resources and
budget at all costs and I
commend the legislators and our
ministration for working towards
that solution.
No water just this can only
happen if we honor the
traditions and the culture and
livelihood of all of our
communities and that must
include all of our sovereign
nations we must continue to
support our pueblos and our
tribes to ensure that they have
autonomy over their water
resources and their natural
resources partnering with our
tribes will be another
cornerstone of my time serving
in Congress and I think all of
the advocates all of our
legislators and this
administration for honoring that
government to government
relationship and working
honestly fairly and equitably to
support the success of Indian
country in New Mexico.
Well being good stewards of our
water is incredibly important so
too is being good stewards of
our wildlife our public lands
and our national force and I
commend this administration and
this legislative body for acting
decisively to manage the impacts
of the forest fires that have
ravaged our rural communities in
the north and the south thank
you for bringing relief to those
who have lost so much I will
also join you wrong along with
my colleagues in that work in
Washington my goal in serving
you in Congress is to bring what
we what what we need most of all
good paying jobs in New Mexico
and to all of our communities to
ensure that every family has the
opportunity to achieve its full
potential and to achieve the
dreams that we have now I'm
happy to say that I am on the
most lucky members of Congress
across the country and that is
because I get to serve with
tremendous colleagues like
representative Stansbury Leger
Fernandez and senators Martin
Heinrich and Ben ray Lujan thank
you for your vital.
You may have heard or seen or
state of watching really late on
C. span but Congress is a bit
dysfunction and I can tell you
that I am seeing it firsthand
but we can still make progress
now that's why I chose to serve
my district on the agriculture
and on the armed services
committees.
This year and next I plan to
make a significant impact on the
farm bill and the defense bill
for New Mexico even while
serving in the minority my first
month serving here in New Mexico
I focused on building
relationships and crafting
policies that will help our
farmers and farm workers and our
dairy and livestock producers to
ensure that those who put food
on our table have a secure
future in New Mexico in the farm
bill we must defend against the
cuts to food assistance programs
that feed our families we must
promote good policy that rewards
sustainable agricultural
practices conserve water
resources and develop the
opportunities for farmers from
the south valley all the way
down to the hatch valley.
The New Mexico is also home to
some of our nation's premier
military and research facilities
federal workplaces that provide
jobs for our students for
engineers for our future
scientists for small businesses
and our service men and women
that's why as the only member of
Congress on arms services
committee in New Mexico our work
to protect the government's
investments that create these
good paying jobs in the military
and research from Albuquerque
down to Alamogordo.
No more importantly I'm serving
you in Washington to bring New
Mexico's values to our nation's
capital you may have seen that's
why brought mariachi but for
medical putting of my office on
the first date I that I was
there because I wanted folks to
know that I was going to bring
New Mexico TDC not DC to New
Mexico right.
And so I am continuously
inspired by your work to move
our communities forward to
secure a better future for all
New Mexicans and for your get
NCO of the special place that we
call home.
I'm humbled to serve amongst
leaders in the state that have
inspired me.
Folks like lieutenant governor
Howie Morales folks like speaker
have yet Martinez that for me
made me believe that I could
serve to thank.
Things were Senate and house
leadership thank you for
supporting good legislation
moving along this process and
what is I I know it's a very
difficult legislative session
because we end up running out of
time and and important things
that we must discuss but I hope
that with modernizing the state
legislature we can get to the
place that we need to get to
make sure that everybody's voice
in New Mexico has heard that's
my Republican colleagues I hope
that we are able to continuously
work together well I serve you
and your communities in Congress
and serve the state but because
because it is incredibly
important for me to also hear
from you and to work with you
directly because we're all in
this for the same reason so I'm
honored and humbled to serve as
your representative for district
two I thank you for your support
and your partnership who does
almost a bonus Act which is last
year thank you.
Thank you.
Boston's.
Thank all of our delegation for
doing in the city.
We appreciate you join a
sentence in New Mexico
Representative the work that you
do for all of us on behalf of
the Mexico state legislature and
the people of the state of New
Mexico thank you.
Mr chair chair recognizes
Representative Chasey Mister
chair I ask unanimous consent.
The whole house and Senate
rising report progress the joint
session of the house and Senate
will come to order.
Mr chair Representative Chasey I
ask unanimous consent that the
joint session of the house and
Senate being out of San if there
is no objection the joint
session of the house and the
Senate has now been resolved.
Thank you.
