First at Sir please feel free to
stand up and and give us your
give us your support there
should be a microphone is that
there is not always have to walk
closer to this.
It is.
You reach very set.
To go to a war.
When you needed to help of the
United States of America.
And that's what I do most of the
soldiers.
With no links one link what are.
And there are out there.
Survive but we still cry.
Data and are suffering with
these PTSD prop.
We need to recognize.
Everyone of.
Or anybody.
There are the heroes that
supporting.
The whole United States of
America.
Veterans being of the re.
Is the number one issue not a
state.
To see.
Stop.
In nineteen sixty two when
president Kennedy got shot.
The mall for years we're going
to take over.
Body was libertarians all
nations that should know.
We lever right.
And if you don't like the issue
not a state issue go back to
where you for.
Well it's not not.
We do is.
Recognition.
For all the soldiers the overall
PED.
Not much so.
Thank you very much
Representative it may need to go
out help you earn the power of
what you are all suction she to
all people.
To all people.
Thank you thank you commander.
Madam chair with for the record
could you please give us your
name.
My name is level you know J.
Cole above side and from sent to
do being compatible.
In two thousand two of two
thirty five years of sulfur.
Out into.
Rural.
Rio Grande the river data and
that almost called and when I
came back from the.
I didn't know what what school
would always be for thirty five
years to help two dollars.
They took him two and a half
months to give me a hundred
percent service connected
straight up PTSD that's how that
all works.
To
That I help for twenty years.
Hundred thirty six up to blow to
help hundred percent.
That's what I do promote.
The commander for the national
American Indian veterans.
Solved within reach.
Some of wells the representative
office Moul hopped area of the
body to all foreclosures and.
And yet.
What kind of us us thank you for
your service and thank you for
your testimony.
We'll go to the soon to see if
anyone would like to speak in
support of this bill if you are
in support you can raise your
hand.
Committee of Mr moody.
Go ahead please.
What we're getting closer.
You can.
We're having some technical
difficulties.
Give a second.
We're not sure
Yes ma'am I believe on you know
thank thank you Mr you go ahead.
The morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Richard moody I'm a member of
the New Mexico veterans and
military families caucus Senate
bill three oh seven would give
greater visibility to New
Mexico's veterans long history
of service to our country from
the civil war until today New
Mexicos veterans from war to an
increase in more rural older
their stories the document
before they're gone.
New Mexico S. thousands of
Vietnam War veterans whose
service needs to be recognized
and recorded scary as well the
other veterans who have served
our country and our state of the
veterans caucus recommends
passage of this legislation
thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr midi as there
anyone on the zoom who is in
opposition to this bill.
I don't see any so now we're
gonna turn to the the committee
any questions guidance
Representative Sweetser thank
you madam chair I just want to
thank our veterans that are here
for everything you've done
you hear this all the time but
if I don't hear it enough just
thank you for your service at
two uncles that were in Vietnam
as well and then
Took a lot out of them so thank
you for everything my good
friend Rep Harry Garcia.
Just you guys sacrificed a lot
thank you.
Representative minimum wage.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
bringing this because of my
father it was is a Korean War
veteran and he and I love to sit
and listen to his stories he was
a character so he has a lot of
very funny ones but but but I
also my uncle was
Vietnam veteran and so is my
brother in law so and I and I
know the struggles that they go
through so my heart goes out to
you and I give so much honor to
you Sir because of of the
sacrifice that you made for our
country so I love this idea and
you have my full support thank
you for for bringing this.
Representative Mason.
Yes madam chair.
Representative I too would like
to thank you all for.
Earning this to the forefront
and kill the.
The world.
We've lost you know we've
already lost nearly all of our
World War prove that's.
And of course we got a lot of
documentation on those but we
needed on all of our veterans
for all the wars brush with that
now more I'm not a veteran but I
have lots of friends that fought
in that war.
And
you know if it's the war that
everybody came home and nobody
liked.
You know when the state is
really hard on that and the we
appreciate this and hopefully we
bring them to the forefront and
and.
Bill why with some wrongs that
we've done to some of our
veterans but appreciate it you
have my support.
Thank you.
Representative of.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you very very much
Representative for bringing this
legislation Sir thank you your
passionate I I hear your your
testimony is very passionate and
I and I appreciate also the
Committee from Mr from the
gentleman's Colossus.
I'm a fuel record that's really
what I do for a living and so
I'm very privileged all my life
as a starting at a fifteen year
old boy working at a funeral
home and working with and and
serving the families of four one
or two Korean but Thanh Vietnam
Iraq it's a truck
all we need to present it.
Veterans throughout my community
because we have for more
national cemetery in my
community and we have a big big
On backroom
residents in our area.
My grandfather was war war to
Purple Heart my father was in
Vietnam served three tours and
my daughter who's in the Air
Force currently in Japan so I
understand what you guys are
going through my father barely
just just a about six months ago
shared his first time the story
about some of the is his
experiences of Vietnam so I
understand he's been holding
that for years and years and
years and he was he was there
when one of the big conflicts
for started.
It's that
The the the seat that I hold
to date was held by the late
representative Tom Foley was
also Bataan March a survivor so
I think these stories are very
very important
I've been privileged to stay
listening to some of the stories
first hand not not not just from
their families but from some of
these veterans when they come in
pre arrange our services and we
have these nice conversations
those stories need to be
recorded the need to be re
number the the service that you
have given to all of us that we
appreciate today that we are
exercising one of them right now
are because of the men and women
who have sacrificed everything
for us including their families
so may god bless you I'm very
much in support of this is
wonderful thank you thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative assess up before
we go to a vote I also want to
add to my
to the list of of folks giving
gratitude for thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward the stories need to
be told we all have our stories
my uncle served in Vietnam my
great uncles and create great
great uncle two great great
uncles in World War two it is
our history and our history must
be shared so that we can learn
from it and I'm grateful that
you brought this and I I wish
you luck and now I will
entertain a motion to
do pass on house bill a second.
Second we have and motion and
the a second let's take the
role.
Representative Mason yes.
Representative meraviglia yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Terrazas is.
And chair or has yes.
Congratulations you have a
unanimous do pass on house bill
three oh seven thank you thank
you very much indeed thank you
for the accommodation
Representative Sanchez and.
Representative Sweetser let's
take a second thank you very
much.
Yes this is you're gonna have to
chair.
You're the you're the ranking
member.
We're gonna take agree we need
we need imminent return this
microphone off.
Chair.
I didn't realize that either.
He's recognized.
Okay I'm gonna get through this
part Representative Sweetser
will you please let us know what
your bill does thank you madam
chair thank you committee.
So House Bill does house bill
two six dozens of it amends the
rural telecommunication Act of
New Mexico
the bill also provides for the
use of state rural universal
fund for a consumer broadband
only loops this allows small
rural carriers to offer
broadband and the customer not
have to maintain a dial tone
phone as well.
I think
for me the reason I agree to the
to sponsor this does because for
you guys the live in rural areas
and I don't know if it's
everywhere you have to get a
phone line when you get
broadband.
And this bill would allow for
that not to be a requirement for
people to get access to this
fund and
I do have an amendment for the
amendment does is it caps the
total number of access lines
that are able to receive the
excess reduction support to
current level used by the fund
administrator through
December thirty first twenty
twenty one is that the right
these okay if approved this
means that there will be no
increase in the excess reduction
support payments with this
legislation.
Also I would madam chair who's
the chair now Madam chair.
So that's that's a little bit
about the bill before I ask my
expert witnesses to our talk a
little more as with this the
committee would consider the
amendment.
Four
to six.
Any discussion.
Thank you Mr secretary of
Representative.
And no discussion
I mean it's moved and madam
chair the amendment members
point two two four six seven
eight point one just for the
record
Also the other thing I'd like to
mention is there's a Senate bill
that the companion to this and I
know there's
Some people that have concerns
but the Senate sponsor has
agreed to to work with those
people Hon future amendment but
for now
I I am I'm in the same position
but we you know how these things
go we gotta get it moving
because we it's a long process
but that my experts speak now.
Chair members of the committee.
J. son Taos registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico exchange
carrier group.
House Bill two oh six is a rural
telecom fund for broadband.
Of the.
The amendment that you approved
of addresses some of the
concerns on the FY are about
increasing the amount of support
so so that that amendment will
will cap the the support so this
bill amends the rural
telecommunication act New Mexico
to provide for a definition of
access line of.
Currently the the act does not
have a definition however in in
rural P. Garcia made a ruling
and defined it as of the phone
line dial tone for line only.
So
It amended section K. of the
state rural universal service
fund authorizes access reduction
support payments of the fund to
incumbent local exchange
carriers that the and it defines
it access line to include a
consumer broadband only line
when a regulated traditional
phone services not used up like
like Representative sentences of
the small carriers in order to
continue to get their their
Harris support through the
frontier the are required the
customer is required to have a
phone line if they do not have a
phone line the the provider
loses their support so with this
bill the those customer will
we'll save about thirty dollars
a month on the phone line no
having to pay for a phone line
and they also of.
The the provider does not lose
their support and and this the.
Well this are you just a fund
years payments and broadband
grants alone Siebel be counted
as access line would not reduce
the broadband grant side of the
frontier but just maintain the
current support that the ilex
receive the the ilex are the
incumbent local exchange
carriers a small carriers.
There is funding for the
customers access line would
simply extend broadband service
without the need for voice
service as the customers are now
demanding through the the
pandemic it became more evident
that people needed and a higher
speeds for broadband and in
order to get that they were
asking our custom are are a
couple companies to provide that
for a of tell education
telehealth and and working at
home of which became really
evident during the pandemic.
So the state rural universal
service fund is funded by a
surcharge on all phones
including dial tone that include
dial tone wireless and voice
over internet protocol and the
current surcharges ninety seven
cents per month of on
approximately two point four
million phone lines and that's
how you get the thirty million
dollars in the fund.
So seem to want to not be
currently at assessed a
surcharge due to a federal
mandate that does not allow the
charges on broadband the FCC
does not allow you to put a
surcharge on broadband.
No section M. of the ruler you
really reversal service fund is
another section the demands The
the section to create a more
predictable and streamlined
process for any eligible terror
telecommunication carrier that
seeking need board need based
support from the fund it's just
a it takes a long time to
request and then then they may
not.
Offer it of this bill half of
changes from may two thousand
shell where the PRC will address
it and
Both I'll turn my turn it over
to the taken.
The morning madam chair members
the committee I'm a take us on
the on just the executive
director for the New Mexico
exchange Kerry group and I'm
also a registered lobbyist I'd
like to thank you for the
opportunity to present to this
morning.
The New Mexico exchange Kerry
group is a telecommunications
internet broadband association
comprised of ten Raul incumbent
local exchange carrier
companies.
We provide service in the most
rural areas of the state.
The make up of the company's
include six member owned
companies and I commercial
companies and they are Baca
valley telephone company into
moins dell telephone company in
del city plateau cooperative in
Clovis legal rural telephone
company.
In Hobbs picking us go belly
telephone company cooperative in
Artesia Tularosa basin telephone
company and Tularosa valley
telephone company in Wilcox
western New Mexico telephone
company and so for city and
Windstream telecommunications
company in little rock and yet
the telephone cooperative
located import talus so I wanted
to introduce our member
companies to you to bring your
attention to the fast area of
the state that we cover in the
rural areas.
The NMAA CG of course stands in
strong support of house bill two
oh six as amended and we greatly
appreciate Representative
Sweetser for sponsoring the
legislation.
The.
Madam chair of I guess you can
see the pill if I agree to carry
this to lower broadband faster
rural customers that was the
main driver for me you think we
now stand for questions do we
have any additional comments.
I had one short comment okay
madam chair.
Members of the committee my name
is Mike Moffitt I'm an attorney
with the law firm amounting to
implement and and all here in
Santa Fe and I'm legal counsel
for the New Mexico exchange
carrier group and the one point
I want to make to the committee
is that
this bill is proposing what we
consider to be a minor tweak to
the rural telecommunications Act
which will help us fulfill the
purpose of the Act which we
think is really important
because the purpose of the Act
is to provide universal service
at affordable rates in rural
areas and since our customers
are asking us not to charge them
for a dollop line in in order to
obtain broadband this proposed
legislation would give us the
mechanism that would enable us
to provide that to the customers
well at the same time not for
going to support that we need
and so
Without such a mechanism like
the way it is now rural
customers would have to pay for
something that they don't want
and may not even be able to
afford just in order to receive
broadband and that does not for
the purposes of this act nor
does it further the purposes of
the statewide broadband plan
which is to ensure digital
equity and digital inclusion in
New Mexico and we believe we
want to try to include all New
Mexicans so that's what we're
trying to do if we can count a
Siebel line of consumer
broadband only loop line as an
access line then we can find
this mechanism to give our
customers what they want and
still receive the support
payments that we need and that's
why we support the bill thank
you.
Thank you madam chair we stand
for questions thank you thank
you for the presentation and
we're gonna get a public comment
now public support actually
those in the audience for online
that would like to either raise
your hand or make comments and
support of this legislation.
Meets an online does anyone want
to speak.
Okay please come to the
microphone state and state your
name and if you're with
An agency or advocacy group and
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Leo
Baca I'm a government affairs
director for lumen in New Mexico
also registered lobbyist we
stand in full support of house
bill two oh six and thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward in working with Senator
Padilla on the Senate bill and I
think this is a a good bill for
the industry the telephone
industry the traditional
landline phone industry that
serves the rural areas so with
that we stand support thank you
thank you you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Margaret
gray I am a volunteer advocate
with a A. R. P. New Mexico on
behalf of the two hundred and
forty thousand A. A. R. P.
members in New Mexico we support
H. B. two oh six rural
telecommunication fund for
broadband unfortunately this
essential services unavailable
in much of New Mexico
particularly in rural areas
where many of our A. A. R. P.
members reside.
Choose the state rural universal
service fund will help reduce
the cost of installing broadband
loops.
will help reduce the cost of
installing broadband loops and
will facilitate facilitate their
development.
In addition by not requiring
that those loops also include
land line telephone service the
cost to come consumers for
broadband service will be
significantly reduced we
respectfully ask that the
committee vote in favor of this
legislation thank you.
Matter.
Morning madam chairman members
of the committee my name is
Clint harden I'm a paid lobbyist
for plateau and I for all the
reasons that have been already
mentioned I support this bill
thank you Representative for
bringing it of point of interest
I'm also a member of eastern New
Mexico rural coop and I don't
want my phone line anymore I
just want to use my cell phone.
come.
I'm also a personal advocate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you senator.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee of Romero
registered lobbyists for Kate
Carson electrical up kicker
sensors twelve thousand of its
members the broadband in do we
fully support this bill for the
reasons stated.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza on
behalf of the New Mexico
technology council and we stand
in strong support thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee many Mr Lovelace and
the operations manager for the
office of broadband access
expansion and we also for all
the reasons that the subject
matter experts and all the
supporters have mentioned before
this bill is going to help the
office of broadband as well as
the highest peas.
Be able to put broadband out
into the state New Mexico so we
ask that you do pass.
Okay.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Mitch
shepherd and that the aspen
valley telephone on the.
I am the customer affairs chair
and we still we standards it
it's part of this bill as well
we serve Lincoln Otero Chavis
and anti counties and up some of
the most rural areas we have
basically one customer for every
two square miles so this fund is
very crucial to to us to to
expand and to maintain
Nothing showed us that more than
during the pandemic we know we
we were working with eight eight
different schools so that
students are areas to try to get
them service the telework the
telemedicine that
of course the online at
education has has has just
continued
you know what and one of our
schools and Cloudcroft is that
having a snow day they have an
online day and that works great
if you have a good broadband
connection it if not you have to
go to a community center church
park outside of the store and we
see that and so we we utilize
this fund to help.
Expand broadband out out to
these rural.
Parts also with the addition of
fiber when it when it goes out
there that is also a wireless
tower needs because we about
three quarters of our area it
does not have any mobile service
and and so they can't really
have that without the without
the fiber so we use this fund to
build that fibers well but I
think you and I ask you for your
support of this bill.
Yeah we're going to go online
for anybody online in support of
this bill.
Reach a Paul.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Richard
million of a member of the
veterans and military families
caucus we support H. B. two oh
six because it would make it
easier for small telecom
providers to expand broadband
service to New Mexico's rural
communities many of New Mexico
is a hundred and forty five
thousand veterans live in rural
areas are older the significant
health problems the difficulty
traveling from the rural homes
to brick and mortar medical
facilities access to
telemedicine would be is
actually beneficial for rural
veterans broadband also provides
access to online job resources
and educational opportunities
for veterans their families and
all New Mexicans living in rural
areas our Congress our caucus
strongly supports this bill
and recommended to pass the
termination thank you thank you.
Is Paul right right there.
Yes ma'am madam chair can you
hear me yes.
My name is Paul bridge I'm a
general manager Baca valley
telephone in more in New Mexico
and we serve you to Colfax
counties and I apologize I was
scheduled to be there this
morning and mother nature
decided that I would not be
there this morning because of
this blizzard we have so I
apologize I want to thank you in
the committee for hearing this
bill and and Representative
Sanchez for bring it bring it
front for us
is is everyone is that we're one
of the big questions of this
bill because our customers in in
rural northeast Mexico cannot
ever broadband without dial tone
so this is very important to us.
It just it just on a side note
I'd like to.
Just add what what meant you
said as far as is the broadband
program it's very important to
the state of New Mexico Ecker
institutions D. O. T. and in
rural New Mexico as well as some
of our cities the reason they
have services because of this
funding because of the small
companies
wireless cell sites the reason
we have cell service when you
drive from Albuquerque to rat
tone New Mexico the reason you
have it is because of this
program because of our ability
to expand our broadband or fiber
service and as I said DOT uses
our service because of this
program is our ability to expand
the fiber so madam chair thank
you for your time and our and
all drop off thank you.
Thank you.
Yes and now we're going to move
of to anybody in opposition
anybody in the audience in
opposition to this bill.
Okay and if you wanted to come
to the microphone.
If.
Anybody online that is in
opposition to this legislation.
Now see none Madam.
Secretary secretary we're gonna
move to we need.
To the.
No no we yes that is okay
committee comments.
And I think we have
Representative made about Maria
yes thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and and my
experts I think I've I I really
like this idea my actually my I
think my sister complained quite
a bit when she had to get up
from line that she was never
gonna use in order to get
internet so so yes and I and I
understand especially being out
in all of these rural areas the
the law of one person every two
miles that it's costly for
companies so I understand why
this access reduction support is
is in place my question is I was
reading the F. I. R. and it and
it's a is just how do we know
that the money that you're
getting from these access access
reductions supports is going to
what it's intended to for and
for not for regular operational
costs and and really for those
need based issues.
Thank you madam chair all free
for that question to one of my
experts.
Madam chair and representative
it above left.
this support in in two thousand
seventeen of of Senator Padilla
amended the rule universal
service fund and turn it pretty
much into a broadband funds to
support broadband
the the access support payments
that go to the there's fifteen
companies in total would get
this access support
the the in it's in their
mandated to spend a minimum of
sixty percent on broadband of
which most spend ninety five to
a hundred percent on broadband
because everybody's putting five
million now and they're not
putting copper in anymore and
it's to of to get out there and
to maintain it.
Now the PRC has rules in place
that the of the members that
receive the money they have to
provide.
All the information on where it
is how much is spent I mean it's
it's pretty detailed of the
reporting that that the PRC
required by rule.
Excellent thank you madam chair
Representative one less to get
that kind of brought up another
little
Issue or not really issue but
wonder that I had was so they're
kind of mandated to to do a more
what's the worst is yet had it
with.
in current broadband like in
their investments are and and
current not really been dating
the older kind of outdated or
soon to be outdated types of
systems but upgrading to
something newer since we have an
industry that is constantly
being needing the upgrades right
so so they're they're mandated
to spend a lot of that money
a newer stuff it is that correct
thank you madam chair
representative will hello that
would.
Madam chair representative more
help yes of everybody's we're
we're all of the installing
fiber to the home all the new
all the new lines or fiber of it
it's going fiber to the home and
the the speeds are are excellent
speeds we meet the federal
mandates of a hundred over a
hundred and and many exceed that
they're doing make a bit of.
Speeds also so I mean it it's
it's nothing it's it's
everything and and it's
upgradeable beyond that because
it is fiber is that all you do
is is some some
equipment changes to upgrade the
speeds be on the hundred over a
hundred excellent thank you
thank you madam chair
Representative that's all that I
have.
Up to Representative ****.
Thank you madam chair I a
I think this is a great bill
nothing's perfect but I really
do
like the the it's dual purpose
of how it works
you know for both helping our
rural New Mexico the only
problem I had is you start with
western Mexico telephone company
and so city.
One from so Sims teasing but
it's actually a really good bill
just to let you know my my
district obviously changed his
last year but I want to share a
story with you real quick and
how I think this is great into
we're moving the great in a good
direction
in one of part of my district
and ninety percent of poverty
right in this particular part of
my district and children are
getting together at one
household because they can
afford the internet access and
so these kids are trying to go
to school there all gather in
one home.
And trying to to do the homework
in that manner when we were
wireless so I mean I love stuff
like this and just like the
gentleman said he's a customer
my mom's probably part of the A.
R. P. so I am in support of
this.
Because of that I just want to
make you guys laugh we're so
serious here all the time and so
I just letting you know thank
you for bringing this up
Representative madam chair
published.
And and any other questions this
to me Representative.
There.
Representative
two I think it's a good deal of
course committee the first thing
I think of when I think of this.
This project.
Not a lot of men here old enough
is made but the.
In the sixties.
Representative Artesia that line
rate is twenty miles Marty
didn't have electricity.
You know they.
And if it wasn't for a project
course of the probably a bigger.
Project in this but if it wasn't
for a project where the
government helped the co ops.
Provide service I still wouldn't
have to cave on the line.
No in our country that there's
lines ago thirty miles and to
serve one yes.
And without.
Public assistance.
I mean it wouldn't happen in the
side with this order I stand
tools for the bill.
Thank you Representative Mason
are there any other questions
from the committee on the motion
to.
I do pass on.
HB two oh six.
Have a motion as amended Madam
has amended I'm sorry that's
correct I make a motion on H. B.
two oh six as amended.
I can yes ma'am.
Second I close my for.
Point four.
Seven eight point one.
If
you have a to have a second.
Representative Mason we have a
roll call.
Representative Lujan yes
Representative is yes
Representative more about
million yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative SS yes.
And vice chair because the ano
yes we.
We have a due pass of
Representative Sweetser so as
I'm as your bill as amended
thank you madam chair committee.
This
the state.
That is.
Not that waiting for me outside
your living distance.
Thank.
Thank you that was.
