You have the sense to hand out
and
I needed to.
Deficits in
in
I respectfully request that
Yes that's it and then that.
Respectfully.
The committee says purposes
after special.
Session.
To adopt House government
actions in the Indian Affairs
Committee steps into those bills
three nine nine I would move for
you two to five four eight seven
going forward for discussion
and health second do we have any
opposition.
CNN you haven't opted committee
substitute for discussed for
discussion thank you madam chair
of these things section one
faster provided I can use any
public thirty.
So what could happen if this
bill.
The impact on the federal county
and can.
Section two provides the process
for the future that's a
procedures for counties that the
reserves talking.
Eighty five thousand or more
after the next census.
Of twenty third.
And section.
Temporary crisis for the county
of.
Districts right now and this is
for the term ending in twenty.
I'd like to take a minute to
review the population size a
species the county.
And that the population sizes.
Is the seventh largest county in
size.
With the five thousand one
hundred square mile and they
have a population according to
the last census and seventy six
thousand.
Whatever has a population of
sixty eight thousand five
hundred thirty seven and the
third largest size was six that.
and just so you know in twenty
twenty one there expenditures
for a hundred forty one million.
You agree that has a population
of forty thousand and either
square miles or five thousand
eight hundred and I would just
like to add.
These.
Okay I just want to say that the
last census we kicked off count
day and everybody was looking
down state of so there are a lot
of problems in the last census
we think for that we under
County in the posted at fifty
thousand.
Of the so.
So this is in on twenty one was
thirty to thirty two point six
nine there are thirty two
counties in the state twenty two
but the scales authorizations of
sixteen thousand or more and I
these twenty two counties
there's only three counties that
have commissions the rest I
commissioners.
Hello integral part of.
And I think just if you know
they do that just let me tell
you.
State national elections this
just in collect local taxes they
do local plan economic
development planning the
responsible for county roads
pass legislation sent to water
and wastewater systems they do
planning and development parks
recreational facilities and
county lines they operate
numerous housing and housing
development projects counties
have law enforcement
responsibilities including
sheriff department jails
detention centers sports
channels they work with and
sometimes operate with each of
the sections internet or your
call costs some build hospitals
in state health programs.
Are counties are vital part of
New Mexico's government
structures.
And the best thank you
Representative.
To like to introduce your own
the next slide expert witnesses
are do I and she's the director
of legislative.
Shares for the K-State's office
and I have more Fischer who is
from Legislative Council.
Thank you to.
Audience.
Hand in support of the bill.
Would you please raise your hand
here in opposition to.
Okay please stand and make your
comments.
Morning madam chairman.
That leaves you Madam chair for
we can
I speak on behalf of the whole
commission and all of them are
they oppose this bill.
I also speak on behalf of hello
the joint chambers office CEO
this morning again.
And see Gallup and more often
here consul.
And yours should be coming from
us our families in the community
should be able to decide what is
best for area and this bill is
anti are a time at a local.
This major chain of local
governments use our we've that
at all the state code table we
need time to discuss with the
whole community and see if this
is best for John or not.
The bill did not go through any
interview minis no never
notified any county
commissioners and staff.
This is an important.
There's amendment today we have
seen that as as as well the
current that for further says by
requiring five board members
count is earned by
Representative.
Rather.
Allowing cameras to side the
center team on the tobacco.
Mexico County.
Constitution already allows.
Funds to make a decision on
their own to go from the number
five four after all this is.
They're also be fiscal impact
on.
And we don't have room for two
more commissioners would have to
increase we have remodeled.
Remodel the current chambers we
ask funds for salaries benefits
travel and the for the
commission doing so is a big
financial impact on one point
downs.
Currently there's one town of
that seven board members
seventeen counties have I or
members in fifteen counties
three more members.
The other issue.
Madam chair and maybe what we
has been in great financial.
During the last five years we
have not just we have five
straight years awards from the
state auditor we have a current
reserves we have all of all all
the problems that we can.
There's no issues.
our our mission is strong.
We urge.
And he with this committee.
A long time to have the it's all
local government.
Action and I on.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Do we have further comments.
Hello.
The people of the nation.
in in opposition or support
outside support okay let's go
back to support and finish those
comments well now let's finish
opposition do we have any
opposition on the webcast.
And of I would like to remind
the audience that as of comments
are are one minute please.
Thank chair can call
long go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is our Charles
long the McKinley County
treasurer and
I want to speak in support of
this bill.
Thank you know everyone of you
there sure hold that democracy
depends on fair and equal
representation.
We do not have that right now.
With the three member.
Commissioner.
We have several chapters Navajo
chapter governments in McKinley
county.
And the majority of them do not
receive services from McKinley
County it's been like that for
years and a lot of our chapter
government miss out on services
from McKinley County stands the
way business is done is based on
favoritism.
You know even now as the county
treasurer the commission.
In that ministration do not
recognize me as an elected
official.
Do not run on governor all of my
own department and that's set to
see not only me but alright and
that this time thank you very
much.
Okay.
Francis Gonzales go ahead.
Thank you my name is Francis
Gonzales and I'm from there New
Mexico in the county of Grant
County I just wanted to let you
know we have a five percent
commission here in Grant County
we the people elected them we
wanted that because we wanted
more representation and we have
been able to find the funding
even where we were at their
worst times to be able to fund
the five percent commission.
And that they have been able to
prove as of the treasure just
stated more representation from
the different parts of the
county is you know that we're
rural and we are very spread out
the other thing in traveling to
other counties as I work on
campaigns during the year yes
Carroll County had passed it
they refuse to recognize it and
implement it right for them to
have that and Luna County that's
something they have been
considering so I think these two
companies you know what would
really benefit from it I thank
you for having it and I really
ask for the committee to do that
the past thank you for your
time.
Thank you for listening.
Jacinda Kota go ahead.
Hi there this is Isaac Dakota
basados I'm the chairman of the
native American democratic
caucus we stand in full support
of house bill three ninety nine
we believe this this not only
provides equity to our native
American communities but also
provides us an opportunity to
ensure that native American
representation will be had in
these two internal parts of
specifically Rio Arriba McKinley
County where that representation
is lacking so madam chair
members of the committee we do
ask a to pass up this bill thank
you.
Thank you I said just as go
ahead.
The act better madam chair.
Members of of of the committee
my name is Joseph Fernandez and
I am a registered lobbyist for
NM native so and we do status
support of house bill three
ninety nine and and ask for.
To pass up if you look at
McKinley County over three
quarters of its population are
native American residents from
who are Navajo Hopi as well as
from the Zuni tribe the
population has grown the recent
census showed an increase to
fifty four thousand four hundred
thirty nine if you look at
district one there's about
twenty three local Navajo local
governments a twenty three
chapter houses district two has
seven chapter houses and adding
up to additional commissioners
will
give a fair representation to
ensure that the county
commissioners are meeting the
needs of the local chapter
governments we we we ask for do
passed thank you very much for
allowing me to speak thank you.
Thank you Joseph.
I don't see any more has raised
on the west for supporting
comments we have three in the
audience supporters.
Yes chair members of the
committee thank you for your the
bills were my name is doing
Salazar image.
RT of the county and I fully
support this bill the resolution
was sent to the county
commissions two years ago just
before I commission and for this
point because it's so large of
geographically this committee
that was actually populations
from we need to have fair
representation and I think I
members will certainly do that
for us all we also.
This happens what I understand
to be able to afford this extra
to individual so we stand for
the full support of this bill
and I hope that you will.
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the.
Excuse me allergies members of
the committee my name is
Kristine Lucius and I am a
former commissioner.
my German technology center.
And I am fully in support of one
to a five member commission.
When I started two years ago.
I thought that a three member
commission would be great that
we could all work together all
the three of us and I quickly
found out that was wrong.
Three members on any county
commissions.
We really can't speak to each
other because we violate court
building meetings act so it
makes it very difficult and as
the Salazar said very good
counties huge or six thousand
square miles.
And it's we have a lot of
constituents in each of our
districts so I am here to fully
support going to a five member
commission thank you.
That members are madam chairman
my name's John around behind the
more this investment also
largest city county with portion
Santa Fe County I'm here to
speak in favor house bill three
ninety nine particularly to talk
about Conservancy in Espanol the
way we're able County currently
has it was only three member
commission eight of fortune is
disproportionate for the rest of
the county to have
representation for the city of
Espanola residents the waste
unfortunate gerrymandered the
population doesn't allow the
city basically going to do what
we have a seat at the table for
county commission seat actually
for the first time in nearly
thirty years assistance in was
elected to the county commission
surprisingly and the way that
districts are set up it's
unfortunate that there's not
enough population balance in
this investing on to help number
what's and how's this population
forty thousand individuals now
we have one commission district
that is literally the size of
Rhode Island just to show you
that in balance going on.
Would be really important for
the counties to go towards at
five member commission I was on
board with the resolution passed
by a democratic party about two
years ago urging County
commission to do this in that
aspect but unfortunately because
of the way it's set up is the
contact county commission has to
agree to go towards that five
member commission so here today
asking for your support for this
effort for rural county and
Carroll County became the
counties and we stand together
counties of taxes both
particularly because of my
expertise and knowledge of
what's going on.
Thank you members may madam
chair warm for your time today.
Thank you any further comments
in support of the bill outside
or in opposition to okay.
They were for three ninety nine
All righty okay this position on
the web chair of opposition on
the webcast.
I see no hands of okay it would
not go ahead.
Good morning committee members
chair thank you for allowing me
to speak today I am any real
Otero county commissioner
district to I currently
represent twenty two thousand
eight hundred eighty two
constituents in my district H.
the cost of each commissioner
includes twenty six thousand for
salary twenty two thousand for
budget five thousand for travel
allowance two thousand for
office equipment and does not
include training expense staff
report office utilities
eccentric each commissioners
approximately cost the county of
fifty six thousand dollars
adding two more commissioner
positions we burdensome to our
county to additional offices
have a remodeling estimate two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
remodeling or relocation
commission chambers would cost
up to three hundred thousand
dollars as you can see from the
department of economic
development.
Otero County is down almost one
million dollars from gross
receipts tax I represent
bringing funds to the for the
social development of Otero
County that means transportation
that means mental health that
means anything that is needed to
health department and if you put
this into our the requirements
we're not gonna be able to
supply those services to our
constituents much needed this
needs to be local control and I
won also remind you that each
one of you in that room
Representative about thirty
three thirty three thousand
people thank you thank you thank
you.
Thank you committee members
Representative Zamora.
Representative.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the presenters purpose built for
today.
Seoul.
Representative why does the
resolution of four four we gonna
have to do with the state
park at the counties get this
figure.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative that's
an important question
we all strive for the local
control funding that staff I
think I agree with you is is the
best thing that you know some
awful things over is that that's
a.
You have here are two really I
think we need more
representation and I when I
first with this building you
know I was just going to give up
to so I you know because we have
a this might constituents and
know what they want.
And then I found that you can't
constitutionally put that you
can't just do something for one
now that's against the
constitution so that it looked
at and looked at the other
counties that we're has had
three committee members large
like farmers that that larger
numbers of population and I had
thought well.
This kind of makes sense is that
I had and put that together and
then more voices started coming
forward saying we really don't
have a voice.
we don't have enough
representation or we just need
to have more control over how
are on the budgets and
expenditures we don't feel like
we have part of that so I put
this bill forward and we did
like four I dress said it was
difficult.
And and I decided to go ahead
with those.
And madam chair representative.
How much is it going to cost the
county Rio Rico this well they
pay their commissioners Madam
chair representative they pay
their commissioners I think
about thirty thousand dollars a
year so it's sixty thousand
dollars a year or two more
commission.
That just goes on that will have
other expenses I'm sure they
have training in the house.
But I I think in terms of the
that cost is as high as the cost
of not having good local
Representative and you know we
represent thirty thousand people
you know these counties of I
think they should have smaller
ministers I I think that's just
an important fact I think at the
local level of the school board
level and municipal municipality
level and at the county level I
think they should be better
representation current members
and madam chair representative
no I agree with you and I
disagree.
Because we're gonna cut these
counties and to and to.
Different grades and I can't
think of the word right now
districts districts.
So.
That some districts and and I
guess it'd be done according to
population right.
At the county commissioners will
drop the grid so the state's not
doing the job they'll draw up
the districts they'll decide to
you know that the plan and and
this bill is that each
commissioner hopefully will stay
in their own districts hopefully
that's how it should work and
then they'll drop the new
districts and and that's and
then that will tie into state
law that that that administers
redistricting but for the most
part this is a local control
issue they will have to go from
three to five commissioners that
they will be in charge.
This is current commissioners
that are there right now.
So madam chair and
representative how CENIC going
to be fair with the ones that
are fighting it or don't be
drawn up is this.
Madam chair and representative
what you're doing is you're
opening at so so what the deal
also states is that the current
this current commissioner should
stay in their homes I mean
that's kind of that the model
okay and if you're gonna
probably drive on different
districts and it will be
according to population and I'm
a little bit the my experts have
a little bit about this because
there are certain loss in
redistricting that I'm on top of
that sure certainly madam chair
Representative in existing law
I'm from the commissioners along
with our latest.
The bill refers to that is
Representative indicated that
this bill also is.
Those statutes and left the
precinct adjustment tax so the
way that that process works is
the local bodies accounting
bodies redistrict themselves and
then it submitted for approval
from the secretary of state's
office and there's a process in
place in those statutes for the
secretary to another I know I
know it's like if there are
major issues with those apps and
if there is not compliance on
behalf of the local bodies madam
chair representative in the
secretary of state rex the
founders.
Help currently works after the
the sense and madam chair and
and expert witness so if it's
out of compliance will there be
a hearing or to secretary of
state read draws alliances this
is it this is what it's going to
be Madam chair representative
that's a good question the way
that it works is there's it's
very prescriptive in statute and
one thirty thirteen be that
there is a series of
noncompliance letters that and
there's a from our dialogue
between the lower body is.
And and madam chair and
representative of how many.
I'm sure you have some numbers
in here and how many or for how
many years it's.
This bill.
and on the floor no credit
check.
Representative this is your
knowledge come up.
We have public comment
Representative.
I'm sorry your that that I was
late I guess I just don't
understand the question how many
of them in the counties counties
how many.
Or how many is this.
Actually this go back and then I
have a lot of voices coming
forward to say could this of I
think it's I think it could be
fairly even I think it goes more
toward
Four that's what I'm here and
and what it did.
I think that's true I really.
This.
That would be great.
And and chair representative so
so in redrawing the bill.
I'm sure you look at the numbers
that you put down on the
populations.
So.
And our I just imagine in my
head that that's one of the
things that you changed.
When you re drafting the bill
because of how it affects point
County.
The.
Questions and.
That's okay chair
representative.
So.
This bill affects.
Three counties.
So is it fair to say that.
This bill is telling three
counties what they have to do
Madam chair representative.
Chair representative yes.
Madam chair and in the.
Representative.
That's why I have a hard.
It's very well of everyone is
but what I see it in point.
All three counties and for.
Testimony from one county very
strong testimony as to for the.
And it's the same County which
is pushing for but the.
Madam chair and representative
I'm sorry but I'm I'm gonna have
a hard time.
Supported this job for the rest
of the testimony.
I think this bills drafted up
and wait for it's not.
Looking at the whole state is
a fair ball game is looking at
three counties of what we want
those three counties.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative thank you
Representative Representative
little thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative good
morning this is.
I was a member of the twenty
twenty one redistricting task
force.
And
the intent of the redistricting
process was to
At.
To take a look at the
representation issue of
representation after the twenty
twenty Census we know I'm aware
madam chair and representative
that that there were because it
took place during the time of
COVID at and I have been a
coordinator for the
rural communities tribal
communities in New Mexico.
And there was a.
Of.
An undercount we believe it was
very hard to gain entry it was
not only hard and.
Tribal communities but it
actually became very evident
that it was in rural communities
because we have this coalition
of New Mexico communities and
rural areas we were sharing
comparing notes and trying to
a couple of really jump on best
practices because everybody was
stymied by this process so.
The whole point of that.
Of redistricting was to ensure
based on facts on numbers of
people of populations.
That people had and equitable
representation and this case it
was in the federal and the
statewide elections.
And and the what I heard
and saw during that time was
the.
Challenge
raised by some counties some of
our Representative just let.
Of of
It appeared.
From all appearances that there
was some reluctance to to give
consideration to sent to
committees and that was very
problematic for me because that
limited of that which were tribe
which the entire.
state was working towards which
was equitable representation.
and so starting with that madam
chair and representative with
that bit of background from my
experience was.
I'm curious with the a couple of
questions more.
Is are you aware of the thing
with these changes what I'm
hearing Halford as well the
email said and getting from a
constituents from people outside
of the county as well letting me
know that they do not feel they
are Representative equitably
they do not believe that there
is equitable representation.
So I.
Wondering are you aware of.
Madam chair representative of
the
is support changes to come are
the and.
I is that are there are you
aware of plans for these kind
of.
This is this issue.
Madam chair representative the
that's that's a great question I
I think when people see Mr to
see that things could be
different I think when private
conversations public
conversations I think change
starts happen I think that's
what's happened you go along for
your whole life you're going in
the county you live in the
county commissioners is always
the commissioners nobody ever
talks that changes and olives
and somebody says why don't we
have I.
And then these private
conversations become public
conversations in the number that
I too was one of the chairs
district forty left I passed the
legislation
Two years ago I can't remember
number when we when the state
put money into the census so
that we could do a better out so
we put money in so that we would
have a better chance all over
the state because we know what
revenue and reduce stress in
terms of state revenue into you
know name and any anything we do
if that population growth and we
have better numbers we will get
to carry out services for people
so I introduce that legislation
on the house side it was the
first aspect is very important
and then.
And then my daughter not happen
to get you know she was in
charge of the census for Rio
Rita Act.
She quit because she said they
kept changing the rules of the
national level **** census was
going for you if you spoke that
was faxed this is in rural areas
than they said you can use post
office boxes and then they said
well now I have to go online you
have to get a certain number we
mailed it to you and if you can
now the thing you have to get
the right number you have to put
that into and.
you know you have to go online
and put in the international
growth communities that have a I
mean it was just one thing after
another from the federal level
so I mean I think the census was
entirely under tab in the state
that is slide that is my cost I
would also like to introduce one
of my co sponsors
representatives who is co
sponsoring this bill.
Sure and no Representative Lewis
you point out a very good factor
that is are the people feeling
that they're getting their
equity and in my to use of
to road to recovery I'm sixty
six miles away from the city of
Calgary office so you might five
years of experience.
But first ICAP request.
That's just the way things were
handled in this small what used
to be a small city of Cologne
world rate of white sentencing
problem therefore is primarily.
But to the point where we look
at this of the information in
account of your groceries of the
twenty twenty one twenty.
Senator the community of ninety
six percent of spam.
An isolated spectrum talking the
fluency speaking Spanish and
purpose of difficulty in the
Berrier of communication
Representative service from
Alamogordo isn't table speaking
Spanish nor us ever tried in my
notes on the fact of the matter
when we have issues like this
that have gone this far given
them time to adjust to me to
accept me wonderful reason the
from the first Democrat some
years to be in the of explosives
the way I see it and that is
this is a of problematic that
uses our it's rover and this is
a way of putting some equity
back to the people in the
representation but I think I six
percent.
You look at the rest of the
composite of the information is
on line marks are coming you'll
see that they have a thought
that maybe it happened before
for some reason thought but this
is not the supporting the equity
that they're talking about.
For the people of our community
that was recently sent by the
current mission by there were
fifteen thousand have to the
port of the senses of Senator so
is made up of two communities
what as we know of heaven
suggestions okay and I see six
two thousand job growth.
The gentleman.
Because of this difference to
charities operating what having
all the services at all agencies
all departments are one of the
most gross and sharp right the
other side does not go to the
truce noted what to put in the
other departments and agencies
what we're talking utility of
talking of funding is only
talking things that make equity
for more people to show that
they are wealth have prosperity
to to the future but we have
that distance gap.
Is the overview citing within
this community that means more
than just being the only form of
government the sharper us in
this would be a step this was
also a so the the providing two
places are over sixty one
thousand people in the community
no Sir.
That's that's a sustainable
level as we can but three
dictates no more we need to have
a body more than one more than
two more than three to four or
five right now with the we look
at Dona Ana County they have
some members.
Yes it makes a lot of those
models of for a port for those
without those people the rules
Mr to those areas they would be
able to from this.
For this project of what needs
to be and so I hope in the in
the US so this bill that we
understand yeah we targeted
three because our three
essential right now the ones by
of.
Representative this is to say
that are we considered was made
the comment would stipulate
would dictate into three this.
Read get a little.
Body of a Representative rather
than just a small use of three
that say what comes and goes the
best example there's no reason I
shouldn't have a vice the
request for but that just goes
to show recognition not made any
valid effort and whatever I'm
trying to do I try to put a
splash pad into the community of
the Otero county in order for it
to be turned away but later
requests for me to put on a
seventy five thousand into a
city hello world golf course
speakers.
You see my point.
There's a problem there's no
door by taking three to five
this putting the connection of
the people who have the most to
have interested parties have
somebody isn't it cable speaking
the dialect that's needed down
there I think this is this is
the service that's big dollars
of our indigenous brothers and
sisters.
There's a responsibility I take
the person affected by it failed
to bring the things of that sort
of.
This because I have to consult
with projects this year I've got
one ICRC request one point three
million dollars for a substation
for insurers.
Well I'd for truth burned out
last year and several are we
doing on the side got a news no
families or people.
But we change that sorry to get
us firing of full time part of
our.
If it was something like that
that I'm trying to say I don't
think that we don't the
association co chair but I think
we need a fire station is
decrepit over fifty years old of
we have the only fire truck
that's been bought was Barney in
the last three years otherwise
all of our other trucks or fifty
years plus and should be on the
road.
And then these issues that state
of correct this delusions of
that fire station within one of
those is right in the middle of
the rural part of this community
shop grow what I see rule that
we're gonna do fire burns with
accelerators and they're doing
all right there with the
community additional social
families this is small.
My suggestion was to feasibility
the school which is some more
more more the middle of that
town so that the news people are
moving into a building do falls
to three hundred thousand dollar
or seventy five thousand dollar
walls fences and so these people
are all responsibility to the
rather with their insurance.
To be that far away if this fire
station substitution a quarter
of a mile from the county line
is going to go forty five
minutes to get to the news
table.
Yes Representative.
Thank you pardon me committee
members thank you we need to we
need a motion to adopt Senate
committees.
Thank you very much I have a
motion by Representative Andrea
also if you are you in a second
I I scare.
We have an activation fee then
you have an adopted committee so
thank you my apologies.
Thank you.
Representative block and then
Representative on the and you
know to determine.
Little you want to share.
One I believe it's a question I
appreciate thank you madam chair
and the representatives
what you illustrated here and
thank you very much for that
information but it illustrated
clearly to me the intent behind
redistricting at every level at
every level of of of our elected
system.
That the premise the goal of
people of communities having
being able to elect
representatives of their choice.
I think is paramount here and so
do you at the clearly
demonstrated it but I need to
ask anyhow madam chair
representative if you believe
that a.
Increasing the port the number
of these districts to I would be
beneficial to the people that
you're representing.
but and then chair
representative I certainly do
I'm going to route this bill for
I did I I I think more local
representation at the local
level and I think it's a good
thing you know the distances
to.
And just to see people.
Of.
It takes forever to do that so I
and and and and let you go and
listen to people and I'm
thinking what's happening so I
think words nations office.
This is the info that we have
growing use of those we do also
state that this.
But we will come back and we
reserve the next area that uses
with the state and and I like
seeing them so those into the
side of legislation is the.
Thank you for that thank you
Representative block and
Representative on.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
So.
You know I'm just well my
question is why did we pick
thirty five thousand.
Is there a reason why thirty
five thousand with the key and
the so madam chair
representative Lente we believe
this in a related to this and I
just.
Included that included the three
counties are where we have to
have
it seems to be a good number to.
You just sometimes.
State that includes the three
counties and it seems to be
equitable and seem to change the
the numbers for the county said
we're going to have these larger
populations thank you madam
chair thank you representatives
so you know I'm looking at your
list that you provided your Luna
County twenty five thousand
that's only about ten thousand
off.
But they are excluded.
So the whole argument that
occurred today madam chair
representative is that folks are
under Representative.
So if if folks no terror
McKinley and.
The result are underrepresented
why aren't folks in Luna County
madam chair you know it is it
that's a difference of fifteen
thousand just check the higher
number.
Thank you very much it it's just
thank you madam chair that's
actually ten thousand Senator.
Forty is it well thirty five
that's twenty five thirty three
okay so madam chair I'm looking
other counties like Santa Fe.
Done and to Dona ana and
Virgilio.
And according to your senior
they'll apply commissioners
madam chair.
So did the math madam chair
Bernalillo each commissioners
representing a hundred and
thirty four thousand people.
Madam chair representative if
we're looking to bring
representations these people and
why are not where we expanding
this is like for.
For one commission as a hundred
and thirty four thousand people
in their district madam chair
house that equitable.
Madam chair and representative I
do want to change the entire
state law and and so I just
chose these families because
that I had called me.
I see thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
currently no terror county
commission has about twenty to
twenty five thousand members in
their in their district so I
compare that to Tony and County
madam chair.
They're representing double that
that's forty three thousand
members of the.
So Madam chair representative I
just feel like this is.
Not equitable in its own right
AS of Bill.
Because we're picking and
choosing three counties instead
of equitably looking across the
state where the average is we're
not where we picking fusing
madam chair
and chair and representative for
picking and choosing because
those are the people that came
and asked me to take a look at
this present legislation.
C. thank you madam chair thank
you Representative can you tell
me how many people are who
contacted you specifically from
terror County Senator.
But it was it was the the
representative who contacted me
from it's.
And he had a number of people.
asked for this and staff that
are able to Representative
cancer.
This is the the state included
in the program description of my
interfacing with the family of
the terrible this is been more
the the real fact that well I
have had this commission he goes
to one pocket meeting the user
just require people
and I will tell you that that
that they know what's best for
shopper of and it's not been a
of the culture of Environment
invites throat culture the
decision and that's the only
time I could see the
commissioner rob the something
like that and when I go I always
ask the same questions and that
is what was not provided to the
conversation what was not
invited to that point are you
included but it's is a term
county commission meeting that
that once a month bye bye a of
but in CC by two presidents.
They invited me to go with them
this is our guests to these
meetings it's it's this bill
inequitable relationship the
say in the beginning was not the
one of me trying to get to
provide help with the board of
the rules are since the staff
selection should with a lot of
these folks but it's system
different culture that I have to
do seven with and I'm okay with
the the the when I called but I
got a sense of spending so
practices probably operate and
have been able to operate this
way for many years the remote
forward come with those
Republican.
We had very little of
successfully to come in many
times through his hands up and
gave up I'm not sure what the
system to try to find a password
this is a pathway through the
wall when we say about the other
parts of the state if they come
to us we put him on this on this
no problem they didn't come to
us we to produce a central and
maintenance started which is
something that we're doing this
legislation that may and a
motivating others within the
state to reflect a look at I
will tell you this.
By no means of us left doing
this we would not have this
discussion to the that we're
having today at the state level
for I've used all means from the
state level to try to get of
what I think this equity just in
more roll about in my own life I
see are the requests that we're
using the test result that would
mean that has to be some
understanding that wall one says
I think the.
I can sit back and say guess
what I walked the streets for
years a walk in clinic campaign
every two years this those
things that are here.
Want to talk of the things that
we're hearing you would also to
account and they would say
reserves for.
I have a meeting once a month
with the USDA EPA it was support
communities that the party
because the first wastewater.
Infrastructure transition that I
which were going to include all
the waste water we had a total
county funding from the table
this past week in the end the
report this will be the most
well where do we get what we get
in return and what is the people
that don't want to get it right
because I told us that we're
gonna have a lot of
conversation.
That's the best thing about this
program visit it's going to have
community involvement right now
I'm just trying to get the
people for terraformed to give
us contacts in the the end of
the conversation the other there
was they said we're going to sit
down and have it does cover
present from us and they will
decide three to the side with us
the of sixteen and a half
thousand people of Sapporo four
yield and found in the process
of accepting this entire federal
funding program mechanism to
help anyway that's going to help
I say economic development point
or chronic when you look at the
set of the self.
Hello.
These.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives for those
answers.
You know what I'm hearing is
there is under representation
Senator is that correct madam
chair.
Shop rose rose is because we
have a list of the results of
this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so is several
unincorporated city madam chair.
The this is a corporate she had
the largest in the state right
now.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative wise is not
corporate.
That is a good question the last
details Representative.
Neville both chair of okay.
I I will answer them because
that about representations of
what we're talking about.
However raised my question how
would one new commissioners on
our county commissions.
Help you all incorporate Madam.
Of the Madam chair this bill is
in the interest of the
incorporating city sits atop
this bill supports for two
have communities of the counties
of thirty five thousand or more
of that our mission is a five
percent Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives so I'm here you
feel under represented.
A way you could come represented
by building corporation however
if you see both of you do not
want to talk.
How you actually could some of
the same make become
incorporated and then become
powerful your own right that's
when hearing madam chair so.
Okay I'll keep on going so.
Regarding.
The county commission.
Right now as it stands.
I hear they're not they're not
working with us they're not
helping us Madam chair
representative of I go to a lot
of the terror county commission
meetings almost all of them I've
never seen the commissioner for
the good the good representative
there and I don't think you
invitation to attend this open
the public Madam chair
representative why is that K..
Given the calendar of whether
meetings are a let go and in
fairness it's a little more
convenient for you because you
live in the program of about
sixty six miles away and I think
of whether it's a
if the consideration for the so
last passed on.
Five years later of the because
of past on the US sincere intent
table Madam chair representative
I appreciate that answer and.
You know that it's streamed
online you can join with public
testimony on line as well we try
to make it as open as possible
to folks so I don't think that
that that's a very good excuse
madam chair but I don't see it
as a solution we're looking for
their actual representation for
these folks chair I think we we
should.
Put everyone at the table so.
You know I just don't see this
bill
as equitable equitable relief to
these communities madam chair
because if you have folks and
Bernalillo county one
commissioner represent a hundred
thirty four thousand people.
A hundred and thirty four
thousand people.
That is not fair madam chair to
single out three counties to
force them to have this
administrative burden not only
to pay these people terribly
that fifty thousand per for
employee plus benefits madam
chair.
And then we would have to
regarding our commission meeting
room madam chair.
Is there going to be an
appropriations and the stuff
that Madam.
Madam chair and representative
no there's not appropriation
that you have.
You know.
I think if people in the.
The train right now wonder if
they worry about the number of
chairs and desks they have.
I'm just saying this is about
democracy rally in its in its
in its final census about
representation at the local
level and and you know yes they
will pay to commissioners more
money and yes impact factor that
I have the a lot here
expenditures last.
Sure they can carve out another
sixty million to market issues I
don't think this issue here what
happened was certain counties
came to me when you're putting
this film together and said we
don't have revenue
representation that represents
the people who live in our
counties and the chat and that
was true in my County
Representative the madam chair
through the federal family and
that was true in the case and
that's why practice field scored
I wasn't about to change the
whole county structure that's
not what I was interested I was
interested in representation of
the local level from voice came
through those.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so.
I appreciate the answers.
Regarding.
Current representation do you
feel like.
There's not good local
representation currently County.
Madam chair and Representative I
respect the.
At all times so I think you know
when they vote in any any public
official we may not agree I may
not you know I I would just stay
on localist electricians in my
district I I service people who
win and I try to I try to create
a you know and have Mister
required to gather on on goals
that last.
and and the so I think the
people that elected percent the.
Do I think we have enough in
there even now that's why I
brought this bill forward.
Thank you madam chair thank
representatives so one problem
I'm I'm seeing with your bill is
regarding folks who were just
elected twenty twenty two.
So madam chair representative
could there be a possibility
where these new added
commissioners.
Would have to run again the
twenty twenty four if these new
commission seats were brief
questions madam chair and chair
representative that's a great
question really hard is that
that that work why did I mention
that over because of course all
that was the first question.
After running again we have to
run every two years thank you
credit for you so the first
question was am I going to have
to run in twenty twenty four and
I said so I'm going to have the
amendment eight excuse me miss
box for the number we will call.
Madam chair representative of
Bill provides that is a
districts are.
Additional precinct with that
that is.
Go on.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so.
Let's just say the
reapportionment where there are
two incumbents in the same
district Madam chair
representative I don't know if
that happens they're doing it
themselves let's just say for
the sake of it that happens when
one of those people that have to
run in a new collection and
twenty four cents.
Increase as state minister.
Representative.
Sorry about that with the
restricted game precincts of the
as of yet.
I would like to add to that
chair representative if you're
drawing your the districts I
doubt very much very much if you
drive yourself the district
outside.
And in my I think that working
you know we we all.
When you read this last time so
you know we all looked at those
centers very carefully I
certainly did and watch that and
so I think the commissioners we
set it up so that it would be
the commissioner's office not
the state not the secretary of
state the district commissioners
set this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I think
Representative someone asks
question regarding that this in
my opinion if we're supposed to
try to overhaul the system for
more representation the current
folks I believe madam chair
representative it would be in
their best interest to drive
themselves.
A district that could
potentially swing in whatever
their favor may be madam chair
so could this actually have the
opposite effect share of those
same commissioners drawing in
their body or someone they want
to do and then you see madam
chair.
Madam chair and representative
anything.
I'm not gonna make any promises
here I do believe in the good
will of.
People who are elected to
office.
both both parties and
independents I think I think
people want good government they
want their government so I get
of the Baker
of justice of equity I think
most people want that and could
something bad happened take it
to the bank Representative
something bad could happen you
you know you try to you know try
to legislate.
I'm not trying to legislate
expecting the worst and hoping
for the best I like going to the
amendment.
Yeah thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and yeah I
just hope I hope that there is
optimistic and that.
I'm hopeful if you are there but
I know that there are a lot of
folks at least in certain
counties they may feel slighted
act this tax insurance.
They're also them to that recent
jobs.
That really looks at it so if
they're going to play out a line
of there will be some so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so you know
another thing we've been talking
about is the lack of
representation and then that is
also with I said PED's as we
spoke about like an affair
County and currently we have I
said he's open for any fire
station down there and I know
the service working on station
down there for that so madam
chair representative.
Currently are are counties not
working as fiscal agent for the.
Areas in terms of the.
The people Madam.
Representative everybody in the
county in those commissioners
represent their districts and
they represent the company some
call so hopefully this trying to
do this jobs but what you're
hearing in this the recent films
comport is because they are
people feel that they are under.
And I and I.
Just Jared this review.
Want to make any sense market
there have to be there have
always.
In creation of this one see it
happen and that and that's why
we move forward on this
legislation.
And I.
Representative and.
Without further to.
The the.
The testimony of the subject.
Also director.
This is a time passing the of
you know the people.
Brought to the table.
With the due process of
understand.
The dialect of.
By the session.
And I think that's what made the
show I say the remotes out of
reach of what I have in fact at
meetings it looks okay.
The been the biggest trouble.
The last one that we have is two
years ago it was at the system
the
I just don't know how one person
I could Swedien technician madam
chair.
Representative we're not
dictating who should be elected
happens districts we just saying
that we should have just Madam
chair representative notice
notice sickness suggested that
suggesting that we're dictating
who should be there madam chair
both from population it appears
that that is what could happen
because that's the only place
that has a population as big as
one Missy District so.
Madam chair representative I
just think.
I think this need more time.
I think this bill needs more
thought process and we need to
look at these high high
population areas like Santa Fe
County that thirty thousand
commissioner for thirty thousand
people purchase.
And then Bernalillo county that
hundred thirty four this isn't
fair and that's not fair thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative before
I call on Representative on in
our new I'd like to make a
housekeeping announcement.
Because of our time frame we
will be meeting tomorrow morning
at ten AM we will be on the
house floor at one PM we have
long list of agenda items for
two day support.
So with that Representative on
in the review thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Just to make a motion for do not
have on house bill
passed the house.
I have a motion for a do not
pass on House Bill three nine
nine as amended.
As a do pass on.
The committee steps to House
Bill three nine nine.
Do I have a second.
I have a second by vice chair
of.
Please take role.
Senate on in order yes
Representative walk.
Now Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative Lewis yes
Representative right.
Yes.
Representative Zamora no.
By your Figueroa yes madam chair
Johnson yes.
Yes I have six to have a due
pass representatives thank thank
you committee.
Right now we well
Go house bill four to six as
amended Representative.
Or tass.
Jerry to get my.
There.
I.
Yes.
Have the employees.
Next year.
Then the larger.
Well.
Yeah.
All right Representative are you
ready.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee thank
you so much for a year or two
and house bill four twenty six
a focus their numbers to happen
and fix that.
It's like to go first and then.
Processes let's go ahead and
do have a motion to discuss your
amendment.
The tier two I know
yes shares to five eight four
one point one.
Do we have a motion to dismiss
we have a motion to move
amendment for discussion we have
a second no opposition.
These estimates.
Madam chair and members so he
in the couple of the the first
advisory on a certain child
we insure that consumer
protections are.
Reserve that we are the leading
this process
with.
Keeping in mind.
Prices keeping in mind that.
On it the one.
This is the second.
Change starting elector infinity
pool these problems the
investment of possibilities for
electrification.
Affects.
The next two to three seconds
credit revenues insurers are
investing.
Madam chair members of the
fourth she's of the of the rest
of the edits really ensures that
the electrification
infrastructure projects
support the decarbonisation
roles in the transportation
sector.
It may not make sense madam
chair.
The federal.
And I'm happy to go through with
thousand to.
Okay do we have discussion on
the amendment.
Any questions.
All right.
I move to the.
Have a motion to adopt amendment
the second no opposition you
have an amended bill thank you
madam chair members on so what
this bill does.
Does it for
us to so what it does is it
creates environment for us to
decrease air pollution which is
is so important especially
around transportation corners
just
live Senator decrease air
pollution it creates a new
program to provide incentives
still carbon transportation
fuels versus high carb and
transportation fuels it reduces
greenhouse gas emissions sixty
million times we think by twenty
forty eighty million times I
twenty two by twenty thirty
sixty million by one forty it
tracks new and existing clean
fuel business so important for
our jobs for economic
development or G. R. T..
That's.
What it doesn't do
it doesn't for New Mexico.
Four I'm from California
here to make this state like
California what you're there
this is not about to UNICEF
California's fuel prices and I
want to to help you understand
how fuel prices are but they are
eighty percent of the retail
price for gasoline gasoline and
diesel is the fact that prove
oil distribution and marketing
costs in you.
That price also includes the if
the profits that will test these
are really record.
In California the rest of that
fuel costs twenty percent so
he's from excise taxes on
transportation we do not have
that here in New Mexico the
skills not about that that's why
guests in California is so
expensive is because those
excise taxes.
Despite what you might hear none
of the states that have clean
fuel standards have gasoline
prices that that increased
twenty percent twenty cents
fifty cents a thousand dollar
that just that does not happen
in the states that have
standards.
So that's that about devices
that change no I love this area
bill that that solve climate
change this is not that this
bill helps reduce the effects of
climate change rate by reducing
emissions but it's not the end
all be all functions.
We should work it's just one
tool that we have to reduce
emissions to start right this is
an effective way to do that I
want some of the equity and
justice this bill is is what's
based in this bill is ensuring
that disproportionately impacted
communities of our partner
program designed from the very
beginning this includes patients
tries levels of we are we are
ensuring that.
Those communities that are
affected most by gas prices by
by everything I heard of this
conversation it's really
important that we get it right
for New Mexico
This is another very important
thing is that it allows it
requires the utilities to invest
at least fifty percent of their
revenue is transportation
leisure legislation for the
benefit of.
That's what the bill does is or
three broad categories and I'm
happy to I like to introduce my
thanks to talk a little bit more
about the bill show me on an
and play at orchard.
Good morning members chaired by
church members thank you for
having us here today I'm going
to turn it over to my colleague
five years you for sure to walk
us through the talking points
with.
Chair.
Katie thank you very much for
having us here today my.
House Bill four to six.
Has been forty six percent.
Transformational economic
opportunity for all New Mexico.
Authorizes environment proven
toward to adopt rules.
Clean fuels to New Mexico.
This is a great state comes
healthier place to live while
creating jobs.
By the Canadian.
And the process.
Which is our stakeholders across
New Mexico together to
participate designed.
Was the best fit.
This inclusive process will see
participation oil and gas avid
because institutional.
Public health experts utilities
now this G. callers state local
governments water managers and
the public and others to do the
voices.
So how
programs work.
The New Mexico clean vocals and
Justice businesses that produce
or import and then resell high
carbon fuels for transportation
this is important to know.
This committee will rules will
not apply to the strong Mexico
fuel retail businesses.
Six hundred we will program fuel
providers have two options.
The carbon content in the fuel
to be clean fuel standard for
the continued
into the business and.
Providers to the first option
bill generate credits they can
sell Mexico's new clean fuel
market.
The June second option decided.
They will have to go.
To buy credits from the head
have.
Because need to override
providers are already turning to
have providing clean two options
this will be in.
Does this.
Our
existing producers.
Senator vises canonic
opportunities without picking
winners and losers.
The local rules will have a
field are all right yes.
And education is already
underway.
Examples.
Include.
I.
Bio natural gas and electricity.
The New Mexico already home to
refineries.
I do support which is.
Mexico.
Diesel the.
I do so.
Some of the Mexico is one
judicial fuel economy throughout
southern New Mexico today it's
also exported to other states.
Namik opportunities to
participate in the free market
our agency and statewide.
Legislative options.
Providing you a copy
The information is currently on
New Mexico I.
This shows businesses throughout
Mexico that are currently.
Mexico domestic car.
And also enhance.
The list of companies ready to
invest in the land of Egypt.
The New Mexico signals.
Induction is from four to six we
want good neighbor businesses to
be part of our state.
Well designed clean fuel fuel
program brings consumers more
choice.
The choice of what type of fuel
they want to purchase to pay
less.
Our reduce their own carbon
footprints and if with the car
truck is involved the choice to
fuel up at home.
Mexicans say this is what they
want.
And economic benefits to Mexico
well designed programs are
tremendous sixteen thousand
permanent jobs twenty thirty
forty three hundred construction
jobs twenty thirty resulting in
four hundred seventy million
dollars in on the workforce
benefits plus an additional two
hundred thirty million dollars
hi this is from projects this.
The technician is already here
And excelling that.
State they don't play don't get
the jobs.
HB forty six issue New Mexico to
be a superpower in this clean
energy race thank you J.
Johnson.
Madam was question thank you
what's the audiences in support
of the bill creates your hand
all right I will start right
please express yourselves within
one minute good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Tiffany Wallace a lot
I'm an employee of Occidental
petroleum off point that's
right and forward.
Next.
We're gonna share
with.
Which over we really want to
thank the sponsors were this
legislation which we believe
offers just right incentives to
reduce carbon emissions in the
station secretary we feel very
and the fact that staff to
protect our environment and
improve community health and
here we brief we appreciate your
support thank you.
Thank you Max.
Here.
Our own.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Carlson service
public service.
We thank the sponsors and the
car for the
bill.
Reporter.
Supporters still claim and then
at to address the location which
is our it was nice regional
twenty forty.
Issues that are working there
will system for harmonization of
our system of systems and
energy.
Ortiz please
good morning and gentleman it
was.
Serve the purpose half of the
state's support of the T. four
six we're glad to see the that's
going to be building credits in
of the cases with focus on
transportation impact.
This bill will support and also
failed for electric vehicles.
Our mission I I.
we encourage you to do for the
participation all.
And the US but the same as
representatives of.
And I think we need to be
looking for their.
Our state.
Matt.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Chelsea can
that and I'm the director of
public policy of New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
House Bill.
Six specifically the market
based approach and incentives
the bill is based on do you
think the Sanchez and executive
for their leadership on steps to
drive increased capital efforts
to address climate change we
also appreciate the sponsors for
being responsive to the business
community throughout the process
thank you.
Further comments in support of
the bill hi good morning madam
chair members of the committee.
Hi Representative the state
department department and I'm
also gonna have surgery he's and
we are pleased to support agent
for twenty six.
We want to position New Mexico
all the actually clean energy
economy and the jobs of the
advisory H. before twenty six
will encourage economic
innovation and give New Mexico
competitive advantage as a clean
fuel experienced a bad passing
eighty four to six will
demonstrate New Mexico's
commitment to developing this
expertise diversifying our
economy and the committee and
clean energy.
Please.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Sharon
or convert member of public long
program whether there's anything
we can do that he is so
appreciated reading thank you
for support.
Further.
Madam chair members the
committee secretary Kenny
Environment Department I just
wanted to say thank you for
schedule thank you for hearing
bill and just to keep it out of
the robust discussion on this
but just to keep in contact this
bill expands of authority so
that we can engage with public
for holistically the public
stakeholders tribes pueblos all
the opportunity to participate.
Process and the school just for
that so thank you much thank you
like the peoples are already at.
One at a time.
One.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith registered this for Torrez
energy stand in support of this
bill we are introducing clean
energy products projects here to
Mexico over the park on the
station thank you for your time
thank you.
The
Madam chair members of the
committee of Charlie Parker's of
rush through this for the
alliance of automotive
innovations basically the car
manufacturers of HB for twenty
six Cahill Centers comes at a
time when the servers but is
that a federal point the
development of the electric
vehicle market so that are sixty
models offered in every major of
marker operator has announced
plans so that increase the
production the last four years
already percent Walker R. thirty
different the models in a
variety of different segments
however automotive industry
investors will not be enough to
increase market penetration for
electric vehicles which in the
second quarter of twenty twenty
one accounted for one point six
percent of all vehicles sold in
New Mexico.
In customer demand is necessary
and time and time again study
shows purchase incentives and
available check charging and
refuelling infrastructure I
argue that doing a clean fuel
standards and promote both
Mexico has ambitious
electrification goals with.
The card regulations start in
November of twenty twenty six
thank you all standard business
envelope of complementary post
policy to help address necessary
conditions to meet of state
appropriations for those reasons
to support this legislation
thank you Terry.
Good.
Please make your comment within
one minute thank you.
Thanks for listening
I was.
Support for bill money says to
GM of the store manager for
community solar developers are
simple solar and recently moved
to New Mexico Albuquerque to
participate in the solar program
and spending percent by the two
developments that New Mexico is.
Boards renewable energy industry
we're excited to about the
potential this program
continuing to enhance is that
the industry and can you to grow
in the US as well to grow in
this state thank you thank you.
Madam chair was.
This is.
Of the seven chair members the
committee members of our out of
to Carson the true cooperative.
He is forty of forty PED
charging stations early there
working on ten more this bill
the tax credits in this bill
will help can Carson to invest
more into the renewable energy.
This year.
Hi madam chair of the committee
my name is Jenny County climate
energy conservation Mexico
slayer also shows part of the
bill of what we do believe that
the future of transportation
electric we need to look for
strategies to help reduce the
energy of reducing greenhouse
gas emissions the current so for
those reasons and others you for
today in the past and support
thank you thank you.
Thank you.
This.
Okay let's go to the webcast.
Right Kenny go ahead.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Ryan penny with clean energy
we're the nation's largest
provider of renewable natural
gas transportation fuel we have
highlighted sixty stations and
forty three states including
eight and I New Mexico we are
provide services to refuse
transit heavy truck customers
this bill will increase business
investment and decrease
greenhouse gas emissions with a
positive externalities a
decrease in smog forming knocks
and diesel particulate matter
we've been in business success
story because the California low
carbon fuel standard and this is
working in other states as well
so we think that this is going
to be a success and in New
Mexico we are in a life of thank
you.
Thank you Ryan can issues go
ahead.
But can use to this for the
coalition sustainable
communities New Mexico comprise
of Taos Santa Fe Los Alamos
Albuquerque Los crucis and for
all the reasons already stated
we stand in support of the bill
thank you.
Thank you can.
Dylan Jeff go ahead.
Good morning The Lion Jaff with
consumer report in support of
house bill four to six
greenhouse gas emissions have
adverse climate impacts is Coxon
simmers billions of dollars
every year one tool that can be
used to achieve broad carbon
emissions reduction for the
transportation sectors of clean
fuel standard such as the one
being proposed here today and
often will clean fuel standards
such as this one is technology
neutral and take the market
based approach support a wide
range of contract.
HB forty six is a critical tool
to help alleviate high gas
prices by providing more fuel
options for consumers which are
not tied directly to fluctuating
oil prices and encourage
investments in cost saving
technology needed to reduce
impacts of GHG emissions in
communities across New Mexico HB
four to six will spur innovation
helps this support equitable and
sustainable economic growth and
guide the transition to a
cleaner more just transportation
secretary and we urge the
committee to pass this important
legislation thank you.
Thank you bill Sam waited go
ahead.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee on same way with the
coalition for renewable natural
gas and strong support screen
you'll standards are in need is
a drop in renewable substitute
that can be used to replace
conventional natural gas and all
applications R. G. project
development creates well paid
employment opportunities
including in rural areas for
example developing a new
livestock waste our energy
project creates an average of
two hundred sixteen jobs during
construction after construction
maintaining and operating that
project creates three direct six
interacting seven deuce jobs
Representative total of sixteen
permanent jobs facility and
there's the potential for
hundreds of our need facilities
in New Mexico the strongly
supported option of HB forty six
and four contributing to the
state's clean fuel future.
Thank you Sam.
Shall we need to go ahead.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name shall be
Ellis service vice president
renewables for Darling
ingredients calling strongly
supported house bill for twenty
six dollars in Asia's largest
the nation's largest rendering
company we operated two
locations in New Mexico we
collect use cooking oil and
waste fats throughout the state
in order collection facility in
Los crucis as well as a
processing facility in
Bernalillo starting collects
animal by products from the
livestock industry we collect
bakery residuals from commercial
facilities we collect use
cooking all restaurants once
collected these organic
materials refinement process in
the state they could be sold
then into biodiesel renewable
diesel producers so we do have
one body so customer in the
state based on our experience
and in coastal states where we
also operate rendering programs
we would expect as a result of
this legislation prices paid
restaurants for used cooking oil
to increase substantially we
expect our collection right to
read expect significantly
reduced rates of improper
disposal I dont use cooking lamb
that's reduced agencies up
eighty six percent our bodies or
renewable diesel customers
reduce all Cole believes by at
least fifty percent once again
we we appreciate your
consideration this bill in order
support thank you very much.
Thank you Shelby Amy brown go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I'm Amy brown I'm the
chief operating officer with
alleged consulting and I'm in
Albuquerque resident we urge
support of HB for twenty six I
don't think there's any
disagreement that this will
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and air pollution and create
jobs I'm going to spend just a
few moments talking about the
main argument against the bill
which is the fact on the cost of
gasoline I want to point out
that the bill already provides
that the rules that will be
adopted will limit costs to
consumers which is very
important to keep in mind I also
want to make sure you understand
that the credit price does not
correlate to the price of
gasoline at the pump you can
look at actual hard data from
California and British Columbia
which I've had these programs in
effect for over a decade and see
that that is not the case.
The driver of gas prices is the
price of crude as we all saw in
the last year with the price
spikes in states like New Mexico
that do not currently have a
clean fuel standard clean fuel
standard will drive fuel
diversification and that will
have the effect of providing.
Time is a thank you thank you
very much.
Graham no yes go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's Graham noise on the
executive director of the low
carbon fuels coalition were in
strong support of HB for twenty
six we're trade association as
you would expect with many low
carbon fuel providers but also
some of the world's leading
companies including Amazon
American Airlines bear Boeing
UPS all of these companies want
to see a clean transition to
cleaner fuels and see this is
the best policy device of the
California study that we
supported last year looked
extensively for any correlation
between low carbon fuel standard
credit prices and retail gas
prices are found no correlation
whatsoever over a ten year
period found seventy percent of
the price of retail gases crude
oil as we all have experienced I
am in California twenty percent
is attributable to cap and trade
and gas tax and remaining ten
percent is retail and wholesale
margins the impact of the G.
fuels of low carbon fuel
standard and many other factors
that could not be found us
statistically significant the
program diversifies and opens up
cheaper and cleaner fuels and
also presents opportunities to
attract federal dollars to New
Mexico through the inflation
reduction act and bipartisan
infrastructure act we
instruction point thank you
thank you.
Let me are going to go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of our committee of the
committee my name is Canadian
Mexico executive director of the
New Mexico Alliance of health
councils and we want to express
our full support of HB four to
six authorizing a clean fuels
program in New Mexico this
program will be a cleaner
environment and healthier
communities as a result I would
play a critical role in reaching
decarbonisation amongst many
other environmental friendly
impacts that will also help
address environmental
determinants on health which is
a shared commitment of the New
Mexico Alliance of health
council service well in
advancing health equity across
New Mexico so we appreciate your
support H. B. four to six thank
you all very are.
Next we have he lost in.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jean Loxton and I represent
the league of women voters of
New Mexico.
The league supports bill for
twenty six as amended the clean
fuel standard because that it is
consistent with the league
position to address climate
change issues it will contribute
to this moves transition to
reduce greenhouse gases and
therefore is much less
destructive to individual have
fuel users into industry itself
it provides opportunities for
growth and so we are strongly in
support thank you thank you Jim.
Just go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jessica the present I
represent the American biogas
council the American biogas
council is the voice of US bio
gas industry dedicated to
maximizing carbon reduction and
economic growth using bio gas
systems we represent more than
three hundred seventy companies
and in all parts of the bad gas
supply chain that are leading.
the way to a better future by
maximizing all the positive
environmental and economic
impacts biogas systems offer
when they recycle organic
material into renewable energy
and soil drugs.
We commend
the leadership for bringing
forward HB for twenty six this
important bill can invigorate
and diversify New Mexico's
energy economy improve air
quality and combat climate
change thank you for the
opportunity to comment on this
important matter.
Thank you just a.
Sherri Mero go ahead.
Okay this is sherry Meryl can
you hear me we can't.
Okay current chair Johnson to
members of the committee my name
is sherry Meryl and I and then
into the America director of
state government affairs in the
co chair of the New Mexico gas
vehicle coalition thank you for
the opportunity to speak today
in support of New Mexico house
bill four to six that calls for
a clean transportation fuels
standard program to be
implemented in New Mexico a
clean transportation fuels
standard is field of gnostic
technology neutral and promotes
the production and usage of the
cleanest fuels renewable natural
gas or are in need made from
animal has the lowest carbon
intensity of any fuels including
electricity and hydrogen New
Mexico has an abundance of crops
dairy and other animal farms it
could reduce our energy and
other violent renewable fuels
providing economic opportunities
for many rural areas of New
Mexico implementing a clean
transportation fuel standard in
New Mexico will enable the
cleanest
fuels thank you that's a minute
thank you very much.
Carburetor go ahead.
Good morning good morning madam
chair members the committee says
Kurt rigor of the director of
litter FC Mr Mexico we also
speak the position of the
national conference of churches
and is committees of faith we
fully support SB four twenty six
for all the reasons previously
stated by proponents we owe it
to our children and
grandchildren we the healthy
planet and we believe that four
twenty six we'll continue to
effort thank you for this time
thank you for.
All righty.
Go to public comment in
opposition of the bill please
raise your hands.
Okay let's start with my right.
Chairman terms of committee
trust a reserve officer New
Mexico Chile Association
Representative New Mexico
signature crop and we do send
opposition possible for twenty
six our industry simply cannot
sustain any additional garment
regulations in fact recently
association president Clinton's
announced he's stepping away
from Chile industry because of
it it's too expensive to grow to
the New Mexico the clean fuel
standards will increase prices
and and so with that manager and
opposition.
Madam committee member funds
rules for America's in the New
Mexico cattle growers I don't
know how many of you have the
opportunity to go to the
legislative finance committee
interim committee is in Artesia
this last summer but the one of
the experts that help implement
the California clean fuel
standards give us some numbers
for the first ten percent
reduction in carbon as in cost
to seventy dollars the the
twenty percent reduction is
gonna be for forty five to fifty
cents a gallon and a thirty
percent reduction is going to be
seventy five cents to a dollar
down he said that our state is
too large to rural and there's
to local population to be able
to support this program and
that's coming from the experts
that implemented the program in
California it's awful like for
you to take this into
consideration whenever you guys
are voting on this that this is
going to affect the average
industry drastically one point
six percent of the population.
Was ten point three percent of
the population in Mexico Women's
two point three percent of the
thank you thank you.
Madam chair members moments read
offers from small farms and
wrongful and I represent myself
The New Mexico growers
Association New Mexico property
action services and then the
next order of life is we
strongly oppose this bill any
time you bring government in
prices go up and as Mr court
this state what happened
California that's what will
happen here New Mexico's rural
states unfortunately we're
numbers Randal S. of poverty.
Those people cannot afford
increased fuel prices
agriculture we are a lot of fuel
to put food and I.
This bill will hamper what we
did.
Thirty gallons of fuel per hour
a medium.
Our our tractor burns fifty.
That is a lot of additional cost
agricultural price takers we
can't raise our prices last year
I sold one this year January for
thirty passed last year I got
about seventy five years ago I
got to seventy five how much
thank you.
The alliance and I am a
collision for your for New
Mexico renewable solutions is a
little awkward to hear more
options actuals this bill I want
to thank the sponsors I think we
do appreciate this bill it's
have to lower greenhouse gas
emissions by our specific edits
to the bill would be the pieces
on part of markets specifically
offsetting and the reason why is
because it's not a symmetrical
trade and rather the way that we
see it is it quantifies our
airlines Water the scene is in
California we see this with the
wildfires there we are very
concerned about what this means
in the opening our door to
upmarket the system to where
we're putting a price tag on our
air land water we understand
that transportation is a really
large polluting industries but
we believe that addressing this
of the source would be a better
way to to look at the house
definitions I have to also do
some research on the part and
also the purpose of what the
fact is has also.
Thank you.
Comments in opposition to the
bill madam chair members of the
committee to do Rivera of
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
hi unfortunately due Senator
Savall opposition this morning
to the proposal for you although
we appreciate the spirit the
intention of the bill of like
many of my colleagues mention
for agriculture as an industry
this price takers many of our
agricultural operations are
located in very rural parts of
the US state and because of that
we do spend more on a
transportation and going to and
fro not only to get you guys
food and supplies to the grocery
store also for basic services
like health care and to get
groceries back to our so for
these reasons we encourage you
all to love in opposition thank
you.
Do we have individuals outside
no okay let's go to the webcast.
Comments in opposition to house
bill two four two six one K. so
the engine can see echo go
ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Sophia to complete the on the
environmental justice for Nader
for earth care community
development nonprofit based on
the south side of Santa Fe and
I'm here today asking you to
oppose H. B. four twenty six
what was previously mentioned
the secretary central mechanism
for implementation established
by the bill.
Is a system whereby individual
companies earn credits by
reducing emissions and then sell
those credits individuals or
companies who will meet the
applicable standards the global
indigenous community has asked
for protections against the
commodification of the secret
air water soil for our please
keep the lessons learned from
our indigenous relatives in
other countries please hear
calls against Carter market
mechanisms like carbon credits
carbon markets the proven to not
work and to overestimate actual
reduction in emissions due to
look into the indigenous of our
own networks in Alice's carbon
markets.
It's a scheme that props up and
encourages more carbon emissions
which is extremely harmful we
can all agree.
Improving fuel efficiency
standards is important but I'm
going to carbon trading
mechanisms along with in this
bill negates the benefits that
might have.
Zoom on age before twenty six
thank you thank you Sophia.
Carlos go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee it's Leri
Sonntag here part of the better
together New Mexico grassroots
coalition and oppose house bill
for twenty six with requirements
that are among the most
stringent in the country already
in New Mexico we can ill afford
the costs that result from this
type of legislation it's quite
different to institute this type
of stringent cap and trade
policy in a state like
California that has abundant
wealth it should be noted
however that policies like fifty
four twenty six are driving up
poverty and homelessness as I've
been instituted in California I
have been reading different
studies I guess because the ones
I read there is a clear
correlation between legislation
like this and the price per
gallon of gas which could this
legislation increase thirty
fifty up to a dollar per gallon
this piece of legislation works
to appease climate activists but
it ignores the true
environmental and socio economic
harm that will cost.
I point you to oppose house bill
four twenty six thank you.
Thank you.
Of Julia part go ahead.
Yes good morning madam chair
committee members managed really
for non the executive director
of public action alliance we
focus on climate justice
and I'm here that respectfully
oppose this bill although you
know we do agree that we need
some
stronger environmental
protections in regards to a
field standards we don't support
the
codifying of carbon markets are
offsetting schemes
our through our analysis we
don't believe that the market
can actually address emissions
reductions on.
that has to be done by phasing
out fossil fuels so all your my
time and just again please
oppose thank you.
Thank you Julia.
Erica Bahnsen go ahead.
Please on you yourself.
Unfortunately we cannot hear you
Erica.
We'll move on come back okay.
Of the go ahead.
Good morning chairwoman members
of the committee my name is
Chelsea I'm here representing
yucca use United for climate
crisis action under thousands of
members and supporters with
transportation compromising the
highest percentage of US
emissions you must find ways to
reduce emissions in this sector
we appreciate the effort to do
so here but as right and this
bill will fall flat to ensure
real reductions this bill would
need to be changed to make sure
polluters are not able to claim
credits for complying with laws
and standards that already exist
such as the methane rule under
renewable portfolio standard
another issue that needs to be
addressed as the bill
specifically allows for the
inclusion of third party
nonprofit credit a great a great
tears part nine section after
all our of our mental protection
agencies verify the any offsets
included are real historically
it has not proven possible even
for national governments and
international corporations to
verify these offsets accurately
on the overwhelming evidence is
the office don't reduce overall
emissions study after study has
found that they're ineffective
emission reduction strategy
meanwhile there is ample
evidence that they cause harm to
indigenous and other land based
communities who have experienced
displacement and speculation of
their lands as a result offset
schemes thank you for
considering these important
questions during the debate.
Thank you Jersey.
Walter Bradley go ahead.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee well I'm Walter
Bradley and I am gainfully
employed but very farmers of
America in the.
Hello this this bill is cut good
intentions we all know and and
and it doesn't take a rocket
scientist to figure out the cost
will go up and I'll just give
you one quick example we don't
have any of the refineries
operate this currently in the
state of New Mexico so are the
fuel will have to be imported
from either Colorado or Arizona
and the the side of the state
transportation costs is going to
drive a cost of just just that
alone not counting the
investment that would go into
refineries to
start producing this type of
field
stand part of greatly enough
opposition to for twenty six and
for the same reasons of that the
the others have spoken thank you
madam chairman thank you Walter.
C. L. O. C. U. legal go ahead.
CLI.
Hello.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Gail S.
ends and the senior attorney
with the center for biological
diversity when we also stand
with the no false illusions or
wishing in opposition to this
bill because this bill allows
carbon trading and credit Senate
means that producers of carbon
intensive fuels can continue to
produce those dirty fuels and
simply why credits to offset
that dirty production so it
doesn't result in overall
lessening the production of
dirty high carbon fuels in the
state so we can't support a bill
that doesn't actually decrease
that the direct emissions from
and for that reason we have
proposed a bill thank you.
Thank you.
A need when we Chester go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jim
Winchester the executive
director of the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico appreciate the
opportunity to talk in the
conversation today
we as an industry agree that
reduced emissions is the shared
goal I all parties here I would
like to point out that oil and
gas is as led the way by
significantly decreasing
emissions while increasing
production the past decade
I think though that this bill
the question is at what cost
would be mandated clean fuel
standards have on New Mexicans
in I respectfully disagree with
supporters in the data is
available that shows that this
act will reach consumers at the
gas pump in New Mexico estimates
are for an increase of anywhere
from thirty cents to fifty cents
and just want to make it clear
this is a regressive tax and the
tax that we boards most on those
in poverty in New Mexico as well
as those in rural areas so we do
stand in respectful opposition
and we thank you for our time
today thank you Jeff.
All right Erica I'll make you
one more chance go ahead.
You can start I did you all hear
me yes.
Right good morning madam chair
woman a committee members my
name is Erika Brunson and I'm
with the American fuel and
petrochemical manufacturers we
respectfully exit to oppose H.
B. four to six New Mexico
residents already pay twenty
cents the state taxes and fees
every gallon for every gallon of
gas a started a study by the
water associates examined
California's else that work in
clean fuel program as a
benchmark for comparison to New
Mexico's proposed CFS still want
to estimated California's costs
to be twenty three cents per
gallon of gasoline the analysts
estimated the reduction target
The New Mexico HB four to six
would be twenty seven cents per
gallon for gasoline and thirty
one cents per gallon for diesel
back twenty thirty New Mexico
cost impact to consumers is more
extreme than either California
Oregon and it will hurt New
Mexico low income residents
seniors on fixed income.
We recommend the legislature
waited this no budget against
the much higher program across
thank you.
Thank you.
Purpose for it so.
I don't see more hands for
comments on the webcast the
members.
We have a list going.
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair move to table.
Second that.
Motion still ahead and
Representative Rehm.
Minimalists Representative
Hochman.
Representative.
Madam chair
Madam chair representative we
understand the intent that
chair.
An emotional to.
Yes you have a motion on the
table have a second but we have
three members would like to
discuss that the so we're going
to go to read okay Hochman and
then the thank you.
We'll get back to you.
Sure
okay what opal to save more
questions we can go to.
Two of Representative Hodgman
yeah if it if the motion fails
and put money back on the list
thanks.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you Representative for
brain felt you and I have talked
about this ourselves a little
bit but I just wanted to get on
the record so having cleaner
fuel standards if it works
correctly correctly means we
have more efficient fuels which
means more less less fuel to get
you more
and so I from a climate change
perspective absolutely hundred
percent behind that I think that
if it's New Mexico the
trailblazer position to do that
but as chair of the house
transportation public works
capital for equipment to me I
just have one really large
concern that a large part or
very significant part of the
different department
transportation budget comes from
fuel excise tax.
So if we were to implement this
particular standard my concern
is the department.
Which utilizes these funds for
road repair most likely would be
put in a place where it
eventually would have less money
and more efficient fuel.
Last.
Let's purchasing of fuel so I
know that part of this bill you
do have a advisory committee.
And I would very much ask that
you consider to have a member of
the department of transportation
on that advisory committee so
that if there were to be
specific loss of revenue for
that department we can figure
out a way to make up for that
revenue otherwise we're putting
New Mexicans in a precarious
position that we will be able to
fix the roads the same way that
we normally do so I just wanted
to put that comment on the
record I from the when we spoke
founded like you were open to
that which is very much
appreciated but yeah we always
need to always always always
need to considered and intended
consequences of every piece of
legislation that we bring and I
think that that would
potentially be one of them
associated with the stuff so
thank you madam chair thank you.
Little yes thank you madam chair
representative and experts
so I heard the discussions
regarding the
On both sides about the cost at.
Hearing on one side there will
be no cost at the pump on the
other side yes it will be
constant.
Can you describe.
Whether there will be it is at
ten year is lay out how that may
or may not happen.
Madam chair representative
little yes thank you thank you
for that question yes there are
lots of studies that have been
done based on the California and
Oregon and now those actions and
program and those studies are
showing that there is virtually
little if any cost at a cost
increase at the pump for gas
and.
There are options at the pump
for clear fuels and those that
you're fuels are significantly
cheaper sometimes a dollar less
per gallon so that's that's
that's one thing else there also
what this bill would do is
incentivise the creation
manufacturing of of of your.
So Regis options the way the
market.
The credit program will be
designed and I think it's really
important Madam chair
representative of that that I
That we've taken to
Representative Hochman Vigil
sentences the consideration it's
critically important that that
is affected communities
discussion communities that
government that our agencies are
all part of the process and
creating that market programs
and that we can be sure
reasonable just reasonableness
of fuel prices and that's
something that the E. ID takes
into account and that's it's
that's already it's statutory
authority so I think that's
really critical as we think
about designed this program that
we're insuring that prices are
low.
There's one report one city that
that we see that.
That were filled prices increase
that that was based on this
information and miscalculations
there's a there's a whole dark
what not at but those that those
are peer review based on on
reality so I.
I would say that I knew what was
gonna look like but I will tell
you that this the IDC ID and the
advisory committee that will
help shape.
The policies will be taking feel
prices and the consideration
have not seen.
Regis prices at all.
Thank you.
Thank you for that information
I think you mentioned.
The Madam chair representative
that that there will be a sign
in the bill the membership of
this group though have advisory
looks to be more diverse
I'm glad to see
that the representation also is
going to clue.
Maintenance and I bring that up
mostly because it was a cause
that are highly is are you
through tribal lands there's no
denying I forty I twenty five
all of the major arterials
through rural New Mexico five
fifty and and so on so I'm
wondering hello this is going
to.
Hello this might benefit these
communities I can see well
actually maybe my question would
be madam chair initiative what
is the impact.
To not just we're talking about
rural New Mexico who are are
long lived along these highways
and by ways what's the impact
those communities thank you
madam chair representative will
I think the impact is great on
its on the positive and of of
this section of and I want to
just point out for for the
committee madam chair that
please fields are here already
this will create more incentives
to pay those bills to move
companies.
Yes I do that this is this is
where it is filled with help of
world New Mexico where a company
can locate in rural Mexico to
create the clean fuels that's I
think that's really really
important so there's an economic
benefit of development benefit
for companies that come into
come into rural Mexico and.
What's also important is that
there's a lot of money right
now.
Federal level you we talk a lot
about that berated funding right
for from the inflation reduction
acts from the bipartisan
infrastructure access that
there's money that will create
incentives through tax credits
for businesses to do this kind
of work as of four four of New
Mexico but there's also a health
impact with cleaner fuels lesser
polluting fuels we've got real
of air quality issues we will
have fewer pollutants in the air
that has a direct impact on on
rural communities and there's
also a groundwater of benefit of
three feels ground water cleaner
fuels don't believe that
background.
It's nearly the same effect so I
think we're looking at a lot of
positive benefits for rural New
Mexico.
The madam thank you
Madam chair representative so
when I think of some of the
alternative fuels I think of
electric vehicles in my district
in my area
that seems to be a little more
At.
It said taking hold I'm also
reports about as time moves
forward the trick Bill Costa.
Are setting up stream the pricey
well they are to me but but will
come down over time as we see
other
Other
Other because.
I should just lost manufacturing
yes thank you.
Manufactured products a start up
high and decreases as the either
work and gaining traction or are
they go away
Really and pertaining to that I
can see how I I have seen this
electric
Our plug in stations is what I'm
gonna call them I'm sure there's
a better term for them what are
the calls charging six charging
stations thank you electrics
charging stations that are
available
and we have talked I have talked
with about this before too is
like and thinking about
we go to yes we go to Mescalero
to the south and terror county
along those routes at least
because maybe I don't have a
vehicle I not seen.
Of the stations in New Mexico
we're traveling great distances
so
I'm wondering how that's going
to change and
I don't want to speak for
especially rural communities of
farming communities and
agriculture communities but I
also grew up around that and I
can see how at I haven't seen a
whole lot of trucks and
vehicles for agriculture and
livestock it is it's difficult
to see so my question madam
chair representative as a couple
of things to it.
And how will that be built and
maybe the first question is it
all or nothing is that one or
the other and I in my mind that
I have it in my head sometimes
that it's well we're gonna move
completely towards.
The zero emissions.
Is that realistic and by what
period of time I see we have
them set out so that's my first
one is it is the only.
Right now what's been happening
and secondly
how money eight.
Revenue the potential is there
houses revenue can be realized.
By a communities I see one
charging station that I'm aware
of I know of the I think it's a
Santa Domingo there's one so and
that's a good spot.
Because it's a long way from
here to Albuquerque and other
points in between so thank you
very long.
In question the manager of the
little it it's it's complicated
this is not an all or nothing
bill we're not saying no gas
regularly produce norm normally
produce gasoline this I just on
the term but the way we have
gasoline now that's not gonna
stop this bill provides options
and it basically feels cleaner
so we options for cleaner fuels
all the options for a lecture
vehicles the legible charging
stations I think that's a really
important no you know there
those charges Asians are are all
of the state you have apps on
their phone to tell the more the
next the nearest one is that is
absolutely in our future and I
think it's it's it should be
noted that that's an option for
tribes as well to
have more charging stations
there's a the federal level to
incentivize that so we we can
bring money community and tribes
could sell those credits you
know from the the impact from
the charging stations they have
from the solar projects on on
tribal lands to use to create
the electricity that will
charges at charging stations so
that that's really important to
note here also just an article
this morning that Tesla is going
to produce a twenty five
thousand dollars time is
probably not in the that cute
but it's hard that runs well
that the the EDD market is
changing rapidly you're getting
more mileage you know from from
charging I think that's really
really important what this bill
does it needs that car
manufacturers where they are so
that we have a market for that
as well for the efficient cars
that don't take don't cost as
much operate so not all or
nothing I would say it's all
actually lots of options and we
created census for those
options.
Thank you thank you for that I
will listen to the rest of the
debate thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative I have
a motion on the table there are
no more questions from the
committee by Representative
Zamora table and second by
Representative.
These call the roll
Representative on the enormity
no to table.
In a block yes to table
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil no
to table.
Representative.
Yes
Rehm yes to.
Representative Zamora yes to to
by Geoffrey Roth no to table.
Madam chair Johnson no to table
take this to table
the motion fails
with and I agree.
The new pass I have a motion by
Representative.
Waste here for do pass in the
second by Representative on your
new please take role no I
remembers said all ask questions
of okay let's go back to
Representative right thank you
madam chair of.
Yes Madam chair representative I
don't think anyone in the room
doesn't cut the missions
I think that
get over the.
The the prefaces to the when we
look at how it's going to be
executed we can't change certain
things so what's what's just for
a moment to talk about China and
how they're producing so many of
the.
And we have seen from the full
circles I was how it just
happened to come to the US and
unfortunately the error China's
see here that work in the end up
right.
And that's just a fact of life
the wind moves all around the
planet so until we can get all
of the others on board.
We're gonna for you for anything
what's going on I would really
like to see our international
of partners get together and for
some of these countries to lower
their emissions you look at what
we're doing in the US and I mean
we're moving to more energy
efficient cars we're doing of
the more energy efficient
electricity we're doing all the
things that we can do this.
to put the standard in.
Federal rule statewide New
Mexico I think is gonna be very
problematic and try to get into
some of it the you said that you
you have some studies that show
the lower that it actually
lowers the fuel costs can you
share those stories with us and
share Representative
There's importation of the to
the Department of them in
California.
S. Census beats one economic
study and I can.
Ordered on to you.
And there are other studies and
perhaps experts can.
Let us.
Yes thank you.
Share so
the other our study I would know
if that we found most complied
that the department is working
fine no
discernible change in the price
of fuel
Of all these other factors that
Representative four ties us.
Introduction those are the
factors that
Part of me wants that the facts
the price of.
Thank you.
Madam chair yeah Representative
I would I would appreciate that
you give those to me if you
could but what was the score you
look at it so.
Today are going on triple eight
and I found that the gas prices
in California the average as far
as right now is four dollars and
eighty six cents a gallon.
The average price in the New
Mexico is three dollars and
thirty nine cents or gal.
So we've got a dollar forty
seven.
There was a speaker who said the
fuel costs you should talk about
California.
This is support seventy percent
of the fuel cost is the crew
costs.
And twenty percent is a cap and
trade offs.
That's what it says.
That comes out to ninety seven
cents a gallon.
So go ahead and say that we're
not gonna see an increase I
think it's very naive.
Where.
I.
This is LA times March of twenty
to twenty twenty two and this is
from governor since office so
it's an LA times article.
Of officials have signaled that
changes to the cap on the
program and how much the state
relies on that are on the table.
The scope scoping plans may show
that a proportion of the total
reductions the cap and trade
does not need for such a major
role in the toolbox moving
forward said jerk Blumenthal
secretary of the environmental
protection agency during the
Senate hearing.
And what they're finding in this
is that the goals can be met.
The reduction is not as much as
I go back to the winds that
travel across the of the whole
continent so what's what's going
head and for a moment what is
the cost of a CO two.
Con
carbon credit.
But Madam chair representative
I'm gonna have to to to answer
that but I want to dispel some
myths here.
I disagree that the increased
gas prices in California are as
a result of the cap and trade
market there are they have
numerous excise taxes and I want
I'm from California I know how
expensive it is to drive there
is always and more sensitive
California New Mexico always and
it's for a variety of reasons
but mainly you know that the
taxes that are that are impose.
This is not a cap and trade
program this is a market
research for the production
credits that happen trade
program I don't think we have
enough time in the next two
weeks to talk about the
mechanisms of cap and trade but
that is about.
Factories polluting in New York
all kinds of things not it feels
so I I just I need to dispel
them that is right now happy to
pass on thank you Here
Representative Ortez other thing
I've noticed that California has
a claim through a program and
also has a separate crime
happened treat program and so
when you look at costs that are
related to capital street in
California those do not exist
here this is a claim for your
program California has many
different kinds of excise taxes
have intrigue program into
different.
the idea is one that we are
hoping to have adopted this bill
not on.
Not having not that not a
carpeted
happens right program like
California has in itself right
and separate program there the
other thing I'd say about
China is that I would say that
China actually has one of the
largest TV markets and as far as
manufacturing PED's as far as
advancing
these kinds of technologies
China sees the writing on the
wall time is already there for
this up and New Mexico could be
a leader in this or we could
wait and see what happens but I
believe there is an article in
the Wall Street journal that
says China's up their market
even market is blowing up and I
think that is something that we
look at the Mexicans of maybe we
can we can participate in that
two years ago.
there they know that is what is
great about this vet bills as
far as infrastructure for ET
vehicles is that utilities are
actually participated market are
actually required to invest
their revenues from the credit
program into building up the
transportation infrastructure
that we need that's going to
allow the federal monies that
are coming in from
infrastructure that is a
selection act bipartisan
infrastructure law that will
help us create the
infrastructure to receive the
monies that are going to be
coming our way as far as
upgrade our transportation
system for all of us thank you.
Madam chair and expert of how is
trying to generate most of this
electricity is sent from burning
of coal.
The next the.
Yes they have a lot of coal
fired power plants that they're
building online but.
They're capitalists they know
that the easy market is huge and
there's a lot of consumers ready
to I and there's a lot of folks
locally looking to figure out
how to invests in that and so I
think that's where you see them
taking both the precious.
Thank you and thank you expert
for pointing out that they will
burn more coal to power more
electric vehicles and that's one
point that we need to work on on
that of questions you know that
we get more people from around.
So madam chair and
representative let me go back
maybe I don't understand this if
we're going to go ahead and
produce fuel.
And
and it's you know dirty fuel and
I talked it was talking about
yes we will just use that.
does a company let's say the
refinery that's producing of
gasoline in New Mexico do they
have to buy a carbon credit.
Madam chair representative right
I I want to be clear here New
Mexico actually imports most of
its.
Yes we can do so that is correct
right so.
Usually consists of up to the
chair representative which has
under the proposed program
The idea is that if you are a.
Generator and fuel you
accumulate and income stream and
credits in this low
carbon fuel market and
if your fuel does not need
the low carbon fuel standard you
go into the marketplace and
purchase
the credits that the clean fuel
generator to look cards you'll
generators have been
accumulating based on their
products and
over time the card in.
Standard decreases and so
ultimately you begin having
cleaner and cleaner fuels
which we anticipate having the
results that we've been
discussing here today.
So madam chair next for so I'm
not too sure of fuel I produced
all I have to go and buy that
carbon credit how much is that
carbon credit faster.
Chair representative we don't
know because we have not created
that market yet in New Mexico so
I think one of the ideas of this
bill is that it gives the
authority to create a program
that works best for you Mexicans
and so what's gonna happen is
that everybody comes together
and we have consumer
considerations we have industry
at the table we have utilities
at the table where she can use
of the table trying to figure
out
what is the system that works
fast and then the market will
decide ultimately based on the
framework that script together
as part of this rulemaking.
So madam chair and expert how
mature the other states that are
at that point charging for that
carbon credit.
I'm gonna go I usually.
Madam expert on the state is not
the one that is I want to be
clear the state is not the one
that is buying and selling
credit these credits are bought
and sold between
twelve senators and the folks
that are looking to buy the
critics and so that transaction
if not
going through the state as far
as you're purchasing from the
state or not purchasing from the
state
and I returned to I called the.
Yes.
The.
And I'm sorry.
Madam chair representative we
have the range of the house from
where markets range from twenty
five dollars from the fund to
has tied to intuitive I organs
wages from fifty to one sixty
one
Mr the most recent California I.
Sure that point.
Madam chairman point.
Can you Representative finishes
question is if I can write your
manager is just that what we're
talking about participate is I
think we could clear something
up on it so we can all
understand for carbon credits
are.
On that point this.
I think thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative.
Members of this committee.
Need to understand what carbon
credits are that's that's so
important.
In this bill and just a money
that we've been hearing to the.
We can go to the prices of
carbon credits.
But it doesn't really matter
what the price of apartment
credit is.
What what what the fault of
setting up a carbon credit
system.
Is that it doesn't stop any
pollution percent.
It doesn't stop at all because.
If I go start a company.
That produces not so clean up a
fuel.
I can go buy carbon credits.
From somebody else.
In that company still produces
the same amount of pollution.
It's creating a market within
our country.
That gives us a false hope of
reducing emissions.
So then there for the customer
the poorest of the poor.
In our state will wind up paying
a higher costs for.
Fuel.
Even though testimony has been
here been said here today that
it doesn't raise the price of
the fuel.
It will raise the price of the
fuel because most carbon credits
will be bought.
At a price.
To be able to keep producing the
fuel.
So we're chasing the tiger by
the tail.
And we're going to create higher
prices for the poorest of the
poor.
And when you create a higher
price for the poorest of the
poor they're gonna suffer we're
gonna create higher prices for
farmers.
And therefore it's going to
drive higher prices.
For food for clothing for
everything else it has to do
with agriculture farmers will
not only some of.
can you finish your point four
being called to the floor we
gonna have to really still for
tomorrow morning and continue
tomorrow morning thank you thank
you madam chair.
So far not will not only have to
pay higher prices for their cost
of inputs to the cross.
But we also have Department.
We sell.
We sell.
That wholesale prices because we
can't raise our prices are
prices are predicted by the
market by the farm.
And the.
I.
I'm asking you to close your
comment was being called.
Okay.
The first tomorrow morning
focus.
I understood that you're asking
me to comment and.
Now closed thank you madam chair
of respect thank you members of
the committee.
Hey we're.
S. and will continue tomorrow
morning at ten AM.
Yes.
Representative.
