Present.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little.
Present.
Representative ring.
Representative Zamora.
Zero to this day.
Madam chair Joseph present.
Madam chair we have a quorum
thank you already welcome
everyone welcome this.
And then hello everybody on the
web cast
let's go ahead and again we
don't have any.
We have three feels today and
let's go ahead and begin with
Representative.
Chavis thank you madam chair of
health bill one seventy nine
think is a really.
Building what it does is require
someone who has.
Work on your home to
you know if there are nations
that you haven't paid them and
they want to place a lien on
your home we've got to give you
notification that got a few
you've documentation in terms of
you know contract or what work
was completed one what
Work was completed sorry and you
know what feels have been.
Right now the latest **** that
whole year doesn't see any kind
of notification I was when I was
out door knocking one of my
constituents says to me that you
know they found out that there
was a lien placed on there many
many years we were surprised
when they have to go
bankruptcy hearing that's.
So they had no notice they had
no documentation as a matter of
fact the same thing happened to
me of.
I was doing so.
Research on my mortgage find out
there is a I don't even know who
that individual was never met
and the work on my house this
bill would essentially protect.
From the it would give them the
opportunity to have notice.
Sent to them with the
documentation.
And with that.
Okay thank you let's go to the
audience.
We have any opposition or
support of the bill okay were.
Would you like to make a
statement.
We have to work with.
In these past this where are
recovering years try to help
people.
And it has been one of in the
this is an at the and also.
Who wants to you know homes
trying to get a problem that has
been taken.
Something needs to happen to.
Announcements the right people.
Thank you states the webcast.
Incontinence or.
Rates for that so committee
members.
Madam chair and representative
this is really needed I agree I
think there's one other thing
and I don't know I I don't have
the language to fix it but I'd
like for you to think about how
to fix.
So I've contract with general
contractor.
He's building on house and we
saw this in Burleigh county
where the general contractor
basically in those old from.
The people were building the
house the subcontractors filed a
lien against the property.
For them to have their house
basically paid for twice so.
Yes you know the the general
contractor got convicted went to
jail but we automated where.
The home doesn't have to fires
house twice.
So
You know I I think if the
legislation said something about
if you if you're paying the
general contractor the read upon
price and he doesn't pay the
subs that you know you're still
good to go.
So why not I'm sorry it's going
to hurt so Sir not getting their
money but I don't know I don't
know how to fix it who's someone
gets hurt you know in the in the
process but it should.
I don't think the homeowners
because they could end up in a
situation where they could
before phone.
I just have to walk away.
But this is definitely needed
you don't have to give in the
on notice I could go put a
billion on everyone's house here
for no reason at all.
But anyway that set.
It is.
Representative Zamora thank you
madam chair thank you presenter
for the bill so in a hand
delivered.
Letter.
Does that have to be with some
of the some kind of authority
here and for.
Like maybe a share for summer
can the person placing of the.
to the hand delivery of that
letter and and my concerns madam
chair and presenters that.
What if I take the letter to the
to the person I place a lien on
and things go south from there.
Just some safety issues
That that you might look at
unlike the bill of but I do I do
have another question managers
right now the in present time.
The county clerk doesn't write a
letter to that person or
anything it just comes up does
it come up in the newspaper
Madam chair representative
Zamora I don't we look at the
county clerk in any situation
doesn't.
This is a notification this.
Making plays the lead with the
county clerk of and that is a
story madam chair and just walk
away Madam chair representative
yes okay.
I believe that's all the
questions I answer thank you.
Representative little
Representative lock and then
this is an opportunity.
The to the two packs I would
second that that was why okay
Representative.
I just can't within the agency
yeah.
Thank you.
A. as COVID other we need to do
that madam chair and
representative that we've spoken
about this before some similar
concerns about hand delivered
how's that verified that it's
done that check in the mail
certified mail provides the
record so recommended changes
but.
Second Hochman Vigil
how has this not been done
already thanks to.
We have a motion for to pass a
second have any opposition.
CNN Representative.
Pass on the house.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you thank you.
Hey is.
One nine two I have to
We have the staff pass out.
So.
And.
That we didn't get to do the
last time and police.
Remember their limited edition.
Okay thank.
A ceremonial full madam chair do
have.
There's no incentive to.
Thank.
Thank you.
Now we'll go to health.
Want to.
Armstrong thank you madam chair
and the thank you committee for
hearing additional
Representative Brown is the
committee and asked me if I
would sit in for herself I can
guarantee you that I will not.
What is the issue.
left.
Of
the at this.
But anyway madam chair office
keep rolling for the time being
but.
This is a bill to exempt social
security income tax from from.
Of the wi fi and I run this bill
for.
At least six years
Version of it did it last year
but with the cap.
On the income so scary we would
like to exempt social security.
Completely property tax.
And Representative Brown would
you like to add.
Just start okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so Representative
Armstrong I think is summer is
it very well we we heard from so
many retirees after the
legislature and the governor
signed legislation to exempt
social security income from
state tax if the governor did
say
press release of us to do the.
The exemptions that she wanted a
full repeal.
And this legislative process of
went forward and ended up kind
of being modified a little bit
so the character account was put
on.
And I just like to send a
representative Armstrong behalf
of retirees and say let's just
with the careful together Madam
one of the concerns I have is
that we're still we're still
making news for being a state
that taxes social security at
the state level so we have
printer so being on that list of
states that tax people often
don't read the fine print or the
footnotes there's a cap and you
know that with what we do we do
show continue to show up on the
list the state Mexico taxes
social security.
And so I just they could be good
to make a clean slate of it I
think we can well afford to do
it it would just simplify the
system and of course of for that
one of the points I want to make
them chair members is that
social security is actually
being taxed twice whatever is
being taxed there's a payroll
deduction of tax at that point
so we money is put into.
Your own basically social
security for the for the it is
taxed on the front end and
And.
If you were states are taxed at
the back and then the
distributions occur so I think
it's it's their money as their
retirement funds so to speak
today at the invested in it.
Payroll deductions just better
the thing thank you what they
what they have
I think.
Mr
madam chair.
I heard from some constituents
who many people very very
thankful that the legislature
took off the most of the tax but
I think I've been getting
letters saying what you need to
just the whole thing.
New York explained.
What came out but they're still
a great will there for the sake
of our seniors.
to just remove the tax
completely and that's house bill
one ninety two.
We stand for questions thank
you.
The do we have any comments from
the audience.
Thank you.
And that.
Is the opposing or supporting
have.
I don't see our hands up so
committee members.
Representative more thank you
madam chair and and I'm glad.
both presenters both
Representative that that you did
make a statement that this money
has already been taxed
That's that's been the issue for
me is this how can we tax and
then I believe.
If I remember the history of the
Social Security might enlighten
us on this madam chair
representative is that.
What happened.
How this tax got started it is
that the state of New Mexico was
in one real bad crunch was it
back in the forties or fifties
and they were looking for
somebody.
And this this all security was
not being taxed.
And then.
They were looking for somebody
to pace the state was looking
for money to pay bills and they
went ahead taxol security with
intentions to take it all later
date and they just never
happened it just stayed on there
and
I think as as.
Representatives of the people
the state of New Mexico and
especially the.
The social security recipients.
We all want to them to take
these taxes off holes close
your.
Things are hard enough on them
and and their budgets are tight.
And it's not like if they run
out of money they can go out and
get a job to supplement whatever
the money for.
And the.
I appreciate bringing this bill
forward I think it's way
overdue.
And that.
Thank you very much.
That's all of my comments and
shares insert might just college
three four so I I do have a
history of how it came to be in
New Mexico that we taxes I don't
think it was the forties I think
it was somewhere in the eighties
but what happened is it was one
of those end of session late
night.
meetings on the floor when
everybody was tired people are
really paying attention and this
part about taxed social security
at the state level was kind of
put in the bill with the with
the public wasn't on notice
about it nor with the
legislators for that matter and
after the bill passed they
looked and so there were taxes
what did we just do.
And and you're right it was a
period of time when when
finances were tied for the state
but that certainly is not the
case right now and the state
seems very Bob revenue and so
yeah the history is very
interesting on this one and and
I think those late night session
sometimes
good idea.
Thank you thanks to have
Representative Kauffman to be
here Representative Chasey thank
you very much I'm sure the youth
sponsoring this bill you know I
The longer I I sit in this job
the the more I kind of see
different politics at flame
certain issues I know that this
is definitely one of them I
heard more about this issue for
my constituents in the past
couple of years and I think I
have anything else except except
for maybe daylight savings time.
But I I think at one point the
administration and the
legislature trying to kind of
find a good compromise in in
passing what we.
With the income cap to ensure
that those New Mexicans who
really needed the break got it
but I think that's missing the
point someone Madam chair
representative and that these
are our seniors these are folks
that have earned this money
these are folks that have earned
their retirement and also in the
state of New Mexico we need
retirees here very big part of
our economy and so I think that
was kind of like fighting off
our nose to spite our face
someone in in the solution we
did come up with and not
sometimes you have to just give
folks a break even at fiscally
there are some.
Arguments against it and I know
that as a Democrat I'm always my
first concern is always to look
out for the little guy and for
the person who who needs to help
and and and is always going to
be.
Working against those forces
that make it very hard to be an
adult and you know post
capitalistic compare that but on
this bill I really do differ
from my colleagues and I think
that I think that our retirees
deserve it I think that it's a
small
the small thing that we can do
to add to our tax package that
would get a lot of games just in
terms of good well with you know
that the people in the state of
New Mexico retirees self on I
thank you for your first
persistent
and and keep going keep going
even if the answer is so thank
you master thank you.
Majority floor leader chasing
thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative
So didn't we start taxing social
security the same time vested.
Reagan administration this Madam
of I think I I have copious
notes on this madam chair and I.
I could go through them if you
want but I think it was in the
eighties nineteen eighty four if
I recall correctly so that would
be in the same time the federal
government if one moment forms
president I was just really with
the federal government to tax
social security and this is
where the money was paid
gathered to.
And then redistributed and they
still do.
So we need to get on their case
directs.
Thank you Representative green
Madam chair of the second set a
quick question one third of.
Representative lot thank you
madam chair and thank you.
Both representatives I think
last year the year before that I
testified in committee for this
bill both my parents are on
social security and I think it's
so important that we give our
seniors what they paid in you
know they were told okay you got
to pay this for your whole life
when you're working and you
deserve to get it back and I
think regardless of how much you
make I think that it was a
promise that the federal
government and our state remains
to people in this country and I
think it's important to do this
bill so thank you but I
appreciate it thank you I have a
motion for do passed by
Representative green and a
second by Representative little.
Do we have any opposition.
Seeing none do you have to pass
on a house bill one nine two and
I also want to thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
In their comments thank you
thank you.
Measure we have another bill.
Those.
The people yes.
One nine two.
Members of the committee so this
was our plan B. bill.
we've got if if we're going to.
The tasks that we would at least
propose which we do and what are
the three that we would put an
inflation escalator into
The the tax for this first
editions and putting everyone.
regardless of what.
the federal government to reduce
their to have a full log.
Cost of living adjustment for
the for the federal portion of
for for for Social Security.
Even that is not keeping pace
with the rate of inflation so
our seniors are actually losing
ground.
As inflation.
At doing right now so the idea
of this bill is to just put and
indexing and basically you're a
call of this kind listed there
and that so reforms from the
state and anything thank you
Representative Brown the
adjusted what she said and no
this is our back up plan if we
can't we prefer the full retail
but this the inflation
escalators just a another way
that we could possibly help our
seniors but of course we for
the.
Thank you madam chair thank you
I don't see anyone in the
audience and honors in so
committee members.
Representative right Madam chair
of the do pass second.
Russian career to pass
Representative right a second by
Representative block I have one
question.
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair representative is
there need for this if you your
first bill passes the you want
to carry both through and.
In case one dies Associated
Madam chair representative of
our so that's exactly right we
do prefer the full repeal if we
get that we don't need to adjust
for inflation
but if both bills go for which I
think is a good idea we'll see
with the will of the other
committee is scheduled and then
the the chamber and so we just
figure and and you know we have
a kind of a procedure if there's
a conflict in jails we we have
to look at as well but would
like both bills to.
Madam chair representative I
never had thought of that
strategy but I might start
doing.
Thank you and thank you Mr.
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair I guess what I would
say is are both going to the tax
committee so you'll get a full
vetting there and.
As a look at that.
Any potential revenue the
implications and and so forth so
I think this.
It's.
As far as doing to bills.
I think in this case.
You have a unique approach in
which but Representative the
lotus anytime take about and
amid based on the committee yes
so you really have to talk.
Thank you madam.
The.
Back to work.
Any opposition motion for to
pass seeing them you have to
pass on House Bill three.
Thank you.
K..
Done.
Those.
We have a meeting tomorrow one
o'clock Review for fails.
Room three zero nine eight zero
that.
The yeah.
You have Welch provided I don't
have the.
The.
Since then.
If you debate the bills to
long winded TV to watch.
Right.
Your.
Two four.
This is.
Which was.
It
is.
Representative.
And so the.
For for me.
I ended up with two years chair.
The you got some long so we
could get.
Hey Richard.
The members of the of the but I
would.
And.
She's.
