I've been doing land grants I'd
this my nineteen Legislature
broken land grants for nine
years
Arturo's the expert attorney I I
know twenty session with you
know so I will rely on him
heavily so.
Mr to the.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Act arch let
them with the New Mexico land
grant council as Representative
McQueen mentioned the intent or
purpose of this substitute just
to just recognize all those land
grants that are currently
operating as units of government
the way that the general
provisions worked is that they
were the last statute that was
passed during the territorial
period it was essentially a
casual to cover all land grants
that weren't covered by any
other previous legislation and
unfortunately not all of the
previous legislation listed land
grants specifically by name so
the left leave that the question
of what which land grants are
article to land grants which
article one and grants and this
what sort of establish those
that are governed by article one
which is the statute that
provides land grants operate as
units of government so these
land grants are already
operating in that sense that all
have received federal patent
recognizing their property claim
and so this is just a kind of
like a clean up on this is just
recognizing land grants that are
already operating it just makes
it clear and why that's
important is because we have had
issues in the past with those
land grants that are not listed
in statute have problems let's
see with the local jurisdictions
like the county maybe not
recognizing that the or a unity
government or of being eligible
for funding from the state of
through capital outlay of the
grant programs also makes them
eligible for federal funding and
so just being really clear on
which land grants our name gets
statute support in fact working
on some of legislation at the
federal level now and and it it
depends on the definition of
land grants and in New Mexico.
so this would really make clear
as to which land grants that
applies to so for all those
reasons it's it's really
important that we get that
listed and make sure that the
land grants are units a
government everyone's on notice
these are the ones that operate
that way these are the ones that
are subject to paper up to open
meetings act and they're also
the ones who are eligible for
funding from the state and from
other agencies.
Thank you Sarah.
The manager would be happy to
answer any questions.
Please raise your hand if you're
in support this.
In opposition.
We're gonna go to take a look at
those for first so if you can.
Share and use this or
Our.
About seven.
Good morning madam chair I'm
state senator Leo how to meal
representing district five this
bill will provide clarity as to
which land grants are political
subdivisions of the state there
remains confusion that inhabits
land grants from pursuing
federal and state grants that
complicates Land Grant
relationships with federal and
state agencies and even
complications and opening bank
accounts with financial
institutions are confused as of
their status thank you madam
chair and thank you for the
consideration of this bill.
Please state your name for the
record yes good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Bonnie fossil loss K.
state the president of the Santa
Barbara Land Grant Altman chair
I did find a copy of the
document I sure hope you have
approved it to be shared with
other committee members some of
them going to detail in
reference to what I what I wrote
on this drive but the the less I
I I'm here to request your your
support for this house bill
thirty three and I believe that
this bill will put that
credibility validity and
legitimacy of two of the land
grant such a system problem and
grant but real quickly what I
like to do is that the review
reduces that the status of the
sent off of a Land Grant
Committee question in November
of twenty twenty two when we
made a request for support from
the New Mexico Army National
Guard to help us distribute
firewood to members of the
committee communities in and
around the PS where you.
Can someone of state level
discovered that we were not
listed we were required to go to
the Dallas County government to
request to support this process
took time and some serious
effort to convince that tells
County commission that our
request was genuine we never got
to support but I am confident
that the outcome would have been
different it isn't a lot of our
land grant would be listed on
section forty nine dash one dash
two US eight described Land
Grant.
We could not have got he could
have gone directly to the state
issue with our request for this
desperately needed support I
submit to you madam chair
members of this committee what
good used to have the title of a
political subdivisions the state
when we cannot access to
resources derived from such
title thank you madam chair yes
you should.
Anyone else in support.
Chair members on the upper the
L. with the New Mexico land
grant Mexican Senator and the
title to the land grant and we
are in full support of this bill
because it will give these land
grants the ability to provide
the services for the communities
that no one else is stepping up
to do.
They need this help thank you
very much.
Thank you so much I we will now
move to the zoom folks who are
in support of this bill if you
can raise your hand if you're in
support.
Steve hello first we have Mister
Pulak Mexico.
He needs to and mute his Mr
Pellegrini's on mute that.
Good morning madam chair members
of the of the commission
committee my name is Steve Fulop
on the president to determine
the land grants and we
we vote we want we want to to
pass vote on this to send a test
is crucial for our land grants
and all the state is that of
said previous to me able to
fossil and Senator had a meal we
concur with that so of a vote a
past vote on this is is what we
want so we support the bill
thank you very much thank you Mr
Polanco now now we have Joe
Benito Chavis.
He needs Mr Chavez can you
please on mute.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
still the need to try this I am
the president for signing in and
out of the land grants we
support house bill thirty three
I have read the bill I'm very
familiar with it
the N. and urged committee also
to to pass his bill thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Chavez at Charlotte
guy a ghosts.
Can you misstatements you need
to on mute.
Good morning madam chair good
morning members of the committee
the house I'm a a new statements
from up some of the by the land
grants secretary board of
trustees
I hope that this bill house bill
thirty passes begin the other
land grants the political
subdivisions status so that they
need receive the benefits such
as that.
Thank you Mr Vegas.
Now we have Augustine Assetto.
Yes.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is this team to settle I am the
president of the San Antonio the
last what us Land Grant
Something that came up just
recently I I had a request from
a couple of organizations for a.
Some April information and I am
definitely in support of this
this bill because of the fact
that we we are help to that
compliance.
And if if we are held to that
compliance than in the same
regard we should be deemed.
A unit of recognizing the
government by the state of New
Mexico.
What's gonna supporters Hospital
thirty three thank you Mr set of
next step we have Mr Daniel my
S..
Good morning madam speaker this
is done in my us and the
president of the stuff up in a
similar grant
we discuss this bill in depth
over the weekend and our board
of trustees supports our house
bill thirty three AM adding all
the article one land grants
along with our mentor to
solidify her status as a
political subdivisions.
Thank you Mr my S. we're done
with public's for of public
support of this bill on zoom we
have one more person in the in
the room who would like to.
Yes and with the board chair.
Reminded.
It
Morning madam chair members the
committee my name is there
Martinez I'm the president of
the somewhat can determine
grammar said.
We stand strong support house
bill thirty three for one it
will clarify for other agencies
the status of our land grants
sometimes there's confusion.
Whether we are you native or not
and this will help clarify that
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so much I will now
move to those in opposition but
I ask those on the soon to
please lower your hands if you
are
still waiting in line to to
speak in support so we'll move
on to opposition in the room if
you can please line up over
here.
And even speaking opposition.
Anyone on the zoom yes Sir.
Good morning.
My name is Ralph long about a
vice chair of the more Land
Grant and spokesman for the song
two hundred wrestling right
coalition.
this bill.
Is life when we spoke to last
week it violates our
constitution.
It.
It just will not fly.
We have the supremacy clause of
protections from this kind of
shenanigans we will not tolerate
having the state legislature
over run the rights of our
patented land grants.
The team in law are shaming
training for.
O. K. from eighteen years
eighteen fifty eight.
The Supreme Court said
absolutely no way nobody after
plan grant is recognized in
patented nobody in any way shape
or form can change the design of
that land grant that was backed
up also by the New Mexico state
Supreme Court in the took a look
the land rent verses one twenty.
And in two thousand eight.
Our own Attorney General Gary
king wrote very several letters
look seventy one pages long
describing why and how the New
Mexico legislature has an
authority over the land grants
so it's a time for this to stop.
Thank you Mr.
Is there anyone else in the room
would like to speak in
opposition.
Good morning my name is Linda
are on I'm a trustee with the
lasted us.
Land Grant and it's a very same
the we get to bills now.
For the same thing the people
are so are hurting because of
the fires that we had.
So we couldn't get more
representation here from our
land grant the full because
they're trying to redo their
homes.
And it these because for this
time.
To.
Impose on us.
This question when article six
of the constitution clearly
states that Senator national
treaty.
So trivial but.
And the the state doesn't have
the authority to over over right
that.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr one.
Shin said.
Good morning madam chair.
Committee my name is double that
of.
On the in order for me please
I am the chair of the Lamar said
this on to add to this day a
little bit more also known as
the more land grants I have to
you two documents that I've
highlighted one is house bill
twenty dollars thirty three
basically the same identical
language in them basically the
same so it just a repeat of this
this is what we've been dealing
with for a number of years and
quite frankly is become very
harassing and is gone the point
of being very malicious intent
by some of the legislators here
in New Mexico
we request that this bill be
opposed because it violates our
constitutional rights to privacy
because it violates the treaty
of Guadalupe that goal in the
treaty of the people are
guaranteed protection and as you
all know treaties are law.
If violates numerous other laws
that we've mentioned Supreme
Court decisions and on and on
there's no need to go into this
detail but it be very dangerous
for the legislature to walk in
this territory this particular
land grants in these coalitions
I've never opposed all the land
that legislation but we do a
postings when they come to
dealing with issues around of
the eight digit of a see the
legality of of what they say
they have that they want to
become of land grants being
patented but they're not
recognize are confirmed and in
this thirty three the last bill
is not confirmed thank you so
much.
Anyone else in the room.
More two more.
Good morning madam chair.
And committee my name is that Mr
Lujan I Representative Lazar S.
Land Grant okay
I would just more or less that
you guys know that at one
particular time in history Kate
there were a group of people
that wanted to create a lake up
there in Las Vegas okay the
started by creating these small.
Land Grant called so we created
a okay these this particular
Bill that went all the way up to
Congress all the way to the
Senate and what if there was
rejected because they said no we
cannot partition that's the the
land grant the slide grant and
that's it it's yield we cannot
partition anything from that
particular
Land Grant.
What I see here is you know hi
see another shadow of
what they call it out.
We by.
Another.
Manifest destiny gerrymandering
gerrymandering to take away the
rights of the people from all
the land grants it is not going
to affect us in that language
but they use the the the the
flight ban as you know the the
culprit of not being able to do
whatever they want to do.
This bill will actually take
away the right from the people
from all the land grants the
other land grants your time is
up thank you.
Yes.
Between English Centers funnies
I going to try to communicate
with you.
I know don't see other late
noises cosa.
And I know that you know.
I oppose these.
As B. thirty three because is a
copy and paste of ace B. twenty
that you most soon to table last
week.
So please be quite introduce.
First of all Landon's come fear
for US Congress organized come
become political subdivisions no
need a space your legislation.
Only is the intense Yunis COVID
one port those with all the.
On the bus similar bills what
book could be tougher to
governors.
Maybe because they did it the
United States general accounting
office report.
Please read the memorandum
growth for the foreman Attorney
General's New Mexico Daddy king.
He to commend to the Lizzy lake
New Mexico legislators and the
congressional delegation how to
to to solve to resolve the
situation with land grants.
As you mentioned last week.
You all are kneeling these
committee.
Don't be afraid motion to table
these days be thirty three
instead make the commitment to
be a breach to resolve the
conflict between land grants I'm
trying to find a common pulling
thank you you.
We have one person on the zoom.
Is an opposition patients.
No doubt.
I thank you chair our test
I would like to pause this bill
a very thirty three as well as
H. J. R. or for and I share on
six all seek to avoid and evade
our state constitution and the
fifty years of legislation
regarding pollution control and
natural resource protection
Mexico name is green and and
nineteen seventy one I'm very
consulted and revising what what
now seeks to believe it.
These this and these bills are
arbitrary and capricious provide
an equal protection fund
to.
Veris E. against Yorty of the
state of New Mexico in order to
evade Act resource legislative
regulations and dispel or the
others passes of New Mexico will
have little or no recourse this
is to be expected as
expectations resolve my regained
ramparts right graphic the
powerful corporations that
profit by pollution.
And contribute to both pollution
and the profits in New Mexico
these three desperate bills are
lasting for me again working
together and making the
necessary creative contributions
and sacrifices needed to enable
us to pass a healthy work world
to the next generation and
injured some remaining balance
of native species and
biodiversity in New Mexico while
we appreciate the fiscal
analysis by the past and current
Attorney General regarding the
war on the environment costs
were allowed by just J. RO six
and H. chair for at all while
blocking citizens monetarily so
that your time is up can you
please thank you thank you.
Before we go to the committee
questions with the sponsor like
to respond.
Thank you madam chair.
First off I I I just I want to
emphasize this was very
different house bill twenty yes
twenty was a process by which
the partition land grants the
store land grants that were once
part of another grand and have
been separated to the chief
political subdivisions status
this bill not only doesn't have
that process it doesn't include
those part.
So this is just all the other
existing function functioning
land grants with the with a
couple exceptions noted listing
them in article one for the
reasons that that in reference
to make it clear to everyone.
There are political subdivisions
which they are so we're not
changing that status we're just
recognizing that says.
I'm I'm confident there's
there's nothing in this bill
violates the constitution
there's nothing in this bill
that violates the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo is actually
this is the state's way of
supporting these land grants in
absolutely this bill has nothing
to do with the treatment so I
just totally different thank you
madam chair all thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
we have some questions first is
representative of Sanchez.
Thank you madam chair of you
just have to get to the question
but I want to make clear.
There are no partition land
grants named on this.
But you're adding trying to add
to the list.
Madam chair representative on
shows correct and it I'd love
for instructional at a two and
additional cost a few questions
Madam chair representative
that's also on ask.
So there's an existing lists and
we're adding to the list
correct.
Mentors and Sanchez correct so
the the the land grants were
adding to the lists are the
federally recognized.
Madam chair to Sanchez the
social Madam chair
representative
Yes in the sense that all of the
land grants on the list received
a federal path so they all all
of the land grants there was a
land claim made so the
recognition of land grants from
the federal government may have
been to individuals heirs of the
community that may have been to
some of the petition on their
behalf but all of these land
grants that are on the list did
receive a payment and have
Common lands that they manage
that derive from that so madam
chair representative as a
federal patents the threshold
we're a land grant is considered
federally recognized.
Madam chair representative
Sancious not exactly the way
that this under the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo the provisions
that apply the land grants was
the recognition of prior private
property rights it was the do we
wait to determine which land
grants were owned by the federal
government became part of the
public domain and which ones are
not just land grants but any
private property in the state of
New Mexico when the treaty with
Mexico ceded its territory
United states had an obligation
to recognize any private
property claims within that
territory that is lands that did
not belong to the sovereign of
Mexico and so what the treaty
did is the treaty recognized
those property rights to
education process and that is
what was recognized by US plant
is that these lands were owned
and sometimes they were issued
to pay land grants to the town
of take a look at for example
and that was their land
recognized by the federal
payment but they were they were
never recognized as a governing
entity by the federal government
that is something that's under
the jurisdiction of the state so
madam chair how many names are
we adding to that this list and
how many are out I guess
officially recognized in the
manner you mentioned so Madam
chair representative this would
add seventeen land grants that
are currently operating as units
of government they're currently
not listed in the statute there
are five other land grants are
already listed in statute that
are units of government and then
there is also the actually Land
Grant which is operates as you
know government itself in its
own separate such order of those
seven T. not how many are I
guess federally recognized land
grants per the what you
mentioned was official so Madam
chair representative all
seventeen of those land grants
received a patent on it or and
has manages common lands that
derive their ownership or title
to a U. S. patent.
Madam chair I guess you
mentioned that was in the
special earlier though
How many of those me that
threshold.
you considered land grants that
are federally recognized madam
chair alts Representative of all
seventeen of those land grants
have a path
from the federal government I
guess madam chair earlier you
mentioned
That was in the official
recognize meditation.
thanks so madam chair
representative I'm getting yeah
so so I guess the the the point
is that that was how the federal
government recognize their land
claim but the land grants
themselves were all granted by
either Spain or Mexico do an
official act and all seventeen
of these land grants received a
grant of land from are the
Spanish crown or the Mexican
government so that was what
officially established them as a
community as a land grant and
then the the patent recognition
just recognize that they had in
that they had title to those
lands.
Okay madam chair a does this
legislation change any of the
characteristics of these land
grants.
Madam chair representative such
as no all these land grants
currently operate under the
statutes they're just not
specifically named and so
there's it's kind of silent and
in that regard and so this would
just actually name them in
statute and it would be clear
notice for for everyone which
land grants are in fact governed
by these provisions of the law.
So I guess better what I'm
trying to figure out is I
understand the argument where
those partitions and
You want to split up a big Land
Grant that's what the modern
aspects are arguing in this case
these are whole.
Land grants that are already
existing you're adding up to a
list to get state funding.
Madam chair representative in a
nutshell yes it's just to
recognize their status they are
not this does not partition this
does not change the the legal
status of the title ownership of
any of the property this does
not deal with that all the
simply recognizes them and their
management authority as a unit
government to oversee and
administer those properties at
the on
the chair representative
sentences I made it they're not
a hole in the sense of having
all the land they were
originally granted in in I think
almost all of possibly all cases
that they have lost way and in
some cases of.
Most almost all their life.
there has been the sort of
process that there's been an
evolution so thank the land
grants were originally
recognized by the Spanish or
Mexican requests so that was the
first then they were recognized
by the US government when their
patents for confirm and then in
two thousand four beginning in
two thousand four they're
recognized as political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico by the state of New
Mexico and that's what we're
building on today that that
recognition and by being
political subdivisions they have
the of an element of self
governance they're eligible for
grants they're eligible for
capital outlay there they can
interact with other governments
government to government because
they are political subdivisions
the madam chair I guess my last
question and point is a.
I guess the argument that these
guys are making as they want to
create new land grants that
weren't federally recognized it
sounds like these are all
federally recognized I must
beings are gonna come in name
these ones I got a path and try
that's.
Those are the ones you're saying
that originally were named land
grants in the federal government
came back later and give these
other ones a patent my
understanding that correct some
insurers centers if you look at
the substitute each Land Grant
listed has you know a little bit
there history about when they
were recognized by the federal
government so about a trump
sorry one more question I just
want to make sure the ones
you're adding to the list have a
federal patent none of them do
not have a federal patent.
Madam chair to that's correct
and as Representative pointed
out you can see with the date
that they were either confirmed
by either the Congress under the
provisional process or by the
court prevalent claims thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative we have
Representative need about
million next.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and
instruction at the I have many
of my questions of Mr Sanchez
was awesome and he asked a lot
of the same questions that I was
going to ask I have a few other
ones the kind of specifically of
specially that came up with all
some of the comments that were
that were that were made would
this bill take away any rights
of any of the land grants listed
or any other land grants that
are out there.
Madam chair representative more
about million no.
Except I'm the next one and I
just want to kind of the madam
chair I want to kind of clarify
something just so I can make
sure that I'm kind of a hearing
things correctly so so this is
technically these land grants
because they were all patent and
everything they were kind of
recognized in a lump sum in two
thousand four but they were not
listed specifically and so the
fact that they're not listed
specifically is what that's
what's keeping like this land
grant here from this letter with
the Mr of Vasquez that from
getting certain help so the fact
that they're not listed
individually they've already
been given this this recognition
but not listed specifically and
that's what's the issue that
they're running into correct
Madam chair representative more
about million that's correct
okay thank you thank you madam
chair that's it thank you I
thank you Representative of a
person Lujan acts.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sorry came into the conversation
a little late for that some
understanding and a lot of the
questions from Representative
Sweetser it.
Give me a better perspective so
couple questions.
Chair.
because there seems to be quite
a dispute that we're hearing
today.
So my question goes to
Is there any sort of parity
that's being created with the
disputing parties today madam
chair.
Parity meaning.
The left office and the and
coming into conversational the
late so if you can catch me up
just a little bit parity are.
That requests.
One of group over the other by
not included or by being
included and chair.
Centers of the hunt
There is a dispute there are
various disputes among.
Some of the partition land
grants in the years they were
partition from.
This bill doesn't affect any of
those disputes or any of those
land grants I don't believe
there's anyone on the current
list on in the committee
substitute that doesn't want to
be on the committee substitute I
do believe there are some
partition land grants that would
love to be on this substitute
and are not and so we've left
that we set that aside and with
that for another day.
You madam chair so with when
will they have the opportunity
to address us to become part of
the list manager.
managers of the fund as it's
been referenced the the
partition land grant bill has
been run which was house bill
twenty has been run and passed
several times I believe another
bill has been dropped that.
That specifically addresses one
of those partisan land grants
not all of them but this one.
so you know it's possible that
those get resolved in the
piecemeal fashion which is sort
of what we were doing in the
past but this this list is sort
of.
We feel we're all all the the
land grants that have a clear
path forward.
Okay so madam chair
Representative
So it is through through this
body that we we make those
decisions correct that to add
those those those new bodies is
that correct.
Madam chair representative Lujan
that is correct and if you look
at the if you look at me as a
the the lettered sections you
start with
The the two may increase go into
Mexico today in other languages
that are already on the list
right so the very thing that it
the most recent addition is
Mandhana.
The Amazon though had their own
article like to the the
currently this is set they had a
separate version it was only
about paragraph long it just
applied two months on the oil
and they want to be under
article one which is sort of all
the the current rules and
processes that apply to.
The vast majority of the years.
So we're just like these other
land grants are adding fear
being governed by article one
and we want to make that
explicit.
Thank you madam chair so they
will have the opportunity this
is that they would want to be
added they have the opportunity
through moving through this body
and getting those approvals and
getting it to be added at a
later date you're just making
this.
madam chair
how do we see this you're you're
making this passage for this
group because of the order and
the
The the patent in the
credibility that they already
have is that correct mentors and
Lujan that's that's correct in
in the ones that are on the list
I mean they have the opportunity
to pursue that you know subject
to all the vagaries that are
included in that in the Cauchy
shins with you know there the
other partitions the at the the
land grants a partition from you
know all that that sort of a
messy negotiation process they
would be subject to that thank
you madam chair and so I would
just say to those that are here
they're having those conflicts
that if you need some help
because I know there's not a lot
of.
funding that goes along with
helping you through a lot of
these processes and I just say
if we could be of help to you if
there's something that we can
you can reach out and we can
work with you through those
processes I know one of the the
the bills madam chair that that
I'm working on is an
appropriation to help
with the with the state
auditor's office to help with
some of these
These issues because of of the
lack of funding for some of the
things that need to be done and
and our communities our land
grant communities so I'd say
please pursue what you need to
do I think that this is just a a
streamlined type of of the bill
that's this getting those that
are already made it through the
process so to speak to get for
the you have to get to to be
added to this list and then I
just wanted to ask one last
question madam chair the primary
the fiscal the FIR that we have
This is on the second page is
administrative implications at
N. M. L. shape post a guidebook
on the following website to help
land grants function as
political subdivisions and to
help them implement best
practices in their management I
mean we're giving some
information this is going to be
added as a fiscal impact madam
chair I mean that's my question.
Senator Representative Lujan
that that that viruses new
fiscal impact I think that's
existing guide book that's
already available this is
published by the lingering
Council
Which part Mr to let the is the
director and missed and madam
chairman charger do you keep
this updated and give out
information for those that need
to be some guidance needs
resources so madam chair
Representative huh yes that's
the primary function of the
council is to provide program
support to land grants so we
work individually with these
land grants and right now that's
how we even know which are the
seventeen we're trying to add we
already work with those land
grants we already provide them
services these land grants
receive Services and in a
variety of ways from the council
including legal services serve
your services and this is just a
way to sort of clarify which are
the ones are entitled to all the
services I appreciate the the
that piece in that information
but I also would say in these
rural communities if we and it's
more hands on not a lot of
people even have wifi or have
access to a website so if we can
do some more and and additional
outreach manager I'd appreciate
that Madam chair representative
we do also provide those things
in print and then we we meet
with the land grants and we as
in so it's not just all online I
appreciate that thank you so
much as I have mentioned.
Thank you representative
Representative Mason yes madam
chair.
Let.
Representative McLean just a few
questions I was I was really
hoping that this time.
The.
Go with everybody who was
involved in a great all.
Health and everybody would be on
board with this will not like
twenty were little we had quite
a bit of division first question
though are all of these land
grants article one land grants
is that what you said.
Madam chair representative Mason
yes okay and you said there's
this is adding seventeen.
Mentors and Mason yes okay where
the other sixteen that are.
They're not here showing their
support.
Madam chair representative Mason
and listen to public testimony I
think we heard from three or
four three four but that's a
long ways from sixty seven thing
when we're still not halfway
point to.
To chair representative Mason
I just one of those of twelve.
The Life answer political
subdivisions one thing that's
challenging about the lingering
governance is that's all
volunteer.
You know some of the land
grants.
You have certainly relatively
small populations source the
people that live on the land
grants.
you people have jobs people are
busy one thing we have a couple
years ago was throwing Grant
assistance fund which provided
some funding to the lingering
communities which is really
important because again being
all volunteer you know they were
looking for like volunteer
accountants and you know
volunteer plumbers because they
didn't have funding to do basic
services so now they get at
least a little bit of money but
even though their their
political subdivisions like they
don't have taxing authority to
then came the real property
taxes with even within their
community or within their county
you know so everything is
If things down a bit of a
shoestring budget and they they
really do a lot of remarkable
things with very limited funds.
But my point being that I can
understand why they're all not
lined up here to testify today.
Thank you Representative going
madam chair.
Representative McQueen another
one here it was brought up among
the opposition.
All the constitutional issues
this and I'm not a lawyer so.
What.
You know I don't believe is a as
a body in the state of New
Mexico that we should be going
we don't get a.
Over the top of the constitution
of the United States being the
supreme it is the supreme law of
the land the constitution of the
United States our constitution
says Sir please no comments.
Madam is a nation I appreciate
that and you're correct in what
I would call your attention to
is factor adding to an existing
list we've done this before it's
not unconstitutional you are
recognition of the land grants
as possible subdivisions of the
state was at their request and
was for their support.
The.
I believe that's all the
questions I had madam chair I
thank you Representative Mason I
just hope.
Representative assets.
I that New Hampshire allows us
Representative thank you madam
chair I think
I think I feel like my
colleagues here were it's it's
unfortunate we don't have a a
unison in.
The supporting this not always
gives me pause
simply because madam chair if it
was
If it was that good and why
isn't this one full of hands for
this legislation.
And so sometimes it just gives
me pause when one what is
missing something's missing.
And so.
Madam chair representative of
you you say that you have added
those other.
land grants because the the this
was a request that's what they
wanted.
But unfortunately we're not
seeing that here today with all.
So worries me it was me very
heavily.
I think the.
Madam chair representative I
Think what worries me is is
something this this huge because
this is a big deal would you
agree with this madam chair is a
big deal this this bill is a big
deal it's not just some we're
looking at so you can get a
little funding.
Archer Representative clincher
attentive
I wouldn't agree.
I see Representative Rehm thank
you.
Chair representative all of the
land grants on this list.
Our political subdivisions of
the state.
They already are we're not
changing the status of any of
the Langer.
There wasn't any opposition in
the room today are online from
the land grants on this list.
It this bill doesn't adversely
affect any of the land grants
that you heard opposition from.
We separate them out.
It's a it's a big deal to an
individual and grant because it
provides clear.
But they're still political
subdivisions.
And if if this bill doesn't pass
then you will have situations
where land grants will miss out
on federal funding because
someone will understand that
their political subdivisions or
they will be late to emergency
assistance because someone
doesn't recognize their status
this bill clarifies all that it
clarifies the existing law the
existing practice so we're not
if we were taking seventeen land
grants that work political
subdivisions and turning them
into the political subdivisions
I think that would be a big.
The so what we're doing.
So madam chair representative
and sorry I keep looking at my
folks I'm supposed to present a
bill and I just keep looking
because they're gonna call me
any minute and that's why am I
keep glancing because I can't
miss that
chair representative I think so.
I'm not.
Is there no so the record your
tier one word we're saying that
recognized political
subdivisions.
At the we cannot fund get
funding to them because they're
not actually on this list
Madam chair representative.
And so no one serves as their as
their
fiscal agent to to to get them
funding out of the county or if
there's are we saying that they
can't get it or do you just have
to get another route I mean
that's what I see sometimes
Representative Madam chair is
trusses a yes representative for
land grants before my district
was restricted.
I gave capital outlay money
almond requests because I knew
that they didn't have other
sources of funds you know I
mean.
It's have literally help bake
sales yard sales to raise money
for their operations you know
and that I think we address that
in Land Grant assistance fund
but when the system fund isn't a
lot of money.
I lost your question well Madam
chair representative I think you
know that Land Grant assistance
fund pleasant to stay just.
Fund more money to and and
confesses to slam.
Representative think question.
Why would we just do that where
we have to go this route.
If I may and then I'd like to to
for that Mr to let we're talking
about you know the the leader
this is the fund third their
eligible that's where you know
we if that was a hard fought
victory it be difficult to go
back and reopen that we're
talking about is other funds
other governments other
activities.
In what having a fiscal sponsor
when you're a political
subdivisions.
It's kind of disrespectful
right.
You're the unit of government
why should you have to feel like
if you're in Torrance County why
should you have to go through
the county government to get
your money and the added
difficulty of that potentially
towards county take to
administrative fee that are the
delay of that in.
Frankly you know some local
governments don't really see eye
to eye we can deal with the land
grants on a government to
government basis if you're
telling them they have to go
through another government
entity as a fiscal agent.
That's not recognizing them as
the political subdivisions that
there.
Madam chair representative I
completely understand what
you're saying because we did
dealt with at the capitol the
New Southwest Mexico for about
the same way.
And it was it was it will it was
taken and I completely
understand what you're saying
Madam chair representative I
think my my.
Question here is.
I want to hear you know because.
Hello you Mr.
Okay so I'm so safe okay Madam
chair representative I think my
hugest thing is I absolutely do
not want to affect anyone's.
Property or water rights written
sort of things so my question
is.
Madam chair representative so by
acknowledging through this bill
that there there are now
political subdivisions.
Is there any way shape or form
that they could lose any sort of
their privileges of being a land
grant.
Madam chair representative for
us is no.
No way that we can.
Madam chair it.
Mr Marshall is chomping at the
bit maybe that what the other
that's a look I mean I'm not
gonna act like an expert madam
chair here Representative I I'm
just I I I tried carefully and
and those are important
questions I don't live in your
community Madam chair
representative you live in that
community.
And so I want to make sure that
I'm honoring and respecting your
community and I don't want to
make a mistake here today I'm
gonna do the best I can not to
make mistakes to the madam chair
representative and internally by
not asking the right question.
Not getting the right answer
from you guys that cause harm to
someone.
By accident can not because it
not be because of our.
Call us naive or whatever you
want to call us at because we
can't know everything about
everything madam chair
representative so please answer
this question and see if you can
give me a good answer you madam
chair representative that ISS I
think the the the intent and
purpose of this bill is is
precisely to avoid harm being
cost to communities in in a very
precise way
Because if you recall for The
presentation that in the last
week there were a hundred and
thirty two community land grants
that existed at one point in New
Mexico.
Today there are approximately
thirty five the function in one
form or another.
Those are listed in the statute
there's twenty three land grants
that function as political
subdivisions of the state.
This by listing these land
grants in the statute and
recognizing them they are going
to government but recognizing
them my name in statute this
prevents any grouping of
individuals.
We need to then be a land grant
that's governed as a unit of
government and then there by
taking the the resources or not
requiring that the report the
problem is Representative is we
not all land grants that are
organized as units of government
are often not all lenders
organizations government and
some land grants don't have any
governance structure they don't
have regular elections or or
clean land grants that they
could potentially because
there's not a list could claim
to be a land grant.
Go get money from Merced
assistance fund not
misappropriate that money not
report to the state auditor's
office and then fall off but the
money will have already been
gone right so this actually
prevents that from happening the
sets the bar for which of the
land grants which again is a
government which are entitled to
be able to access resources
which of those because that
there do exist in the statute
the statute creates it was going
to have it but there's never
been a master list of which ones
are covered so those I that
exist in the statute now they
came in after the seventeen
we're trying to name we're
already covered they just were
not name specifically and we're
just trying to clarify which are
the ones that applies to.
Madam chair representative do
the other privilege to to this
funding that we're just talking
about the land grant funding
that I'm talking about madam
chair recognized through that
correct currently yes there's a
process that they go through in
order to to get that funding
from the amendment ever set
assistance fund and all and all
almost all of these land grants
already are recognized madam
chair.
In in in in that fund receive
funds Madam chair representative
about this not not every single
Land Grant is potentially
eligible receives a distribution
because you have to go through
and get that you had election
you have to show that you've had
that you've done all your
financial reporting so there's
some steps to get recognized as
being eligible this would create
the this would create the listed
example representatives of Madam
chair representative we
currently have of the state
auditor's office has a list of
all the land grants and
considers and for some reason or
another there was one Land Grant
is listed three times as three
separate entities same entity
but listed three times we have
another there was a registry for
land grants and there's in that
registry for land grants there's
something known as the Casey
Sanchez file which was one
individual who claim to have a
of a right to land through a
land grant but was one
individual and he's now listed
at the secretary of state's with
this registry as a land grant
even though was one individual
who just purported to have a
claim of some property this
would fix the issue that we
would know the state auditor's
office the department finance
ministration they would know
which of the land grants their
units a government listed in
statute it's very clear these
are the ones and if a new land
grant with the state we want to
be recognized in that fashion
they would come before this body
and this body would have to
recognize them in statute.
Madam chair representative have
all of the listed on land grants
that you put on this bill gone
through the process that they're
going through these elections
going to all every single one
has built gone through and and
at this point right now.
they've cover all those things
that you're saying that a
political up a truly a true
political subdivisions
is recognize when they have
official
That functions in that manner is
that is that happening on all of
these are included here Here
Representative yes yes all these
and that's right that's what we
know what the the seventeen are
because they've gone through
those processes of having
elections of actually doing all
that they're required to do an
upper part of my last question
madam chair representative
choose the your your job Sir is
to serve these land grants with
information legal services what
what not are you currently doing
that for every single one of
those Madam chair representative
office that is correct any time
a land grant needs assistance we
provide that assistance it's
Land Grant varies in terms of
the capacity some land grants
need more assistance than others
I'll give you a sort of a swath
of what we do we help some land
grants with their elections to
sort of make sure that they run
them correctly we help land
grants submit and fill out
capital outlay requests we help
them expend Caporali dollars
that they receive we help we
called the registry of land
grants that register their
elected officials on the by laws
will change them so we do
provide those services to all
land grants on that are
currently political subdivisions
so madam chair representative so
you're you're doing that already
to get capital outlay but the
this these other little groups
can get it or they can you're
confusing me.
You're saying a one one one and
one.
One where you guys are saying
that they can't get it right now
you're saying that you help them
get it so all I'm getting is
representative to assist land
grants are our political
subdivisions are eligible for
capital outlay that's not
something that's in dispute this
bill wouldn't change that they
would still be eligible this
would just make it clear which
land grants are infecting this
of government.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative we have a quick
question from Representative
Lujan.
I'm going to defer to
Representative tinier.
About million.
More point thank you madam chair
I move a do not pass on H. B.
thirty three but they do pass on
house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute for H. B.
thirty three seconds.
Caldwell please okay
Representative Mason.
Just.
Yes pass just.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Terrazas.
No.
Here or yes you have to.
Representative more about Maria
yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative message.
Hello.
And chair for tests yes R.
Sanchez you have a do not pass
on house bill thirty three and
to pass on house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
substitute for house bill thirty
three thank you Mr thank you.
Okay next up we have
Representative Rehm with the
house memorial nineteen.
But.
The.
Seventy four.
Just as we.
Receive.
You guys are starting up.
Now.
Thank you Representative Rehm
can you folks.
Folks in the audience we're
hearing on we're hearing our
next bill can you please move
out of the room thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee House memorial
nineteen is to recognize the
wild Turkey federation.
Folks we we really need to move
on to this next bill if you've
committee please take it out of
the room thank you
Representative Rehm let me
explain for a moment how
financing in our in our on four
star Kerr so with hunters and
fishers who of use the for
servicer POM they must buy a
habitat stamp of.
For the use their then the game
and fish partners with others
such as the wild Turkey
foundation and they put money
together to go ahead and improve
the habitat in this case for
turkeys so let's look at a
couple points in this New
Mexico's unique because it has
Marian wild Turkey Rio Grande
wild Turkey and Gould's public
schools were listed as
endangered in seventy five and
through their work and I don't
know how you go out the
mountains now you see a lot of
Turkey's I really got a
commendable but done a good job
in in October twenty two.
They of they were taken off the
endangered list you'll also see
over on page three in the wind
eleven a talk about the key up
twelve times they put this on
for women and about fifty women
will come to the vent they have
about twenty losses all the way
from
hunting and how to do do unique
things and hunting to survival
in the mountains and madam chair
this just recognizes our efforts
and with that'll stand for
questions thank you
Representative
I'd like to ask the audience if
you're in support to raise your
hand.
If you're in opposition raise
your hand.
Folks on the zoom if you're in
support please raise your hand
she's from for Mr doubt are you
in support of this bill.
I wonder if.
Questions from the committee.
This.
We would.
Okay go ahead I think I'm trying
to find my bill shares.
It's under house memorial I got
a chance to sorry.
I I hear is.
Madam chair representative thank
you very much for bringing this
sorry I usually very organized.
But my folder was this place
this morning from about five to
office so
I want to thank you for bringing
this up.
and bringing attention to this
matter.
I think.
I think we're just staff still
rattle from the last full.
And for that that was a tough
one for us but anyway Madam
chair representative I think
this is this is great to bring
that forward I think
especially the hunters that that
love to hunt in my area this
will be a something little
recognize what they're doing I
live in a beautiful area Madam
chair representative for the
Human actual forced we soon
right around while sometimes are
in our area so I appreciate you
bringing this up and even have
us down here the human donor
science over city thank you
madam chair representative thank
you Representative assess.
Representative ammonia.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative does the wild
Turkey federation work with
state agencies to help promote
the importance of hunting and
conservation they work with
other agencies Madam chair in
Representative more here you are
correct and that was kind of
what I was describing in the
beginning is there is a real
partnership so we have with game
and fish we have the habitat
stamp committees and there are I
can't remember now if there's
three or four crosses state they
are regional odds and then they
look at projects to go ahead and
improve force landed B. O. L.
then the partners coming in you
have the this wild Turkey
federation you have the rocky
mountain elk you have the
you'll do foundation so all of
these partners come together and
put money into the project and
improve the environment for the
for the wildlife slide miss
madam chair and representative
so I think is that when you
described how the the was it the
gold of what was in it X. are
are on the endangered list and
now is off the so they actually
help with the conservation of
their of their area and and make
it more conducive for them to be
able to thrive in the wild.
Madam chair and representative
point correct excellent that's
all I have for today thank you.
But for the past second second.
The okay Representative Lujan
Representative Mason yes.
Representative meraviglia yes.
Representative senator Sanchez
Representative Terrazas.
And chair yes congratulations
sponsor you have a do pass on
house memorial nineteen.
Thank you madam chair members.
Okay next up we have a house
bill two seventy four.
The.
The ticket for the missing.
Running madam chair members of
the committee I am here to
present to you house bill two
seventy four which establishes
Asian American Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian day on
February seventh of every other
year and I am here I'm sorry but
for the first Tuesday of
February which is actually today
which is why we're so lucky to
have so many community members
with us today and I'm here with
my co sponsors Representative
Janelle and Indian or new and
Representative three zero about
how the euro is here as well as
a co sponsor of this legislation
we have our expert witness land
Santa who is the policy director
at center for civic policy.
Thank you Sanchez do you I
understand you have an
amendment.
We do have an amendment to
properly please the
This section of law into the
statute in the correct place it
as a technical amendment the
amendment ensures that this
holiday it resides with other
holidays like it like American
Indian day Hispanic culture day
and I will say that we modeled
the statute after Hispanic
culture day so that's the reason
it's every other year and we
chose the date so that it
avoids conv conflicts with the
other days that are in that
chapter of the statute called
public holidays thank you
Representative and can you read
out the to to number that we
make sure that do not I don't
seem to have Representative
Mason and maybe under your
binder it's
the two oh two number of them
were opposite that would let me
just as I can read out if
that'll that's fine you can
confirm I have it right here it
is.
and their numbers.
Justin was one four eight four
nine point one yes thank you so
much of.
To move the amendments.
On the amendment motion women no
objections to that.
Great all right so I think we're
ready to go to a public comment
if your in favor of this bill
please raise your hands.
Wonderful I'm gonna take photos
on the.
The beautiful thing
thank you and if you're in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hands.
We don't have anybody zoom raise
your hand if you're raise your
hand again if you're in support
so that Representative us.
Thank.
We we need to record the good
things that we can read be
reminded of the last ones and
If you'd like to speak in
support of this bill please come
up to the desk here and I'm
happy to a yeah allow.
Sixty seconds that okay.
And can you also recognize for
interpretation.
Of the sixty seconds after for
absolutely will do that.
Thank you madam chair my name is
land center I am the Vietnamese
American also the daughter of
Vietnamese refugees who arrived
into our great state in seventy
four and eighty and eighty one
to really recognize today as
something that we have been
fighting for four years longer
than I've been alive longer than
my parents have been here in our
state but also recognize our
population and pushing back on
this model minority agency as
well as this invisibility at
that we've been combating for
generations I want to recognize
that the population in terms of
percentage as to why it is only
three percent is to also
recognize the history of our
state seeing that we have the
alien land act that prevented
Asian Americans from owning and
living a property and wasn't
amended out of our state
constitution to two thousand six
so as we recognize our community
and our diverse cultures and
truly the community support that
you see behind me it's really
recognize our presence and our
community and our historic day
today I want to thank you and
urge your support.
Thank you Mr.
Madam chair members of the
legislature my name is crystal
C. R. as a and I'm I'm the
volunteer executive director of
the Asian business collaborative
we've only been inception since
twenty twenty as many of our
Asian owned businesses both
immigrant and second generation
I know resources for small
business or large organizational
needs in the business community
it's an honor to be here and my
accolades to representatives to
Penske for all the work that she
sent to get this set state
statute I used to roam the halls
of the roundhouse on Asian
American day but it never had
been a permanent move but now
more than ever do we not only
need the state I'm more excited
to celebrate the diverse
cultures that we have in New
Mexico especially as the Asian
American community is going to
be one of the fastest growing
Asian communities in New Mexico
and so I'm here to answer any
questions about the small
business support that we can
find and our colleagues that in
the mail various different
economic development entities
thank you for your time and
thank you for your support for
the Asian community you.
Hi as a first generation
immigrant I acknowledge the
privilege and thankful to my mom
who is also a survivor.
And of an immigrant herself my
line I of being a daughter of a
survivor and the power as an
advocate and working mom of two
beautiful and smart next
generation of New Mexicans who
are wearing their traditional
garments today of federal
they're watching this process in
online thank you for hearing and
thank you for being able to hear
what the laws that matters to us
I am honored to be ending gender
based violence coordinator at
the Mexico Asian families a
culturally specific service
provider for sixteen years now
here in New Mexico we're here to
engage participate and be part
of this data is stark all day
for all of us then for many of
us some of us survivors it is
imperative that this be speak up
for the laws and policies that
requires policies that hear us
in and be part of the table
thank you so much if you'd like
to make your comment in in your
language as well you feel free
you have some time.
Okay well those school thank
you.
Good morning good morning madam
chair members of the committee
and
are wonderful Sanchez thank you
Representative Spence gate thank
you very much for
introducing this bill I'm trying
not to get too too emotional but
I I stand obviously as a
sponsoring very strong support
of this I am it's been quite
some time are in the works on in
fact I wish that
I am here today in particular in
the memory of Delhi al contar.
Full is the founder of the Asian
families and a very very
Close and dear friend of mine.
who passed.
alright too early.
And far too early to see her and
Devers is this is the foundation
that madam chair and
representative that she
envisioned on when she took on
founding the Asian families in
Albuquerque and
I think it's important for us to
always remember and I know her
communities all the communities
to remember in a loving manner
but it's also very important for
us to remember the history in
the background and how long
these communities have been
struggling and fighting on to
have recognition and I you know
I'm madam chair I'm of the
opinion that every single
community on is an asset
in our state and that if we can
organize and mobilize those
communities they also should we
always recognized and this is
the highest honor that we can
give New Delhi Alcon Tara's
memory and so I stand here to be
her voice today and ask you for
your support your vote for this
designation it's incredibly
important for for communities
and all the communities
represented here today thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative.
Good morning madam chair and
representatives of the committee
thank you for listening to your
constituents and too many others
that are here from all across
the Mexico my name is Karen cafe
and I am a Filipina my parents
are both immigrants that came as
nurses to the United States and
I also grew up in curry county
so I know how it is text east
but I hope that you will do a do
pass on this bill for hearing
from everyone that has already
Representative before and money
also part of the international
district of the communities
coalition
in the international district
which is part of Janelle's.
Area.
Thank you so much.
We have anyone else to speak in
support of this legislation.
Hello.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you so much
Representative risk thank you
for bringing this bill forward
today
so I'm also first generation
Asian American and Chinese
American Taiwanese American
specifically and my husband I
decided to we made a very
conscious intentional decision
to raise our children are very
young children they just turned
five and three this last couple
of months here in New Mexico it
is so incredibly important to us
that they grow up with this
identity strong in them that
they're not only New Mexicans
but they're recognized as Asian
New Mexicans so thank you very
much for this opportunity I hope
that you vote FOR to pass on
this bill.
Thank you.
Okay.
Madam chair members the
committee and all our guests
present
Actually hadn't planned on
speaking so I apologize ahead of
time but I am so honored to be
co sponsoring this bill and to
be Representative Karen and so
many others of you in district
nineteen in the international
district
I also come from a population
that is only Representative like
three percent of the population
in the state and they say that
when you're three percent or
less of the population sometimes
they refer to as statistically
insignificant and I could not
think of anything that could be
further from the truth I have
been so supported by my friends
and family in the African
American community and you all
as well as you've been
Very supportive of me and I just
want to thank you all so much
for being here today I am
humbled and honored to be able
to contribute to this for you in
any small part and thank you all
again and I encourage you to
move it to pass thank you.
Thank you Representative I
believe we still do have some
public comment.
It was wonderfully said.
Hey
thank you ma'am madam chair and
members of the committee on
Representative Representative
meanness Penske on Senate on the
Sanchez
On a crystal Sears Smith first
time so
tends to.
my name is Terry no and I'm in
the early former early childhood
educator and here in Santa Fe
and also local filmmaker.
And today I have here.
My mom who is about refugee I
have my children here.
My wonderful husband today and
this past month I do my own time
and they do it do that every
year.
Hi go I go to my kids go all and
I presented about the lunar new
year.
And it's so important to me that
my children grow up in a
culturally diverse
setting that there's awareness
and that there's room for
children if they don't
understand to like.
You know I
learn and grow and sometimes I
had one student who laughed
during brain presentation.
I think he was a fifth or sixth
grader and the next morning he
came up to me on his own and he
said I mean I didn't even
realize that this had happened
but he said I'm so sorry I did
that that was wrong of me said
that's okay like it just shows
that there's a learning and
growing going on and
During the time but my films are
they are for social justice and
cultural awareness
you know keep on
Of fading towards that goal
thank you so much thank you so
much and I'm thank you for
bringing your mom today you.
Hello this I am more to some sun
and ninety percent the Filipino
American foundation and I'm
looking around and you I am one
of Dallas friendly started these
advocating about this maybe
twenty years ago so I could see
a lot of beyond faces new faces
who are continuing what we have
done before I could still
remember does the Senators and
On this man and people like that
to whom we work with we used to
do it in the wrong place there
of the we bring our food and the
introduce it to the community
but now it's a different way but
I am so happy that DC on
generation of continuing to
advocate for the Asian group the
Filipino community been BC
contributing for our culture out
and and and I would tell you we
are the community that provides
the
you know that they're short of
teachers we are the community
that provides teachers in the in
the state of New Mexico what I
want to delete to advocate this
for you also to support these
people because they're having a
problem maybe I can talk to you
somebody that I really need to
because I'm also advocating for
deaf the the teachers have to be
new teachers who are here in New
Mexico and they're all over.
And the I appreciate the young
generation for continuing
advocating for our nation
community because we Asian
community are good assets of the
state of New Mexico thank you so
much thank you so much.
I don't believe anyone on this
committee would be upset if you
brought pumps it to the next.
I am hearing.
We are as well.
Is there anyone else and.
Is here to speak in favor yes go
ahead.
Good morning and madam chair and
members of the committee I want
to thank Hey my name is bit does
but just you and the office of
an energy efforts in the city
what we could get.
So I just first I want to thank
Representative am to pass key
and Representative and no and no
new
and also what can I do and
senator Stewart responded and is
bill as a person who works in a
daily basis with Betty diverse
communities on one of those
communities is the Asian
American Pacific I landed and
that the.
A how why is I can tell you that
a the bottle belonging being
linguistically culturally
diverse is an asset for the
state.
It's not only the the building
economic development they also
being so much a beautiful part
of their culture that the more
sweet everyone else and we will
have to be supportive of this
bill because this is just the
start of medical things thank
you.
Thank you.
I think that wraps up public
comments as any questions of the
committee yes Representative out
of the question or not madam
chairman that and the
representatives you know we're
pleased that you're here today
we're all I thank all in
agreement.
America we forget at times New
Mexico American everyone sitting
on this panel.
At some point in their history
was an immigrant to the United
States coming into the and
leisure of Indian some of the
Indian descent but it if you
believe the right ones they came
over on.
Walked over here on some and
deal you know many many
thousands of years ago but the
rest of us all my family.
Eastern your pair the and you
know in the seventeen times you
know maybe we're all immigrants
and we applaud.
People in the.
Your your room for specially the
ones I know they come here right
where they come here to go to
work this they come here to be
part of America.
And that's to be applauded.
And I move for a pass.
Hold on one second would be
replicated by itself and the new
act.
You're doing.
Thank you just a couple of
comments common rate that
represent us us the fact is real
quick thank you this is the the
beautiful diversity of of of of
all cultures that just add to
the beauty of our states and I
want to thank you for bringing
representatives for bringing
this this piece of legislation
forward it's been long overdue
and I do remember of back in the
day with we had some
So iterations here with the food
and with everything from the
from the district the Senate
district in Albuquerque and and
it was it was with the senator
then Senator Tim Keller who's
now are are more in Albuquerque
and counselor to thank you for
being here this is Madam this is
a it's just a wonderful
wonderful day to celebrate of
our diverse cultures I've lived
in the district myself and
I just want to say we we are
it's a proud district there's a
lot that is going on there but
it's the culture is rich it is
beautiful and this is what a
beautiful day to celebrate it
thank you.
It thank you very much
representative Cadena see thank
you madam chair
I want to thank you I also my
first born American here I
understand of that is and but I
like that little ladies.
A presentation where those
supposed to be food involved.
And so yes so but coming
Representative assess incidental
working on it Madam chair but
you know I do want to thank the
representatives for bringing all
of this this bill I you might I
love this because my wife and I
when we got married we had a
lot of as a reception and then
when my children graduate from
high school I had one and of in
the backyard beautiful again all
our our football players and
that was from Mexico university
some of them were soaking Eyler
at Pacific islanders and and and
thank date anywhere from that
area and they did a fire dance
for us we started my new deck on
fire.
The rural fire thing but you
know I I I really am glad that
you brought this forward it's
nice it's a beautiful thing to
recognize the United States and
and New Mexico is a beautiful
place to live and raise your
children and to be a part of the
most the most wonderful country
in the world so thank you very
much for bringing this.
Thank you Representative SS
Representative Mason thank you.
The path secretary and I second
that motion madam chair.
Then there's some competition
for that.
Madam chair was the amendment go
ahead take the role you can she
was the amendment act yes the
amendment was amendment was
adopted thank you thank
Representative Lujan.
Yes absolutely wait a minute
wait a minute thank you madam.
Without the mess yeah we did we
did okay I have a month just
making sure.
Representative first time for
everyone in Representative Mason
yes.
Representative Mirabel Millia
yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Perales yes.
By check as they on the
definitely yes chair of his yes.
Sanchez you have a unanimous do
pass on house bill two seventy
four as amended.
Congratulations.
Hey your this meeting is now
adjourned.
When is the food.
