We pray with me.
Father we thank you for this
evening that you've given to us
we thank you for the many
blessings of life.
Father we pray that we may be a
kind and gentle people so that
we may focus on the task at
hand.
In do so.
To your glory.
This country and our allies.
Father be with the the.
People in parts of the world
that are subject to conflict and
turmoil.
From Bernalillo Representative
with the pledge of allegiance.
Federal agents.
The lady from Chavis recidivism
with the pledge The New Mexico
flag.
Isolate the flag.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
innovation is so ordered.
Members we have a little bit of
the majority minority offices
and and with all of you I
believe the right now since the
gentleman from some point.
Thank you Mr speaker so I just
want to address the body's
elements ice cream to the
roundhouse on March seventh so
please fill out get back to me
by Monday if you would please
because we need to make sure
that we've got plenty of product
thank you gentlemen very
generous of you to build the
gentle person from Bernalillo
Sandoval Representative kids
thank you very much Mr speaker I
newspaper very small article on
page seven
it talks about remote work for
disabled workers so the increase
and so I just wanted to bring
to the body's attention that
individuals are out there are
looking at the workforce in
thank you for Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady the
deleted from Santa Fe
Representative set up the thank
you Mr speaker I just want to
stand and thank everyone who's
working on the capital outlay
process this year especially
chairman Linda I know everyone
Hello announcements school once
going twice.
She lives in the face.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two sixty
refer to the provisions of
finance committees respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair Mr speaker move adoption
printed option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
to sixty but a favorable
committee report on house health
referred house bill two sixty
seven has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that do pass and
then for the taxation and
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two eighty
eighty has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that do pass and
then for to the Judiciary
Was a test of a committee report
on.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two ninety
three has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
two ninety three of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Supposedly the as of the
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill five all one
has had it under consideration
one of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Both in a test of a committee
brought up to.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred Senate bill twenty nine
is Senate bill twenty nine of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me yes Committee productive.
economic development committee
substitute for house bill eighty
three to pass respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair Mr speaker move adoption
option no favorable committee
report on house bill eighty
three but a favorable committee
report opted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
for House Bill to eighteen do
pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Representative.
Representative Chandler.
Representative childhood that.
community fund House Bill to
eighteen as amended but I've
federal coming before the house
Judiciary Committee subs for
House Bill to a ten all those
and everything about the state
line.
Was me the executive board.
memorial tend to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Representative.
Mr speaker move adoption for
What
pulls me the eyes of a committee
report up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
term is been referred to Senate
This is an option of federal
committee report and Senator
forty seven as amended all those
embarrassing focusing on.
The state is a good part of the.
under consideration point it was
recommendation that do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption when
adoption referral committee
report on house bill one seventy
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one fifteen has
had it under consideration for
for house bill one fifteen all
those in favor signify by saying
aye opposed me the Islamic
leader board opted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
adoption with federal could
report on house bill two zero
seven of those in favor say
about the same time the bulls
may be as I can afford up to.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are on
adoption of no federal committee
report on house bill to the
thirteen but a favorable
committee report on house
Judiciary Committee substrate
two sixty eight has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that do not
passed by the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to sixty eight to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
sixty eight all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those opposed me the eyes of
a committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
house commerce and economic
speaker move adoption we're on
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House three sixty four of
those in favor signify by saying
House memorial sixty seven house
joint memorial six has had them
under consideration and reports
that same have been duly
enrolled in a gross preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
six sixty seven and how strong
moral six all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those bows may.
B. as I become the reported
opted.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Senate Joint Memorial twelve
with certificate of correction
has been read in full and signed
by the offices the Senate in
open session and request the
concurrence I would request the
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation no objection it
is so ordered.
to read.
to New Mexico House memorial
seventy introduced by
Representative Matthews.
House more rules seventy.
House memorial seventy one
introduced by representatives
Townsend Scott Mason and
Representative Harry Garcia
a memorial requesting the New
to meet the needs of the state
house memorial seventy one
introduced by representatives
Townsend Scott Mason and
Representative Harry Garcia
Townsend and Scott the memorial
requesting the department of
finance and administration to
conduct a study and report on
potential budget deficits in
representatives Townsend and
Scott house rules of
indeterminate twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
and he in turn legislative
committee dealing with science
and technology issues to study
the construction of the nuclear
power plant in the four corners
area house memorial seventy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
House memorial seventy four
introduced by Representative
ream the memorial requesting the
New Mexico Legislative Council
to arrange for a third party
implementation of streamlined
processing of D. W. I. paperwork
House memorial seventy four
introduced by Representative
ream house memorial seventy four
hundred twenty by title is
nursing providing for an
independent role for certified
registered nurse anesthetists
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty.
traditionally committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
oh seven as amended and act
relating to children revising
declaring an emergency Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one of seven as
amended Senate Judiciary
Committee services to percent of
the one of seven as amended
introduced by senator Munoz and
act relating to public employee
pensions ensuring parity for
twelve service accrued by
certain state police members
pursuant to the public employees
there is a house appropriations
and finance committee.
Senate bill one seventy eight
introduced by Senator Hickey for
the legislative finance
Senate bill one seventy eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee themselves
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill two oh six
and natural resources department
to distribute federal grants to
non governmental entities and
individuals selected by the
federal government for programs
natural resources committee than
the house government elections
and ended Affairs Committee.
Senate bill three thirty two as
amended introduced by Senator
projects from the public project
revolving fund declaring an
emergency Senate bill three
thirty two as amended introduced
by Senator Rodriguez Senate bill
three thirty two.
And referred to the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
of this house appropriations and
finance committee.
Senate bill three fifty one
serve as a voting member on an
interim committee appointed or
created by the New Mexico
Legislative Council Senate bill
three fifty one introduced by
Senate bill one thirty six as
amended introduced by senator
Neville and act relating to the
public regulation commission
providing that the salary of the
Senate bill one thirty six is
amended and amended twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
Senate bill two forty two
the period of validity for a
medical cannabis patient
registry identification card to
change the application period
for renewal Senate bill two
forty two introduced by Senator
and Human Services Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
forty seven as amended and act
expedited licensure allowing
virtual remote hearings in
recording by digital technology
changing dates for actions
related to hearings and
decisions allowing for summary
suspension of a license or
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two forty seven
as amended Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty seven as amended
The lady from Santa Fe.
Distiller from San Juan ready on
item number ten.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent of the house the rules
be suspended in that the record
show that all action for placing
House Bill number one eighteen
Mr speaker so I also want to do
what it does is it creates the
office of entrepreneurship
within the economic development
department it's meant to be a
central place for young
Seeing normal it did Van Dam and
final passage of house bill one
eighteen as amended.
The vote is now open.
Within eight minutes roll call
vote so take your time.
We're gonna close it when it
gets to eight so what's about to
close.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of fifty four in the affirmative
one in the negative house bill
one eighteen as amended has duly
passed this house.
that the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee sub
surprised one forty two has been
taken.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
forty two.
And what this bill does is it's
an act of the San Juan
environment to investigate
remediation and restoration
options for the San Juan
generating station facility of
mine providing reporting
restoration options for the San
Juan generating stations and my.
A quick description of the bill
Mr chair and of we are.
Senator close.
natural resource committee
substitute for house bill one
forty two now pass on final
passage of House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee substitute for House
one forty two as amended the
Close.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
Environment natural resources
committee subject to present law
forty two as amended has duly
passed this house.
The record reflect that election
is there for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House with twenty seven has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment for
who are concerned by the fact
that that day
had to pay copays and cost share
on diagnostic and follow up
not subject costsharing under
the affordable Care Act but if
you have to go for follow up
It's very important that people
get their their follow up risk.
Representative.
Gentlelady April fools day and
I'm just behind the curve.
The two oh two number two two
five seven zero eight point one
I want to say when I have it is
B. Paso gentlelady we're doing
formally move it and this was
will delay it is being passed
out.
needs provision the paragraph be
so for example if you go to page
two you'll see a paragraph be
and what it does is it makes
reeks reaches the limit of their
deductible and then the no cost
sharing provisions to apply I
hope that's clear Mr speaker is
Mr speaker I move that do you
want to stand for questions I'm
happy to stand for questions
Santa Fe the gentle lady to
close.
substitute for House Bill twenty
seven as amended do now pass
their own passages of House
Judiciary Committee substantive
house bill twenty seven as
amended the vote is now open.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Members can we get unanimous
consent to vote roll call so
that digitally from Bernalillo
can hit her button.
for House of twenty seven as
amended has really passes house.
Many from McKinley is item one
ready on item number seventeen
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker this bill will simply
relocate the inter tribal Indian
ceremonial office from the
department of tourism to the
department of finance
remained renames the office from
inter tribal ceremonial to inter
tribal Indians are mourning
Association there is a an
appropriation of three hundred
Well passage of house bill one
sixty one as amended the vote is
now open.
What is about to close.
But those members without a
recorded vote Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Representative Sarinana votes
yes.
What is one of fifteen in the
affirmative or negative house
bill one sixty one as amended
has duly passed this house.
suspended that the record so
that all action for placing
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
fifty three on final passage has
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty three is to create
harsher penalties for livestock
fifth and to deter future theft
it also clarifies the
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from.
US Travis yield Mister speaker I
yield.
I just wanted to make sure Mr
Mr speaker exactly right in that
is described in the definitions
we put in this bill thank you Mr
speaker I definitely wanted to
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Mr speaker I now move that has
to do is sherry Committee
substitute for house bill one
Well both but close.
But those members of the
recorded both.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Reporter fifty five in the
affirmative two in the negative
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business in
objection it is so ordered.
Thank you for your efficiency
and for the spirited debate
tonight we do have a consent
calendar
last minute.
Invitations to dinner that need
to be announced the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
role metal thank you Mr speaker
house education committee will
meet at eight thirty in room
three oh seven please be on time
members signaled the gentleman
from all those beautiful
counties representative Lente
thank you Mr thank you Mr
speaker your house taxation
revenue committee will meet
elections in in in fares will
meet on Monday eight thirty AM
room three zero five thank you
members signal to deleted from
the university of okay it goes
Else miss.
Gentlelady from Los Alamos Mr
speaker your house judiciary
committee will meet on Monday at
reference otherwise known as.
Is it like to take your
attention to the consent
calendar it's on the back of the
goldenrod.
final passage to vote them out
under one motion.
in these are how's your morals
one house memorial three as
amended has moral for House
memorial nineteen has a moral
green Representative Sarinana
Senator wild corn.
Is your objection to placing
these memorials on final
passage.
I
see none let the record reflect
two on final passage has been
taken the gentleman from San
Juan.
Mr speaker I move that helps
Joint Memorial one house joint
memorial three as amended house
take one full for all of those
memorials.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative huh when we
have those yes Representative
Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
one house memorial three as
amended has more for House
memorial nineteen in house
memorial twenty ten how to pass
this house.
Committee.
I ask unanimous consent that
that memorial be removed from
the house Education Committee
and plays on the speakers table.
the regular third reading
calendar and then we'll
consented out honey later time
with any other memorials and end
up on third reading calendar.
water Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended of the journal show
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
committee zoom junction it is so
ordered.
objection it is so ordered.
The Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has passed Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill forty two Senate
five Senate bill two fifty and
requests the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
sherry do them on Senate chief
clerk Mrs will be entered.
stand in recess until eleven AM
Monday.
Did you see Sunday.
No Mr speaker said Monday.
