Here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Hochman behaving.
Representative Matthews.
Representative small.
I'm here.
Representative Zamora here.
Representative Allison.
Mr Chairman.
Here.
Thank you so much that we do
have a quorum I just in FY I
Representative Matthews has a an
internet outage at your location
so she will be joining us by
phone so chill listen and but
like we were happy to have her
participation will be limited in
in some way
Appreciate again all of you
joining us and there will also
be some members in and out
because of other presentations
in other committees that time of
year in the session where we
have that happening let's see
another announcement Mr Hammond
and Mr Mike Hammond was promoted
from senior water adviser role
for the governor to our new
state engineer yesterday so
graduations to him four work
with him in and wish him all the
best in his new role as our new
state engineer so obviously if
there are things that that we
need to have him back for or we
have a question on certain
things we know who to go to
track down at this point so
without further ado I do want to
look at house bill twenty four
house bill twenty four was the
one that we heard last week I'm
sorry earlier this week on
Tuesday that we had asked for
there to be an amendment made
drawn up and then brought back
to us unfortunately the sponsor
did not meet the twenty four
hour deadline that we have and
that we stick and it here to
with this committee so we're
going to roll that one and we'll
just bring it back as soon as
the sponsor can get that
amendment drafted up we all
recognize and realize that
that's a super important piece
and that we I think for the most
part are all very supportive of
it but you know there are
certain rules in this committee
that regardless of if your a
Democrat Republican it doesn't
matter I want to make sure that
we can all call the rules that
we are being as fair as possible
to all the members within within
this committee the staff as well
as the public that that watches
I work very closely.
So without further ado we do
have then on our agenda house
bill one oh eight house bill one
twenty one and house bill one
thirty one on today's agenda
house bill one oh wait is that
the statewide weather station
network and that will be
presented by Representative and
our member Representative Zamora
and he does have an expert
witness Mr do what with him
today and that he may have been
affected and is less but will
bring over representative
someone just as soon as we can.
The floor is yours Sir.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
members of the committee good
morning to everybody.
house bill one oh wait is making
appropriation to the border
regions of the state of New
Mexico to support and expressed
an expansion of network weather
stations throughout the state.
Everybody has probably probably
remember seen this bill in this
committee before and and on the
floor what this bill does.
Is.
It helps support the
agricultural community with
information that is very
necessary for them.
To be able.
The.
Participate and be well
represented in the some
insurance programs that are
brought down from the federal
level.
There are insurance programs
that come down.
The through.
Ari made which is a risk
management agency which allows
farmers and ranchers.
To ensure their forages on the
ranches which is their grass
and.
The cattle consume.
And if we don't have enough
weather stations in the state of
New Mexico it creates a big
problem.
What it does is is they use the
weather the rain gauge the way
that the insurance policy is
rolled up is they'll use the
rain gauge.
In there greeted or the the rain
gauge their closest to their to
their greed and agreed to
seventeen miles by seventeen
miles so you can just imagine
how small that really is if you
compared it to the state of New
Mexico and at one time here in a
couple years ago all we had
working in the state was eleven
weather
rain gauges to measure the rain.
Excuse me.
So that created a big problem.
And what it did is.
There were people in Guadalupe
County that brought a policy.
And there was a rain gauge used
in Riyadh also to measure the
rainfall we're gonna love the
county so you can imagine how
much more rains in in Iran does
so that it doesn't want to be
County.
So therefore it caused a big
problem in and of and a lot of
loss of money or these ranchers
so.
In in fixing this.
We will bring.
In.
New money to the state of New
Mexico from the federal programs
which will help the state.
It'll help support our ranchers
and farmers.
And and then as this gets put in
place.
There are different weather
stations.
different quality of weather
stations are different tiers we
called in tears and there's
three different tiers.
And I'll let my expert.
Witnesses described those
different weather stations and
then I'll let him describe how
will help the state.
In in monitoring weather
conditions for travel and and
safety of the people the state
of New Mexico and how this will
play into other things in the
state.
As we get it set up and Mr Mr
chair if if you'll allow my
expert witness to say a few
words I would appreciate that
absolutely thank you
Representative Zamora Mr do what
good morning you're with this
the floor is yours Sir.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name's Dave
to bomb the state climatologist
for New Mexico and down in Los
crucis and work at the NM issue
and as a Representative is as a
more mentioned
this weather station network is
key to
providing more information to
make better decisions for one of
the big things right now is
drought we're in a drought we've
been a drought since nineteen
ninety nine and there's been
some Evan flow with the monsoon
but we I did just this morning
the the updated throughout US
strapped monitor which is key to
a lot of the farm bill programs
like as Representative Zamora
mentioned ninety seven percent
of the state is in drought and
the worst category drought we're
home at two two and a half
percent of the state is in
exceptional drought so in order
to make these decisions and
track those kind of drought
levels we really need that the
best information we can in this
that's what this this this bill
provides the funding for is to
get more information from the
field and two areas that are not
covered so we have a lot of
weather stations at airports and
however there and not keep
places were where a lot of
ranchers and farmers live in or
rural areas so this this
Network really provide the
information to fill in the gaps
in the rural areas were we've
we've had we have not had a lot
of coverage we've got radars and
they're great and National
Weather Service is a key partner
in this however they're they're
backing us up as well in terms
of the need for more stations
and trick to provide that
necessary information I'm just
like this morning we've got the
snow almost every county in New
Mexico and we had some lows of
minus twenty we need to have
that information to provide for
emergency managers and tracking
the temperatures of the air as
well as the soil we're also
measuring.
File that we can track
drought and other things for
agricultural users planting
irrigation is big one water
conservation is one of our key
things that were you going to
use the data for so it's using
how do we manage or water better
and having that information
to to look at the water balance
so how much precipitation falls
how much goes into the
groundwater and how much it of
it evaporates into of apple
transpiration so all those are
key things that we are plugging
this data into and making it a a
big part of what what we need
for New Mexico we're behind in
other states and we've we've
already started and with the
last provided funding getting
stations out in the areas and
this bill will continue to
provide that for the rest of the
state thank you.
Thank you Mr W. some great you
have the microphone CENIC a
radio host Representative
Bazemore anything else to add to
the conversation Sir.
Yes Mr chair.
I believe one of the things I
and Mr da bomb is just this will
give us real time data.
These these are modern stations
they will be certified stations
that'll meet up to know all.
Conditions and and expectations
and and this is real time data
and I would like Mr to modest at
back in one more time and
explain the different tier
stations if you would.
Mr tomorrow yes we have a two Mr
chairman members the committee
the way we designed our our
expansion we we start off at
thirty one stations before the
funding and we want to do is is
have three different types of
stations so that we can measure
different levels of information
so we got that the tier one
stations are kind of the the
Cadillac they've they've they
have everything date basically
very similar to the Oklahoma
model that's kind of the the
what we model after that we've
got that the tier two which
basically is focusing on
agricultural M. users will we we
actually calculative apple
transpiration how much water
leaves the plant so we can find
out how much water is here
getting how much is needed for
irrigation and and thirdly that
the other station as we've is
are more lower costs we can put
those we can move those around
and those are mainly to see for
precipitation and temperature
and so we what we like to do is
make it so it's we get if we get
further funding down the road we
can we can upgrade some of the
the tier three the smaller.
Temperature precept to to tear
to your water to so I'm I'm
leaving room for expansion and
for further the person whoever
takes it over after me so I'm
thinking of kind of the legacy
and further use.
Very good thank you Mr the water
Representative Zamora anything
else before we go to the
audience no Sir Mr chairman
ready we're ready go to the
audience if your thank you
Representative of those in
attendance good morning thank
you for joining us let's go then
for all those that are in favor
of house bill one OO eight
please raise your hand will call
on you one by one.
We'll begin with Steffi Steffi
you are with us good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members and Mister
what
the three fifteen New Mexico
rural advocacy and do PNM rural
caucus are both stand in strong
support of H. B. one await as of
last year anyway New Mexico had
a much lower density of weather
stations than its neighbors
a statewide weather stations
will improve climate and water
studies and as Representative
Zamora had said allow farmers
and ranchers to apply for draft
budget as climate change worsens
conditions of our state so I
urge everyone to please vote for
this very important L. thank you
so much thank you steep let's go
to an and good morning you're
with us.
Good morning.
Mr chairman and committee
members I'm also a member of the
three fifty will advocacy
committee and also co chair of
the New Mexico interfaith power
and light.
It's very critically important
to have adequate and complete
data as Mr ball described to
support our farmers and ranchers
and attract temperatures in the
air and soil.
Water conservation use are
critical to all New Mexicans and
we all need this data to
adequately manage our water and
the support for farmers and
ranchers so we state and also in
strong support for New Mexico
interfaith power and light in
support of this bill and ask for
your support.
Thank you and appreciate doing
this it's gonna wait wait good
morning here with us.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is white
have it I am the current
chairman of the southeastern New
Mexico agriculture research
association as well as chairman
of the battery Committee to the
agriculture research station in
Artesia and we stand in support
of this bill
with the drought the range lands
the props we vitally need this
at also we need for research at
our stations throughout the
state so that I can do the race
starts that can get out to the
smaller farmers in the area as
to help them improve their crops
and so forth again thank you
very much and we stand in
support of this bill.
Thank you very much have a great
day that's going to fall under
C. up all of the morning you
with this.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Holliger CEO with the New Mexico
Essick Association we sent a
strong support of this bill we
think it'll provide much needed
data to to support the
agricultural community to
understand what's happening with
our precipitation weather
patterns this will help of with
risk management as well as
planning for the future I want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward and that
we stand strong support thank
you Mr chairman thank you well
let's go to Ricardo.
Ricardo good money with us.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee up the
card is already with the New
Mexico State University and we
stand in full support of the
bill and I'll actually also
think the on sponsor for
bringing this up to our
attention as well and as for all
of the reasons that we're just
mentioned before it is very
beneficial for the state of New
Mexico to have more data to be
able to help our farmers and
ranchers thank you thank you Sir
let's go to Harvard.
Our good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee power cuts in
San chairman of the San
Francisco soil water
conservation district.
And we stand in support of this
bill we need to of this type of
information for our conservation
planning.
And looking at projects that
will better address conservation
of water in the state of New
Mexico our district doesn't have
any weather station reporting
other than a couple of snow fell
sites and it is not adequate for
us to do proper planning for
restoration for watersheds and
looking at our irrigation ditch
deliveries.
So thank you Mr chairman I am
thank you the sponsor.
Thank you Howard procedure
calls Caitlyn.
The weather is good morning.
It is Bradley good morning you
with this.
Need to be yourself.
Hello.
Yes I'm sorry I just had the
mute button show up I apologize
for that good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Kate wants
probably and I'm a registered
lobbyist that New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau
Representative Ecker cultural
producers from around the state
and on behalf of those members
we support house bill one oh
wait to provide increased
funding to set up and maintain
an adequate number of weather
monitoring stations in the state
weather stations as you heard
are vital to our pre Sir
producers can used to continue
to be good stewards of the land
as they neglect report data such
as local drought conditions and
about the transpiration which
our users can utilize to
schedule their education
additional weather stations will
ensure more accurate and
Representative data on drought
conditions which also ensures
that our agricultural producers
can receive the full benefits of
risk mitigation tools like
drought insurance policies it is
for these reasons that we ask
that you support house bill one
await thank you so much thank
you we need to do is go to
Ralph.
Representative good morning.
Morning sure that day and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
comment.
Make money breeds are.
I am the vice president of the
Middle Rio Grande water
advocates we agree with the
statements already made by steep
Weiss bird and Jim McCarty we
think that this other funding
for this these weather stations
will definitely help the
ranchers and farmers of the
state Russian very much in favor
of that need.
we recommend do pass and urge
this committee to recommend this
appropriation be added to HB to
thank you.
Thank you senator Wirth Bronson
corn Ronson good morning here
with this.
Good morning Mr chairman fellow
committee members my name is
Bronson corn with New Mexico
cattle growers we stand and
prong support of the house bill
one await
with getting in these weather
reporting stations it's going to
improve real time weather
reporting accuracy and for data.
Can't find the drop conditions
and qualifications of existing
disaster programs we would
further provide it would further
provide a high quality real time
weather data used for emergency
management.
The programs also that we have
through the PLF PLS I'm sorry
the
range force program it's it's it
is saved a lot of ranchers and
and New Mexico throughout this
drought that we've been in in
the last several years and we've
had a program like this if we
had the weather stations like
this
that it would of it would have
been tremendously benefited us
even more of the existing
program that's out there
what can I representatives more
with sand the closest one to
southeastern New Mexico is
seventy miles away on four
separate grades and the all of
those of.
They the reports were very
inaccurate so we're very much
looking forward to having a
program that that shows real
time data and in every part of
the state.
Thank you Sir thank you Branson
thank you doing this is going to
work with Courtney ward good
morning here with us.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee meeting members.
I'm a concerned citizen and
concerned about right to your
old grandson's future that's why
I am commenting this morning.
Because of our burning of fossil
fuels we've raised temperatures
two degrees Fahrenheit.
And we are now in a permit water
shortage yes we also need to
invest in the infrastructure to
get the information to help
address.
The adverse effects of climate
change it's also a rural job.
A creator so I'm in school
support of house bill one thirty
one thank you thank you lord
it's grown because brothels
Amigos bravos good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Joe
Zou pan I'm director of
America's problems which is a.
Watershed protection
organization working to protect
and restore New Mexico's waters
for thirty four years we stand
in support of this bill for all
of the excellent reasons
previously stated thank you.
Thank you Sir appreciate you
joining us this correct and I
have been a good morning you
with this.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee broadband I can I
serve as a supervisor on the Lee
County soul water conservation
district board and I really
appreciate the sponsor and all
of his diligent work in and
getting this bill to committee I
think it's going to be very and
Ben cages for egg producers and
conservationists across the
state you will give us the
opportunity and ability to be
more resilient during dry
seasons and and be able to
mediate damages done by heavy
rainfall so I really support
this bill and so does my border
directors thank you very much
and appreciate the sponsor for
bringing this bill thank you the
school Lawrence blue Gallegos
Lawrence good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
I can work with the western
landowners alliance and also
with on the amendment on the New
Mexico Food Network Policy
council or governing board and
we stand in support of this bill
up when a weight and I I just
want to mention that I I rents
for thirty years just north of
the New Mexico state line and.
I also had permits up in New
Mexico and but in the Poconos
county Colorado we.
The and the real ground water
Conservancy district which I was
on actually put new what whether
up stations up there and all
also seven Dr right are and this
was about ten years ago and it
really improved you know our
ability up there to go go ahead
and manage the water so I think
that something that you're New
Mexico needs needs to do it also
so thank you.
Thank you Sir appreciate you
joining us let's go to Bruce
Bruce good morning here with us.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee.
I'm fortunate for the coverage
tension service I actually
believe all New Mexico landed
water managers will benefit from
the data provided by the
stations and so therefore
support this bill thank you very
much thank you Sir appreciate
you joining us Jason Espinoza.
Jason good morning.
Morning chairman members the
committee Jason Espinoza ritual
this with the New Mexico
coalition of conservation
districts and just joining the
chorus in support of the
legislation today thank you
perfect thank you so much for
joining us this gonna Hannity's
the white.
And a good morning.
She.
You are with this.
You may need to you.
Good morning I didn't actually
have my hand raised on this one
but I I support water data and
I'd love to speak later to one
one thirty one as well and at
this is this is as it comes up
you will be allowed to speak but
the my apologies I I saw your
hand up in the cold and you so
we'll come back to you for one
thirty one thank you so much I
thought this was what thirty
one.
Want to wait till.
So who's talking with
Very few can help us out and and
mute those folks that are
finished top we appreciate.
That's the now go to.
Those that are in opposition to
house bill.
One thirty one excuse me want to
wait for me those in opposition
to house bill one opioid please
raise your hand I want results
also there is.
Those those three talking to me
let's see that's an go now to.
Committee members Representative
Brown is your hand that the
floor is yours.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning everyone.
I want to start by
Just commending Representative
Zamora for all his work on on
the whole idea of having a
weather stations adequate for
New Mexico I know that the
representative has been working
on this for quite a few years
and I think he is really
educated us about the function
of the stations and the value
that we get from them not just
for the ag community but for as
it was mentioned emergency
management things like that so
thank you Representative Zamora.
Mr chairman and representative I
believe I read in the past that
we're aiming for having ninety
weather stations there about I
think I'm I heard we have thirty
one currently Mr chair
representative are are we aiming
for about ninety stations
statewide.
And Mr chair and representative
brown thank you for that
question.
I know the numbers have been
changed because of the COVID
challenges that we face in the
supply and demand and and and
everything so I'll let my expert
witness Dr dubois answer that
estimate for this budget will
take this with that with the
amount of weather stations
thank.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee we are like it meant
we mentioned we are at thirty
one for the funding we're gonna
add sixty six with the funding
that we got from last January
that'll bring us up to ninety
seven.
The M. edition of funding we're
going to add another one hundred
and eighteen to bring us up to
two hundred fifteen stations
across New Mexico.
Mr Chairman representative and
Mr to Wausau I think that's
really good news to my ears if
we're only looking at a
seventeen by seventeen mile read
we do need to have more stations
than as many as we can get
actually Mr chairman and
Representative Zamora I would
imagine that the instrumentation
is is very very important and
getting the right kind the most
up to date technology perhaps
could are
expert witness tells a little
bit more about the types of
machinery or instrumentation
that are needed and at perhaps
the surest that we're not
looking at odds and ends but
putting together a network where
everything's and saying and
we're using the best technology
we can get.
Mr chair well.
At the NMAA guidance for that Mr
chairman and
we so we are using professional
grade instrumentation sensors a
lot of it's from Campbell
scientific it's one of the
premier environmental my sensing
and monitoring equipments in the
country actually the world and
so we're we're using the best
and we're also I also have let
me add a advisory board who is
assisting and making sure that
we have the best
design out there and includes
technicians and scientists from
the National Weather Service and
some of the other federal
agencies like the NRCS who also
run the snow tell network as
well as the scan so the USDA so
I got federal state and some
local partners who are helping
me make really good decisions on
what what is what is necessary
to measure drought and soil as
and winds and things like that
so.
Thank you for that answer Mr
Chairman representative
We're gonna be hearing house
bill one thirty one shortly that
is the water data act and my
question is will the data
collected from the weather
stations be imported into that
water data Water data system.
And I just you for that question
I read I was read that bill and
I was thinking man this stinks
it's right in sync with the
weather stations and I believe
drive to buy would be one to
answer this question also Mr
chair because he's the one
that's going to be working with
that data.
Receive in it compiling the data
and and then having relations
with other peoples in the state
to make the data more more
useful across the board for the
whole for the state in different
in different ways other than
agricultural part of it and I'll
let no more comment on that if
you would Mr chair absolutely
doctor table.
Yes Mr chair we all have already
started the conversation with
the the people who are running
the the water data program we've
got we've had we've been part of
some meetings and at the Mexico
tech to to make sure that we
have the right meditate and
connections that's kind of the
work and then our data is is
public so it's also going
streaming to other users you can
go on your see on your cell
phone and request data actually
right now if you want to so it
would be it will be available to
to many users and if if there
are other users that I'm not
aware of just please let me know
and then I will make the
connections.
Mr chairman and in the
Representative so this is the
perfect segue into my next
question and that is if the
public will have ready access to
the real time information I I
know we have a out
that's called New Mexico roads
and the public can download that
app and look at any time you
know they're even cameras in
various places in the state to
show us what it looks like it is
our snow pack or whatever so did
I hear you say.
Mr devore Mr chairman that there
will be a public out that can be
used to access real time data.
Mr Mr chair we we we currently
have our data on our website and
that's whether dot NM issued dot
EDU and it's it's we've been
working hard to format to make
sure it works well with the on
mobile devices and so
I am also if if anybody's we are
looking into a specific app
right now we're just focusing on
the website but if there's a
need to do an app that's and
that's fine with me
make sure that make sure that
happens I want I want to get the
data in people's hands I don't
want to just make this a just
make the data just to have data
but it needs to be in in
people's hands state so that
they can make decisions.
Mr chairman and and
Representative and and other so
thank you very much for that
answer I I think that would be
welcomed by the public and
whether it's farmers ranchers
whoever it's it's good
information for all of us so
again Representative Zamora
thank you so much for your
advocacy on this and I do stand
in full support of your bill
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Brown
is gonna vice chairman Allison
vice chairman Allison the floor
is yours Sir.
Thank you Mr chair I also I.
Excuse me I also bought the
efforts of a.
Phil Representative Zamora.
This will help the farmers in
our area as well.
when the file their claims
because Reese in recent years
the San Juan river was
contaminated with the spill from
the money in Colorado so a lot
of them of cease their farming
operation for a few years I
think when they file claims this
weather stations will greatly a
system so for that reason I
applaud the efforts of of my
good friend of Representative
Zamora and with that I stand in
strong support and with.
Recommended to pass in this
legislation.
Mr vice chairman that the that
the motion is not accepted you
have to just make the motion
itself without providing any
committee a question come so we
can come back at a different
time to take up a motion like
that are there any other
questions or comments from
members of our committee.
They're being then I I have a I
guess more of a COVID represents
a more I appreciate your efforts
and I know that you work very
hard on this and so my question
is one from from from from a
farmer's perspective and and the
you you can appreciate this and
those that formed this committee
in online can appreciate this as
well as that many of us at this
point the technology
technologies provided us with
with number of apps on our
phones and so I have like one to
the west I have six whether apps
that I intend to live by during
the summertime and to tell me if
it's gonna rain when it's
knowing where it's going to rain
what the amounts of rain are
going to be how does this help
those sites like any number of
our local news channels or
there's a there's a weather
underground weather the weather
the weather at how does that
help with with providing them
data to help me as a former.
Here.
Thank you for that question Mr
chair and all it Dr David law
answer that means he's the
climatologists and he
understands how all this
information gets brought in and
coordinated with with each
other.
Estaban glad to Mr chair you're
you're exactly right the the
market is is right is actually
saturated with all kind of have
to go to the play store or iOS
you know there's there's there's
listen list of different weather
however I I'm I'm I need this
mention is that it depends on
what do you need it for your
area and so a lot of the apps
pull data from airports.
And then that's commonly used
most on I would say I don't know
the percent but majority of them
do they pulled that pull data
from wherever's available free
Airports are not always the
right choice for for whether you
may be pretty far from their
side what this does is it
provides it for New Mexico
specific.
then there are other examples
that I'm using
the West Texas Mason at the
Oklahoma mesa they have apps and
you could pick and choose which
ones is closest to your your
your facility House ranch and
use that and then just look at
that that would be your base so
you know what's going on.
Not at the airport but what's at
your nearest station sometimes
maybe the near station is here
for use that but in many cases
is not and that's kind of what
what this does it really do give
you local information to make
local decisions great thank you
and and one last question for
Representative Zamora Hey is
this in house bill two.
Yes it was there there is a two
hundred thousand recurring
monies and house bill two and
there's a million dollars in
there of a one time
Allocation to the weather
stations so that's still put the
short.
on house bill two and then a lot
of the Act community me myself
Senator Pat Woods and and others
in the house and I don't know
how many in the in the Senate
have contributed juniors money
into it so I don't we don't
really know how much junior
money is in it
I'm thinking it's probably close
to a million dollars we hope
that that money doesn't get
logged back in any manner and
that the recurring funds go
through as recurring because we
need recurring funds to.
Take care of this program in the
future and taken fourth and make
it a stable program in the
future for the for the state of
New Mexico and and it'll help
out the state in many ways is as
you've heard.
And
is if you have a name anymore
questions I'd be glad to answer
you know I I appreciate your
your answers to this point
represents a more thank you so
much thank you doctor one well
it is not going to the doctor I
didn't know that that you have
the doctors so that being said
what is the pleasure of the
committee.
I move the past two passed by
Representative brown their
second.
I think his second by
Representative small I think I
heard in the background and then
I recognize you as well
Representative mission Allison
is there any opposition to the
recommendation of a do pass on
house bill one await.
Seeing Representative is a Maria
how do pass on house bill one
week thank you for joining us
thank you for being with us
started to walk appreciate your
answers to all of our questions
and graduation Representative
Zamora thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee and thank you Dave the
box and thank you the for the
testimonies.
Thank you Sir we're gonna
transition a little bit here
Representative vice chairman
Allison will take the reins as I
will step in for a chairwoman
era who could not present this
bill but I still am a sponsor on
this bill as well so question
Allison.
The the gavel is your.
Thank you Mr.
One to house bill one.
Thank you.
The.
By
maintain that sense of.
Mr Clinton do you have any
expert witnesses and also.
When the audience was question
makes the they were three or
four seconds behind when you
announced so bear with me when
my screen.
Early.
Thank you Sir and if I can have
a I and I can probably do from
my end I'm gonna promote Apollo
Garcia as my expert witness so
it looks like she's joining us
right now without further ado Mr
chairman I would like to present
house bill one twenty one the
safety and community ditch fund.
Our house bill one twenty one
would appropriate four hundred
thousand dollars from the
general fund to the state yet
and community ditch fund for
expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty three and
subsequent fiscal years to carry
out the purpose of the acequia
and Community fun Act which is
to provide financial assistance
to the state is and community
systems to develop hydrological
studies acquired technical and
legal research and other
information and services
necessary to consider and
protect water for New Mexico's
future for through the
adjudication of water rights and
with that being said Mr chairman
I would
and recognize the Miss Iglesias
as our expert witness but at
this point in time I think that
we would stand for any
questions.
All.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think you of Representative for
for being a co sponsoring this
bill just briefly I can add a
little bit of background about
this piece of legislation that
the state legislature passed the
a second committee ditch Fund
Act in nineteen eighty eight to
ensure that I think as and
community digits would have
access to legal representation
water education
the education process is highly
technical and it's important for
us I guess who's member
percentage are named as
defendants to have legal
representation education
secretary generally result
through years of negotiations
that result in water rights
settlements the ACT efforts
administered by the New Mexico
department of agriculture and
the entities that are eligible
for the fund our regional
affected sensations which are
organizations that represent a
majority of the second in an
active stream education and
those associations apply through
an annual grant process
administered by NMDA.
The reason that house bill one
one twenty one is come forward
is to address an unmet need the
current base budget the program
at an Indian has about six
hundred thousand dollars in
recent years the requests have
been and and not much higher
than that of approaching close
to a million dollars so this
bill requests four hundred
thousand dollars to be added to
that bill on a recurring basis
it's it's a very important
because for a second have we go
representation having this
coordinated legal representation
with one team for a whole
administrative unit of an
education is beneficial to all
the parties involved and it's
benefited hundreds of a second
throughout the state including
ritualistic associations and
reality by a a second in the
balco so we can send about the
Baca and San Juan Santa Fe
Townsend Cibola counties and Mr
Chairman I'm I'm available for
questions we also have
our attorney who's in the
audience who is also available
to help answer questions thank
you very much for your
consideration.
Resort to is the.
The hands shown on screen and at
this time I don't see any hands
over one just come up six one
we'll start with hello thanks.
All thank you all Mr chairman
and members of the committee our
transients and with the
separatist polisario water
conservation district.
Reasons explained previously I
miss Garcia are we support the
bill and and urged passage thank
you.
We'll go to Caitlyn sprightly.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee again my name
is Kate wants probably and I'm a
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
and on behalf of our twenty
thousand member families across
the state we do support this
appropriation to assist in
carrying out the requirements of
the I think yeah community Dutch
Fund Act as a stated this fund
helps us figures and community
to just with numerous items but
it also benefits New Mexico's
future through the adjudication
of water rights so for these
reasons we ask that you support
house the one twenty one thank
you.
Thank you for that Mr Williams
fifty one.
State.
Thank you very much.
I think yes and did just play an
essential part of rural commerce
and culture the three fifty New
Mexico will advocacy group and
DP and rural caucus urged the
committee to support H. B. one
twenty one which address the
unmet need for essential legal
and technical assistance so they
can equitably navigate the
highly complex and sometimes
frothy water right settlement
negotiations and agreements
thank you so much.
Thanks for the.
Mr.
Good morning.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this is Lawrence
greatness with that western
landowners alliance and the New
Mexico forming.
New Mexico foodbank Ag Policy
Council and we stand in support
of this bill and we feel it's
very very important to to get.
All the water rates in the
state.
And to to the unification
process and this would help very
much thank you.
Thank you Mr diagnose our next
will go to someone from New
Mexico's problems.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee Josie padam eagles
probables we are in support of
this bill through the excellent
reasons outlined by Paula Garcia
and the public commenters thank
you.
Thank you for that and I do not
see any other hands going up so
we'll go to questions from the
members.
First step as the more it if I
may Mister chairman real quick
you have a list of about twelve
other people that wish to speak
in the attendees list.
Beginning with the Patrick how
to meal and goes down.
Mr chair I don't see any hands
on my screen maybe Mary can.
Do something so I can see those
hands.
Merry if if you could perhaps
call out the those in a ten
these lists and meet them and as
as the and they're lined up.
If you can call them out merry
and mute them as they come up.
Yep is Patrick Hermio.
Yes good morning can you hear me
I can hear you I good good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Patrick how
to meal the director the
American friends service
committee's New Mexico program
and we work on land and water
issues in New Mexico for the
last forty years we stand in San
support of this bill for the
reasons laid out by the agency
Garcia all of the other speakers
faller so we respectfully urge
you to pass this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Hermio Mexico to
Albuquerque.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members it is very
important for water management
and fairness that is seeking
association have the needed
additional funds of four hundred
thousand for research studies
and Representative in education.
So as of the three fifty rural
advocacy group and the S. co
chair of the New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
ask for your support for this
legislation thank you.
Thank you.
This McCartney next we'll go to
and Rikki Roberto.
Thank you Mr chair of I'm
actually here is a as an expert
for for representative Lente and
all Garcia.
Okay thank you Mr Romero we'll
go to San Diego my Estes.
Thank you very much show Mr
chairman behalf of itself Bally
regional association of a second
we support this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr my access we'll go
to Luciano Garcia.
Good morning chairman and
committee I am here on behalf of
the cow creek basin a seconds
Association and the president
also present on their and farmer
on my second so this bill is
extremely important to me as
someone that is currently in the
adjudication process for the
past seven years thank you.
Thank you for that Mr Seah.
Next we'll go to Mr Robert
Apodaca.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee Robert up without
the I'm here on behalf of
chairman rob Garcia who's the
chair of the New Mexico
civically Commission Mr.
The hills of does if it's
actually with sectarian bag in
the I see director in allocating
some of the the funds
you know for this purpose and
we are in great need of the
appropriation so we struck stand
strong support of this
appropriation Mr chair thank
you.
Thank you Mr Apodaca and I see
that miss McCarthy's hand went
back up.
Do you have a question or did
you not to just lower your hand.
Miss McCarty.
Okay and the other hand that I
see up is somebody
Representative Nibert Kathy
there on.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Kathy
Romero and I am here to speak on
behalf of a second that'll stay
with us in North on the street
don't as well as the concrete
base and I think yes the ciation
I just want to our ask for your
support and in this well we are
on in the middle of this
education or involved in this
that you to K. and has been
going on for quite some time and
so I just want to voice our
support for this legislation
thank you Sir.
Thank you Kathy.
I don't see any new hands going
up so.
Are there any other hands yes
yes yes can you hear me.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you so much chair and
Sanchez my name is John Brown in
the Franciscan sister and
director of New Mexico one of
the power light and as we move
more deeply into drought and
also climate change we really
need to support those and all of
us to be good stewards of our
sacred water and the sexiest do
that in very very good fashion
and so grateful for them so very
much support this bill and other
work that we can do to care for
our sister Water thank you.
Thank you for that.
Any other hands.
Okay I don't see any other hand
so Mr chair you see any other
hands I thank you see you see
several more hands there seems
to be a great Peters with CV and
M..
Go ahead Sir.
Thank you and good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Greg Peters
senior advocate for lands water
wildlife conservation voters New
Mexico here support H. B. one
twenty one of the reasons
already mentioned we
respectfully urge the passcode
for one twenty one districts
Sanchez for Perkins bill Ford
and thank you for the
opportunity to provide comment
states.
Thank you Mr chairman there
looks like there's a derelict
right next.
Go ahead Mr Madrid.
Yes good morning everyone
my name is Carol Mr chairman the
president's ability you'll come
up of secular Association you're
an organic Mexico and we are
currently involved with the I
one education and the issue here
one is critical in in our
In our ability to see prepare
resolution with our native
brothers and sisters okay Linda
and so well we're really
grateful for this fund it it it
does a lot of help and and and
that.
House.
Once again to see resolution or
educate thank you thank you Sir.
Mr chairman you have listening
to Judy Torres.
Go ahead Mr or Ms.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Judy
Torrez and the director of the
test valley just seconds
Association TVA is in the
process of implementing the
town's valley water rights
settlement settlement agreements
are very complex and take
decades to negotiate the
completion of the terms of the
settlement it'll still take many
years for us to complete we are
thankful for ACV Act funds as it
helps pay for vital legal and
technical assistance I
respectfully urge you to support
H. B. one twenty one and we're
continuing support of the yes I
guess.
Thank you Mr.
Thanks for Harrell Trujillo.
Mr you.
Can you hear me Mr chairman this
is Harold.
I am not president of the morass
sick SO ciation some also
president of the New Mexico
Essick Association I stand in
support of this bill the
implementation of this
educations have become quite
difficult and the funding will
help with this whole process so
we would appreciate our
organization would appreciate
support of this appropriation
thank you very much.
Okay thank you for that.
Next we have hammer away.
Mr Chairman Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
camera I'm here representing the
New Mexico food and agriculture
policy council and the rocky
Mountain firms you and for all
of the reasons previously stated
both of our organizations stand
in full support thank you very
much.
Thank you for that Mr oi.
Chairman do you see any of the
names this is a good guy named
Anthony.
Okay go ahead Anthony good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee Anthony Wagner
with the office worker forms we
farm in both off so coral and
Corelli's and we use the Seko's
and ditches throughout the
Middle rural real Grande Valley
Which are managed by the bureau
real grand Conservancy district
we stand in full support of this
bill so thank you for your
support.
Thank you Sir next we'll go to
and John Mitchell.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is John also
known as toner Mitchell
representing an organization
called trout unlimited for the
reasons previously stated we are
also in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Mitchell next we
will go to Brett Van ****.
Thank you Mr chairman and a
sponsor of this bill I'm a
member of the Lee County solar
water conservation district and
a member of the NMAA CD and
include we support this bill we
believe in education that
they're stand about you and that
and this bill will help make
sure that becomes a reality
statewide we can finish the
process thank you very much for
the sponsor Mr Chairman turn it
back to you.
Thank you Mr Representative Eli
a next will go to Jessica swan.
Thank you Mr chair on behalf of
agricultural cooperative network
a network of over forty island
farms in the middle Rio Grande
Valley we stand in strong
support of H. B. one twenty one
to help create technical
assistance and a secular
education these are life
sustaining programs and for all
other reasons listed we stand in
full support thank you.
Thank you miss one we'll go to
Jonathan Martinez.
A good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee dolphin
Martinez says secular program
manager with the New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission and
for all the reasons previously
stated we also stand in support
of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Martinez next will
koto Marlene karate.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee.
I am in full support of H. B.
one twenty one and for the
following reason it I H. B. two
one twenty one would increase
the appropriation to the ACT F.
with an additional four hundred
thousand.
The purpose of the ACF is to
conserve water resources through
the educational water rights I
believe in support the use to
support regional acequia
associations and we ourselves
are on
and the state kia here in
Albuquerque.
And this will provide legal
representation and experts for
the adjudication process
including settlement negotiation
and implementation thank you
very much first hearing like
support and blessings to you
thank you.
Thank you madam.
Chair do you see any other names
that I don't see I I don't see
any other needs Mr chairman on
the attendees list I do see for
some reason the panelists this
is a Kathy with the hand of a
movie that is.
Okay she had asked the question
earlier of the Cathy do you
still have another question for.
Do you need to lower your hand.
Okay the hands down so we'll go
to the committee Mr chairman Jim
Mara Mr Chairman I'm sorry.
To speak out of order but you
may want to ask for those that
are in opposition.
One twenty one okay thank you
for the direction Mr chair are
there.
Any in opposition of this house
bill one twenty one.
I do not see any hands on the
screen so.
Okay it's sounds good so we'll
go to the committee and the
person I saw up was
Representative Zamora.
Thank you Mr chair Mister vice
chair Mister chair.
So I have seen issues with if.
Thank yes in my district or they
didn't need legal
representation and and we're
having a hard time goals with
the money's in and and the get
the representation that they
needed so I'm I'm I like the
bill I'd like to what it does
one question I do have we're
sure Lente is.
Why are are we doing a bill.
for four hundred thousand
dollars is that good policy for
us legislators to be doing
something like that.
Why did this get funded with
juniors money here or I don't
believe you can find it with
capital outlay but why did it go
through the junior money
process.
Thank you the Mr Chairman
representative Zamora I I I I do
when I do not know if the the
main sponsor of provided money
and encouraging allocations I
would do for a question to my
expert witness to to help me
answer this question if
While others see it can help out
with that.
Yes I'd be happy to Mr chairman
and Representative Zamora that's
that's a very good question the
Though the approach that's been
used in past years to increase
funding
for the ACTF has taken various
forms
the original location of funding
took place when the bill was
passed the act back in the late
nineteen eighties and at that
time it was a relatively small
amount I I don't remember the
original amount but it was a
about one or two hundred
thousand dollars
by the late nineties and been
increased to three hundred and
fifty thousand that was when I
started working with anime and
over the years the way funds
were added was usually through
hospital to amendments on the
Senate side
and so it's not clear to us
exactly what the entry point is
for the budget process but it
would be ideal if if the funding
were added to house bill two as
part of the LFC recommendations
that's something we'd like to
work on in coming years of for
this year to to answer your
specific question about hospital
to junior money
it's my understanding that some
some of legislators from
Districts that have ongoing
educations have committed some
of their junior money from to
this this cell line item
although we won't know that for
sure until that bill actually
comes out and it is passed and
signed but we did we did make
some requests for some junior
money in increments that were
reasonable for some of the
legislators that have I'm going
educations like from tells and
Rio Arriba county San Juan San
Miguel County.
Okay thank you for that answer.
And.
And thank you Mr chair
Mr chair could you could we
please good what it be proper
for us to ask Miss
Representative small to comment
on.
Representative.
I believe so.
I don't see Mr small on here but
I believe another member
Representative Brown can explain
just as well because she has a
very good understanding of the
HDFC processes miss brown.
Mr chairman.
Members of the committee I'm not
going to claim any expertise but
you know we do have bills that
asked for general fund.
Appreciations and you know it's
it's if it's not programmed into
the budget by now
that
you know it gets up to the show
we see the vagaries of the
Appropriations Committee when it
begins to hear the soul of bills
certainly asking for junior
money as it is a good idea and
so it's not unusual for us to
see bills us for this this type
of funding for this type of a
group or need I don't know if
that answers the question thank
you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and and that
does give me some more insight
on it and I would like to see
this bill to be successful I
understand the needs and that's
why I'm asking the questions and
I look forward to supporting the
bill and and see how this goes
forth.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
chairman and thank you Paul and
and thank you Representative
Brown.
Thank you Representative Zamora
next we'll go to Representative
Brown.
Thank you Mr chair and ensure
Lente so I I do stand in support
of this bill I think it's it's
it's a good bill it's much
needed.
Really I just have one question
maybe miss Garcia can answer
this so it the question is are
there any water rights
adjudications involving the
staff is that
regarding a Secchi is not loaded
located entirely in New Mexico
other words do we have any.
infrastructure that is in New
Mexico and in a border state.
Miss Garcia.
Mr Chairman Representative Brown
thank you for that question it's
it's a very insightful and all
answer right and if if you need
more information I'll allow
defer to indicate on that are
attorney I'm aware of of
Of one of grantee that states
receive funding through the
second committed to fund that is
located partially in another
state that's the sunset ditch
and uncle County of this is that
a community ditch on the healer
river they are part of the
Arizona water rights settlement
they're they're quite unique
there from the
community of burden of that's
right on the border but they
have some very unique issues
that represented by by Domenici
junior and they've been
part of an education there for
for for many years and as I
understand that's a situation
that's ongoing.
Mr chairman Mr chair so as I
mentioned in this first year
that that might actually
increase the cost of the
education for those who were
located in in New Mexico on on
that ditch respect yes so anyway
I'm sure that I'm your attorney
is you know handling that and
but I think it would complicate
things just a little bit so Mr
chairman Mr chairman thank you
very much.
Thank you misspelled
We're gonna go back to the chair
letting any closing comments Mr
Chairman no thank you for the
debate appreciate that and
there's no there's there's other
questions or comments on this
and.
Thank you chairman of now I
would like to hear a
recommendation from the
committee Mr chair I move it to
pass on house bill one twenty
one.
We
have a second okay.
Zamora.
Is there any opposition to this
recommendation.
Though opposition so Mr chair
you have to pass on your bill.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
but thank you Mr chairman thank
you committee members for the
debate thank you chairman vice
chairman Allison for stepping in
what we present this I
appreciate you and and and you
are now in the Sir.
Thank you thank you thank you
thank you let's continue this
discussion with our committee on
moving to a house bill one
thirty one house bill one thirty
one is being presented by
Representative Andrea Romero
what I am moving into the
panelists list at this point so
she's moving over right now
house bill one thirty one is the
data act implementation she's
also joined the maybe perhaps in
a minor co sponsor
Representative
Trujillo.
And and so Representative Romero
do you is your co sponsor with
you today.
I'm not sure I'm of.
Forward.
if that's okay Mr chair
our expert is Stacey Timmons if
she could be let in absolutely
Stacey can raise your hand
please we will let you in.
And that is a state see only one
Representative Romero that
should be sufficient Mr chair
thank you for very good thank
you and the floor is yours to
begin.
Thank you Mr chair of the water
data act is current law that we
have in place to help our many
excuse me are many agencies
essentially corresponds together
to be able to relay information
regarding our water resources
with me is Stacey Timmons to
discussed the technical side of
what we have in place and what
we're.
Ending today is really an
appropriation to ensure that
this program continues and is
sufficient I appreciate this
committee's dialogue about how
important data is from whether
to water it all connects and so
I think this committee really
gets it as far as what it is
that we're looking at right now
so I don't want to present for
too long we're just trying to
get this fully funded and I'll
it given the reins to my experts
determines who currently heads
um the water data initiative as
well as so many other projects
at the New Mexico tech under the
branch of geology and
federal G. and I'll let her give
her title since I'm always
trying to Google it out but I
appreciate the time for the
committee and and look forward
to the discussion with me Stacey
tenants thank you Stacy.
Good morning and thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee and especially
Representative Romero and the
hub for having here on this
panel
I and Stacy tenants and I'm an
associate director for hundred
geology at that New Mexico very
geology and mineral resources
which is quite a mouthful it's a
research division of New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology and my background is
that I've been working as a
hundred geologists with the
aquifer mapping program your
Majella G. since about two
thousand four the more recently
I've been leading the
implementation of the New Mexico
water data act because the
bureau geology is set up as a
convening agency in statute so I
just wanted to give you a little
bit of background to talk about
the Watergate Act and what this
appropriation is seeking to do
and to begin with
I feel like when we talk about
data we need to make it relevant
and meaningful so I just wanted
to share with you a really quick
story as an example of how water
data plays a really important
role in our state and that
begins with one afternoon a few
years ago I got a phone call
from a state agency as they were
looking for information about
hot water in a specific region a
tanker truck had rolled over and
spilled its contents about
traveling on a highway on a
river here in our state and as
accident claim that preceded
they really needed to understand
how the contents of what was in
that tanker truck might affect
the water around the accidents
so how at the water quality in
that river might be impacted or
perhaps the groundwater as it
was seeping through that the
surface water the river there
how fast is it moving at half
past make that contaminant move
down river and then in the
groundwater how hello the
current conditions of water
quality might be impacted as
well as which way that
groundwater flow is moving
toward the river or away from it
and then
I'm thinking about.
Potential impacts to drinking
water if there is a public
supply well in that region or
domestic wells nearby how might
those be impacted as well as the
ecosystem and the environment
right there around read the
stuff happened and data about
these sorts of features are in
state federal and regional
organizations some of them are
only accessible by effort
questions some of them are in
paper format and sometimes you
just have to know who to call
unfortunately so the Watergate
Act is really a multi year
effort multi agency efforts to
improve how we respond to these
sorts of events and it really
begins with improving how are
agencies are managing their data
and making it available so the
Watergate Act was legislation
passed back in twenty nineteen
and it sets the more challenging
as I said at the convening
agency for implementing this
along with collaboration from
the state engineer the
Interstate Stream Commission the
environment department and
energy minerals and natural
resources these agencies hold a
lot of the state's water data
along with other state agencies
that are not listed in the act
and then several federal
agencies regional and local
groups as well and so
Water data in our state agencies
is still unfortunately managed
in some very old fashioned ways
such as paper files or maybe
scattered about in excel files
there's a great deal of valuable
information here in New Mexico
that's really meant to be public
but it's not uniformly
accessible and so this is the
work intended behind the
Watergate Act is to to work
together and hearing how this
water data is integrated and
made accessible.
The goal is to have the agencies
estate agencies I listed improve
how they collect manage and
share their data they really
know their data the best they
should be responsible parties to
curate that data and they're the
best storage for the data
providing their own quality
assurance and quality control to
make it ready for the public so
with this appropriation house
bill one pretty one what we're
seeking to do is help the state
agencies step up and address
their internal data management
struggles and improve the
practical aspects of how the
agency shared data with each
other and with the public
one thirty one I think is unique
in that we're seeking a one time
appropriation over five years
with funding to each of the
agencies to do the work that
they need to do to modernize how
they work with and manage their
data and this includes in some
cases as I said translating that
legacy data into more modern for
Max and then integrating that
data by a standardized and
secure data protocol.
Making it's important to know
that the cost of implementing
the Watergate Act will be quite
different from the cost of
maintaining this modern data
infrastructure going forward and
this is why the funds that we
requested misspelled
Representative a one time cost
over five years is just
basically to stand up the lady
that initiative.
The Watergate Act as passed in
twenty nineteen had no
appropriation associated with
that and it and so that there
was some junior bill funding
that was associated with New
Mexico tech at the R. T. elegy
that was one hundred thousand
dollars the money that has been
matched equally by the beer
geology's
Funding support and that's that
the total of state funding going
to this effort at this point for
all the other agencies involved
the Watergate Act has basically
been an unfunded mandate so this
I think we still have a lot of
successes to celebrate today
much of this has been discussed
in the handout resources that
are provided to the committee
electronically.
And so do you collaborative
efforts with the state agencies
and many other regional local
works as well along with
collaborative funding from
federal agencies like the U. S.
reclamation and philanthropic
groups like Healy foundation
board recommendation for
building tremendous partnerships
and relationships that have to
have is contributing not just to
New Mexico water data but to
national agency I'm sorry to
national water data movements
and we're really leading the way
here in New Mexico we have
established a lot of new
inter agency relationships and
collaborations we've improved
data sharing practices already
and we have built an online did
it had a lot that helps us keep
track of some of the key water
data here in New Mexico so my
hope is that we can build on
these initial investments and
help set New Mexico up with
greater tools to manage our
water resources more proactively
so that next time there is a
spill or community water outage
or water sharing agreement
that's being challenged we have
the data we need quickly at our
fingertips please consider
helping us think through some
creative ways to begin by less
than appropriation however
agencies to modernize that water
data and New Mexico on a solid
path to facing climate changes a
long term drought impacts.
What aid is just one of many
tools that we can use to help
New Mexico get on a better path
for its water features so I
really appreciate your
consideration of this bill and
I'm happy to discuss and take
questions thank you Mr thank you
for your presentation
Representative Romero anything
else that.
Well things I've thrown in my
entire two year budget fund at
this to make sure that we can
continue it I know other
legislators have this is too
important I it's in the news
today that this is the group
that needs the information in
order to inform New Mexico's
future in water this is step
zero before step one about what
we need to do to move forward so
it's so critical for us to to be
able to have this information
that's that Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Romero
let's then moved to our audience
all those that are in opposition
house bill one thirty one please
raise your hand.
Okay all those that are in
support of house bill one thirty
one please raise your hand we
will begin with Steve well Steve
wells good morning here with
this.
Yes thank you chairman committee
members Steven was president New
Mexico tech and I want to thank
the sponsors this bill for their
leadership and the state C.
Timmons for her leadership.
Mexico is in the lead in this
and we're getting a lot of
national recognition for trying
to put together data and if you
look at water as probably the
most precious infrastructure we
have in our state understanding
how it operates is fundamental
to the future especially with
these changing climate
conditions so we stand in
support of this bill and
appreciate all the hard work
that's been done to bring love
the water data act to fruition
and now it's continuation thank
you very much thank you Mr
president let's move the Steffi
Steffi.
Steep good morning you with us
hello.
Sh at the chairman had wanted
thank you very much for bringing
this bill into your committee
and of course to the Sanchez
providing it New Mexico is the
most water vulnerable state in
the nation and I've told this
committee before how many of my
neighbors here and to harass
have had their wells going dry
and they cannot afford to drill
deeper ones
we did not address our water
shortages objectively without
data and eight I don't know the
extent of the data that will be
impacted by this bill but I know
that we don't understand the
structure of myriad aquifers how
they recharge how fast people
are using groundwater but this
is this kind of data is just
essential for managing water in
the future and it's essential
that we fully funded water data
act I know and this act was
passed unanimously by the
legislature in twenty nineteen
and I appreciate the five
hundred thousand that was put
into HB too for this but
respectfully this is just simply
not enough and I also think
Representative Romero for her
junior money so I in employ the
committee and of course the
finance and Appropriations
Committee to try to find more
money for this and to allocate
recurring many for the five
years and the five institutions
so that we can really yes models
for the rest of the nation so
please pass this bill and and
let's be created and provide
some money for thank you so much
it is that let's go to Mars
Marlene.
With this.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I am sister Marlene
Karia to sister of mercy and
member of the New Mexico
interfaith power and light water
is life in here in New Mexico it
is a precious commodity that is
not Representative and really
taking good care of so I am in
support of this bill
One eight three one thirty one
as this sequence of the hate the
six fifty one that was passed
land and twenty nineteen both
the house and the Senate
unanimously.
I believe that it is important
that we put all our resources
especially on water because of
the future of all of us thank
you very much.
Thank you thank you for joining
us our Hutchinson good morning
here with us.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Howard touch Sen
with the separatist coastal
water conservation district.
I'm certainly been one of the
beneficiaries out of having
accurate data to work with
increasing the data collection
and data availability aids and
our local water planning and our
regional water planning I have
followed to irrigation wells and
domestic wells are connected up
to the ground water monitoring
systems here in the state and it
would be really wonderful to to
see that expanded to other
locations and other wells and
I'm fully in support of this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman thank you Howard is
going to meet those bravos
Amigos bravos you're with us.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee Josie pander Act
of Amigos bravos.
We strongly support this this
bill H. B. one thirty one as we
supported HB six fifty one back
in twenty nineteen.
in our thirty four year history
we spent a lot of time trying to
comb through various
repositories of water data
understand what the heck is
happening with our watersheds
and and our groundwater in New
Mexico and it's not easy and we
do think that adequately funding
the water data act
will improve the usability and
transparency of Watergate in New
Mexico among a a lot more users
and a lot more constituencies we
urge it to pass I thank the
sponsors and I think Stacey
Timmons for your leadership on
this effort it's very very
important thank you.
Thank you Sir appreciate you
let's go to Gary Payton.
Gerry good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is
Gary Payton with the coalition
of sustainable communities New
Mexico our coalition is
comprised of the mayors and
commissioners the City of
Albuquerque Los crucis Santa Fe
Santa Fe County Los Alamos
County we stand in strong
support this morning for H. B.
one thirty one.
The data collected at the state
level has direct implications
for the ability of our cities
and our counties to be able to
act at the local level.
Each of our members as its own
aggression programs regarding
water conservation and desires
to be able to increase and
improve its water management and
water planning.
We stand strong support of HB
thirty one and wishes to thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward and urged to pass this
morning thank you very much
thank you Sir let's go to Jeff.
Jeff good morning.
Good morning thank you at
chairman and committee members
my name's Jeff Celeste you have
affiliated with retake our
democracy we have over twenty
five hundred members based in
Santa Fe.
I urge you to support H. B. one
thirty one.
Is it's mentioned before the the
act requires that we have a
integration of water data miner
most critical agencies in the
state our state's been the drugs
for over twenty years and with
climate change things are only
going to become more challenging
our ability to measure our most
precious resource.
Water is a critical first step
in a successful it's successful
management.
And the I I urge you to support
to it each B. one thirty one
thank you very much thank you
yes that's will depose gifts in
well good morning you with this.
Good morning thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
Representative Romero
my name is Paul Gibson I am the
co founder freepik Our Democracy
and I want to add that well we
are based in Santa Fe we have
members in every Senate house
district in the entire state I
speaking strong support of this
bill it was passed unanimously
in twenty nineteen by both the
house and the Senate credit was
basically stripped of all of its
funding and without that funding
the data that is housed in a
variety of different departments
in the state can't be integrated
and analyzed and based on years
of experience is being evaluator
planner you cannot measure or
manage anything if you don't
know what what you have and what
you're spending it would be like
operating house budget with no
idea of what you spent and what
your income is to just write
checks you can't do that and
water it as we've heard
throughout this hearing water
New Mexico's becoming an
increasingly scarce and
treasured our resource I
strongly encourage this
committee to pass this bill
thank you very much thank you
well that's good Dale I'm sorry
bill that's good that Joan
brown.
Yes thank you chair committee
and sponsors of H. B..
One thirty one and I'm with I'm
the director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with faith communities all
over the state and water is a
sacred trust that we have and
it's foundational to all of life
and who we are in New Mexico
everything that we do this water
data bill is extremely net
needed I want to echo Mr Meryl's
comment that it's critical in
order for us to be good stewards
and move into the future or even
to live currently in the present
if anything I would say that
there needs to be a lot more
funding we have a neglected
funding on the our concerns
about water caring for sacred
water for many many years so
please support this bill and if
we can provide more funding that
would be excellent thank you
thank you it's good Oscar Sims
in Austin good morning.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee Oscar Simpson here
in Albuquerque for forty here
I'm a native New Mexican I
worked in New Mexico for forty
years dealing with water
resource management.
Dealing with contamination
cleanup and developing water
master plans for public water
systems and also working for the
state and this and that and
addressing the vulnerability of
public water supply wells to
pollution sources.
Water is a key to our economic
development and sustainability
we did not have the data and
which to make decisions and even
decide how bad a shape brand in
my opinion New Mexico has very
limited water supplies we're
increasing drought climate
change is going to make it worse
so I highly encourage the
committee to pass said house
bill one thirty one thank you
Sir thank you Sir Ralph.
Good morning.
Morning chairman day.
Thank you chairman Dan members
of the committee for the
opportunity to comment on the
vice president board of you know
we are grounded water advocates
and we are in strong support of
H. B. one thirty one and we also
are in agreement with all of the
comments that have been made
thus far in support of this
bill.
Mentioned already but I'll
mention it yet as a supporter of
HB six fifty one Watergate Act
to twenty nineteen I took note
most recently looking at its
record of votes that while H. B.
six fifty one passed unanimously
in the house it was narrowly
rejected by the Senate six days
later one day before the end of
the session.
Struck down Senate version
among other cuts removed it's
five hundred thousand dollars
appropriation this was done on
the last day in session so it
did passed unanimously in the
Senate whatever sense the
implementation of the Watergate
Act has suffered.
One of the most important steps
to stake in taking facing it's
on certain water futures
implement backlog of water data
plans that have been submitted
twenty twenty of twenty twenty
one when there was no funding
for implementation except for
the least amount that was
indicated by C. C. Timmons of
New Mexico tech by the way I
want to I forgot to say I think
the Sanchez and Mr chairman for
bringing this bill forward.
So after we urge this committee
to pass H. B. one thirty one
intact with all the funding that
has been identified that would
be and for I need upgrades and
for staffing after passing are
you sure about the to write a
strong recommendations of the
chair and vice chair of House
Appropriations and to the chair
all members of the Senate
finance committee to include the
FY twenty three appropriation
for this fully intact and H. B.
two thank you very much.
Thank you the great Peter is
great good morning you with us.
Okay thank you Mr chairman of
the committee I'm Greg Peters
senior advocate for lands water
wildlife or conservation voters
New Mexico here Sportage B. one
thirty one to support
implementation of the Watergate
Act the reasons already
mentioned it is essential to
fund modern integrated approach
to collecting sharing and using
data and information by state
agencies for water management
and integrate several tribal
state local and non governmental
data we respect we're to do
passed though we should Sanchez
for in this bill forward
particularly to provide
constant.
Thank you let's go to and
McCarty and good morning.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
for this opportunity to testify
again and and thank you very
much to the sponsors of this
legislation and in this Timmons
we must know this date of water
use and availability in our
state.
As has been said New Mexico is
already in a water shortage and
it is critical that New Mexico
find sorry fund the state
agencies to both gather input
this water data so I just
strongly urge on behalf of three
fifty New Mexico real advocacy
and as co chair of New Mexico
interfaith power and light that
this committee.
Help fund and provide the
resources to fund this act thank
you thank you let's go to war
McCartney were you at this.
Mr chairman committee members
board regarding I've with three
fifty New Mexico dealing mostly
with the coops here the state
that are dragging their feet on
transitioning to renewable
energy but that's another issue
but I'm in full support of this
bill
We are in a water shortage.
And climate changes.
affecting us adversely and we
have to have the information and
that information needs to be
available to all the agencies
just as nine one one needs all
the agencies to inter connected
have that data available so this
bill is very important to get
past so that we can help.
Address the issues in the future
thank you.
Appreciate you weren't gonna
norm gone.
Norm good morning.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you sponsor Representative
Romero missed tenants for
leading the water data act
implementation effort.
And gentleman one day for the
attention of this committee
water is life it's encouraging
to see provided support for
funding our water needs and
water agencies.
Improvement of New Mexicos water
data is essential to New
Mexico's future organized well
managed and publicly available
water data are of fundamental
importance.
You may have seen the
searchlight New Mexico article
that discussed the unfortunate
truth.
That important legacy Water data
remain only on paper including
all the Water Rights data
maintained by the Roswell
district office of the state
engineer.
Organized available water data
are important to state agency
staff productivity.
Organized available water data
are foundational to our need to
develop models and projections
of future conditions please fund
the modernization of New Mexicos
water data systems thank you
thank you it's going to learn
scales Lawrence good morning.
Good morning again Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
Lawrence.
Thank you dropped off.
Dale Dale.
Good morning you're with us.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak in
support of this important at all
my name is Dale during agency
and I'm here on behalf of the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club which represents thirty
five thousand members and
supporters in New Mexico and the
el Paso Texas region.
It is strong and strong support
of H. B. one thirty one AM
adequately funding the water
data act for all the excellent
reasons that have been given
today by Mrs Mr chairman and
others speaking in support.
I'm not going to take up more
time there's been a lot of good
testimony here on the reason
this is important so we
we want to thank the sponsors
for bringing this important bill
forward and all the excellent
work at the bureau of geology
has done this far with such
limited resources please
I would love to see a unanimous
do pass today so thank you again
Mr chairman members of the
committee
that's all I have thank you
delivery and Ricky Romero thirty
gate good morning.
Good morning chairman of
Representative my name is a
nuclear meditations we strongly
support H. B. one thirty one for
all the reasons articulated by.
The previous supporters of
Representative Romero and and
this Timmons I want to
personally thank of
Representative Romero for
bringing this important bill
thank you thank you in regulates
good arose of the floor as.
Really.
Hey good morning everyone also
if that is New Mexico Canada's
justice project and working with
some some organizations
discussing the water inequities
with within the Kandace
legislation which is why it is
extremely important to fund this
bill we have seen that there was
an emergency rule to double pack
count and we haven't even been
able to assess what the impact
of water is on the initial plan
count
it's this new industry is gonna
be very weather dependent and
without tracking the the number
of water transfers and the
impact of this industry in
particular we're gonna be
putting some great jeopardy on
our water resources I greatly
support the funding of this bill
thank you thank you let's go to
Cathy Cathy good morning.
Good morning.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Kathy
Romero and I am speaking on
behalf of the north seventy feet
mutual domestic water consumers
association I'd like to voice my
support of this bill and I
stated by others this morning
you know water is our most
precious resource and we must
protect it and having this
bill passed would be in the best
interest of all of New Mexico
thank you thank you Kathy that's
going to help Trujillo studio
here with us.
Mr chairman this is Carol
Trujillo president of the New
Mexico seconds Association I
stand in support of this bill
for too long we have been
relying on paper water transfers
to deal with our water shortages
we really need to look at is
there real water is it actually
disappearing and dealing with
those difficult reductions that
we're seeing from global change
thank you very much thank you
and I I see a couple in our
panelists this for some reason
Anna.
You want mute and you're you're
welcome to speak hello Mr
chairman of members of the
committee good morning my name
is Anil and in whileor and I'm
the policy adviser at the energy
minerals and natural resources
department and we are in very
strong support of HB one thirty
one we believe that the funding
in this bill will allow us to
successfully implement our
agency's contribution to the
Watergate Act and one of the
largest budget the water data
act is that modernizing our
water data management how we
share data how we use data it's
going to allow the state
agencies to use the most current
and robust data will we make
modeling and management policy
decision and when we respond to
public enquiring these and
there's real urgency to this
effort right now as our State
begins to feel the direct impact
of increasing water uncertainty
and Dr.
The estimated costs of water
data infrastructure are
relatively small when you
compare them to physical
infrastructure projects but
never the less to fully realize
and implement what the Watergate
Act asks of us.
Substantial annual funding is
needed at our agency the other
agencies mentioned in this bill
for the next five years at least
and limited IT resources is the
primary obstacle that might
prevent EMNRD from successfully
implementing are part of the
water data at what we plan to do
with the funding in this bill if
we receive it is to split it
between hiring new people in I.
T. and new people in our mining
and minerals division as well as
using the nonrecurring portion
of the funds to provide contract
funding for API design cloud
hosting digitizing our water
data and collecting and
processing coal mine water data
from all mines in the state
thank you very much for your
time we appreciate your support
of H. B. one thirty one and it's
appropriation thank you for
joining us that's going to
Hannity's the white and you are
with us good morning.
Morning thank you chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Hannah Riseley wide on the
New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission deputy director and
my colleagues that Interstate
Stream Commission as well as the
office of the state engineer and
support of this bill we want to
thank the sponsors and Stacy
Timmons with important effort to
move this forward I echo all the
comments you've heard here so
far today is very challenging to
manage something that you don't
know enough about and so not
only do we feel like it's
critical for this data to be
more accessible to the public
and across agencies it's also
very critical for the stated to
be accessible to us in terms of
our water management practices
I'm as you heard from Stacy
there's a lot of data out there
it's just in different
repositories and not easily
accessible we also have
databases that are antiquated
number of databases that are
over twenty five years old to me
it and our I like to say I'm a
twenty five year old database
and I two years is like a
thousand year old piece of
infrastructure so there's a need
to upgrade and as you heard from
Mr bomb earlier we also have a
lot of paper data that means
that staff from our office they
if we want to learn something
about water right on Water using
the Russell base and we need to
drive to Roswell to look through
filing cabinets of paper data
and so I know that this this is
a big left but I want to also
reiterate what sixty minutes
earlier it's almost like we need
to get over a hump in terms of
modernizing our systems and then
I really believe that will pay
for itself in the long run in
terms of increased efficiency
alas I just wanted to comment as
you all know Interstate Stream
Commission does water planning
for the state of New Mexico the
state as a whole as well as
regional water planning efforts
and over the years we have
consistently heard in those
process these at the top concern
that folks have across the state
is data having sufficient data
to know what it is we're trying
to manage it.
Is critical as a probably some
of you have heard as well
there's a recent survey done by
important bird on the water
foundation and which New
Mexicans in general across the
state not just those folks to
participate and water planning
process these rated water data
access and transparency in
modernizing system as the
popularity and so with that I'm
I thank you very much for your
time we support this legislation
thank you it's going to ponder
see Apollo good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee public
Garcia with the New Mexico
Essick Association we sent a
strong support of this effort
and believe that having a
modernized data system and
robust datasets is really
essential for water management
decisions in New Mexico this is
important not only at the state
level but also at the local
level so that entities at the
local level such as a second as
us on the water districts
counties and towns are able to
make good good water management
decisions and that we as a state
start to.
The better a better job of
conjunctive management of our
groundwater and surface water
resources together and that we
have a better tools to deal with
water scarcity going forward
thank you very much for your
consideration Mr chairman.
Thank you both for joining us
again it looks like that's the
end of our public comment period
I am reminded that we do have a
floor session beginning at
eleven o'clock today but I do
know one of Russian debate at
this point so we'll go to
Representative Brown first
Representative Brown the floor
is yours then.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I think all our presenters
and the.
Folks who gave public comment
this this morning
I do support the bill
I I do so with a little bit of
caution I I believe we have just
been stated that there there is
a lot of data available it may
not be as accessible as we
wanted to be
at I I became aware of really
the
the abundance of data when I was
talking to someone about medical
research recently and I was told
that it's not that we really
lacked data it's just that we
don't have the time to to work
with the data and and get some
your patterns that are figured
out things like that so I think
this is probably needed Mr
chairman and Representative
Romero so the us on this bill
it's it's broken down into
chunks of funding what's the
overall ask them thank you Mr
chair Representative Brown it is
eighteen point three million
dollars for five agencies over
five years.
Very good Mr chairman and and
Representative so I see the I.
S. C. will be involved in
Department environments office
of the state engineer energy
minerals and natural resources
am I missing what I know the
convening authority is New
Mexico tax.
At bureau of geology and mineral
resources is there anybody else
involved in in this effort Mr
chair Representative Brown there
are other organizations that
have been contributing to the
set up so of course there are
other
basically folks have been hired
are collaborating on with the
project so as far as the
agencies listed in state
government you nailed it that's
that's all we're looking to fund
but there are so many
collaborating efforts with this
with this project to be able to
to bring it to fruition.
Mr Chairman representative bone
marrow so I'm just curious to
know if the national cave and
karst institute which is here in
New Mexico and yes under the
umbrella of New Mexico tech if
the cave and karst institute we
do one of those collaborators.
Mr chair Representative Brown I
wanted for my expert but I'm
realizing she's no longer in our
panelists so we could just get
her back and respond to that.
And if you'll just repeat the
question she's our hand up to
and in these.
Madam chair representative so
here in New Mexico we are
fortunate to have the national
cave and karst research
institute and that's
organization that receives
federal state an actual
municipal funding to to operate
deals a lot with underground
formations and water supplies
and things like that so I think
it's a pretty.
Insightful group and they do a
lot of research and I'm just
curious if they're going to be a
collaborator and maybe if
president wells for New Mexico
tech is here maybe he would even
have the answer if we can't get
our expert back.
Thank you.
Go ahead and defer to seize the
thanks.
Mr chair and Representative
Brown that agency is one among
many that I would like to add to
the list as I'm officially
collaborating agencies
and early versions of the
Watergate Act bill six if you
want to twenty nineteen there
are a lot of other groups listed
that through the process and
hearings and at discussions it
many of them were were
eliminated I think it would be
worth considering adding groups
like degree W. R. I. A. the game
and fish group have some of the
data that specifically listed in
the Watergate Act and I guess
it's just it comes down to you
know their data absolutely
should be available and are part
of the discussion and and are
definitely part of our working
groups that we have regular
meetings with and so anyone who
has a piece of the latter data
puzzle for New Mexico it's
absolutely I'm part of that
discussion and and can continue
data and and collaborate with us
what what we're trying to work
on here with this particular
appropriation is just getting
the funding to the agencies are
all part of the data and making
sure that they have the capacity
to share about more publicly and
make it very accessible to all
of us so I I think you know
that's where the consideration
to add Nickerie officially but I
do absolutely to collaborate
with them and and gather some of
that water data as well as it's
already some of it's already in
our our registry as well.
Thank you very informative
answer and Mr Chairman
representative Romero so I'm I'm
thinking that we you know we
sometimes have litigation over
compacts and like Texas versus
New Mexico Colorado things like
that I imagine the availability
of and read that'll readily
available I doubt it will help
us with those types of.
matters it would that be
correct.
Mr chair Representative Brown
absolutely yeah.
All right the see if I had
anything else
Mr chairman and representative
so the funding would be used in
fiscal years twenty three three
twenty seven and this would this
reverting twelve yes.
Any any unused funds at the end
of that period would be
referring is that correct Mr
chair representative that's
correct okay all right Mr
chairman thank you so much thank
you Representative Brown any
other questions or comments from
committee.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Mr chair I do a to pass.
Do passed the representative
Allison is their second.
Second second by Representative
brown the any opposition to the
motion.
There being none Representative
Romero thank you so much for
your presentation today house
bill one thirty one had to do
passed without any opposition
appreciate you being here with
us and thank you Stacey for also
joining with us thank you have a
great day you too thank you
thank you committee members
thank you all so much reminder
that we are going on to the
floor and eleven o'clock please
do keep in mind that next week
Tuesday we will be bringing up
house bill eighty three oh in
the publication's house bill one
sixty nine which will be there
if the facilities funding as
well as a H. J. and one which is
drought in federal agriculture
funding so with those the bills
we will take those up on Tuesday
morning until then stay safe the
warm and we will see you on the
floor thank you all so much have
a great day.
