Can you get a time to time.
You.
Mr speaker I move that next
order of business introduction
of legislation see no objection
Introduced by representatives
little Garrett Borrego and
Senator pope and Representative
Hernandez a memorial requesting
the department of transportation
of a killer and pedestrian
traffic and reduce related risks
House memorial eighty one
introduced the representatives
little Garrett for a go Senator
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
fifty.
And act relating to construction
ordered not printed and referred
to the house Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill one seventy six as
amended introduced by Senator
hazard mitigation and cost share
requirements of state and
federal funding programs
increasing the annual transfer
from the New Mexico irrigation
works construction fund to the
Senator six as amended amended
twice by title is ordered not
printed for to the house like
agriculture as a gas and water
resources committee.
antagonists Senate bill one
eighty one introduced by senator
schools.
Senate bill one eighty one have
been read twice by title is
five an act relating to motor
vehicles amending sections of
chapter sixty six article six
NMSA nineteen seventy eight to
raise registration fees for
electric buses and acting a
surcharge on registration fees
for certain electric and plug in
hybrid vehicles providing for
the distribution of surcharge
printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
Senate bill three forty six
introduced by Senator Campos and
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill three eighty eight
introduced by Senator o'neal.
It amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill four thirty three
capacity of aircraft used for
new or expanded air routes from
thirty to one hundred passengers
Senate bill four thirty three
public works in capital
improvements committee
Senate bill four seventy one
introduced by senators serve on
days.
An act relating to child.
of conscious declaring and here
an emergency Senate bill four
seventy one introduced by
senators have on this for
seventy one having been read
twice by title is ordered not
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty one as amended an act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
increases making appropriation
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill five
twenty one as amended.
Senate finance committees of the
two percent I twenty one as
amended have been read twice by
introduced by senators Padilla
and Lopez a Joint Memorial
recognizing Los Amigas state and
huevo Mexico as good will
ambassadors force work in
for the state of New Mexico
Senate Joint Memorial three
introduced by senators Padilla
and Lopez.
Senator amendments was by title
resources adding a center of
excellence for geothermal
resources at the New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology amending the duties
of the energy conservation and
project revolving loan fund
authorizing loans Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eight Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eight having been read
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty seven and act relating to
municipalities making an
appropriation to the city of
Hobbs to compensate for certain
twenty chapter eighty section
one Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty seven.
to the house appropriations and
finance committee.
One excuse me I'm sorry Senate
tax business transition
committee substitute for Senate
substitute for Senate bill one
fifty five an act relating to
telecommunications amending the
rural telecommunications act of
New Mexico providing for the use
fifty five.
committee this is a house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill two zero three as
amended introduced by senator
direct support provider agency
employees amending a section of
the debate developmental
disabilities act regarding the
determination of rates paid for
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house health
and Human Services Committee.
Senate bill two thirty two as
amended introduced by Senator
Pirtle an act relating to health
providers into their provider
payment systems requiring
insurers to reimburse approved
providers if the insurers fail
to load that information within
thirty days of receiving a
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
thirty seven an act relating to
make rules and guidelines for
regional water planning
providing duties of regional
water planning entities Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill three
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill three
seventy three an act relating to
families and acting the office
of child advocate act.
establishment of the state child
advocate selection committee
amending and enacting sections
of the NM es a nineteen seventy
eight Senate Judiciary Committee
Committee.
Senate bill three eighty two as
amended introduced by senator
Munoz an act relating to
economic development making the
eighty two as amended introduced
by senator Munoz.
Senator.
As amended amended twice by
title is ordered not printed in
front of the house commerce and
amending the behavioral health
capital funding act the primary
care capital funding act and the
child care facility loan act
moving the primary care capital
services providing duties
directing rulemaking allowing
the New Mexico finance authority
to provide remedies Senate bill
four twenty three introduced by
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill four
sixty four an act relating to
tourism requiring the New Mexico
outdoor recreation to the
division of the economic
before the sixty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house commerce and
economic development committee.
Mr speaker and we go to that
order of business committee
report seeing no objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to was the
referred house bill four thirty
four as amended has had it under
on adoption of a federal
committee report on house before
thirty four as amended all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe the S. seven
committee reported opted.
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption where an adoption of a
federal committee report on
Senate bill one thirty one as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
seventy eight has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation to do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
maybe the small chair Mr speaker
move adoption.
We're on adoption of a federal
Mr speaker appropriations and
finance committee to is been
referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five as amended
finance committee substitute for
Senate health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five as amended
all those in favor of a missing
line.
recommendations that it to pass
respectfully submitted more than
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption for an adoption of a
federal committee report on
house with three ninety as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
This is the time we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
The representative of someone a
preemptive that request.
Would you like to request that
we remove our clothes.
Okay it is it is granted
requests from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
in goes copy of house bill nine
as amended has been read in full
in order by the officers of the
Senate in open session returned
same here with respectfully
submitted sure double on Senate
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted sherry do
on Senate chief clerk Mr Rubio
interred.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
respectfully submitted sherry do
on Senate chief clerk Mr be
interred.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
And miscellaneous business and
miscellaneous business
mobilization is ordered.
To move from the reserve but.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to give the the
Olympics when amazing it was a
great success the kids to have a
wonderful time in the school
this is an excellent job
Is also
to meet in Santa Fe with the
announcement Mr speaker
had a game of sorts last night
some compared it to.
is it an amazing but maybe to
many players on the court type
We like to stand today
And recognize somebody that that
played
have found out once or twice.
We we we kept pulling him back
into the game because we needed
Mr Chairman representative a
Nathan P. small to
to be recognized as our MVP.
You Mr speaker will all have
tales to tell but I'm gonna I'm
gonna leave it up to some of the
to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes Representative AT
Nathan P. small house of
Mexico house of representatives
and the New Mexico Senate faced
off in a basketball rivalry that
has existed since two thousand
and whereas the annual hoops for
patient care fund and we're as
Representative Nathan P. small
that's cool basketball player
extraordinaire also known as New
Mexico's own Steve Nash played
squeaked a narrow thirty three
to thirty two within over the
house of representatives in the
fiercely competitive overtime
game at the Santa Fe Indian
school gymnasium and.
Player now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that recognition be
extended to Representative
Nathan P. small declared the two
thousand twenty three hoops for
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
The
gentleman from Canada
percentages thank you Mr speaker
and I barely rise today because
behind him and the those guys
gave it their all I'm telling
you everybody did so proud to
see everybody and
coming back and I'm not I'm not
I'm gonna try real hard not to
go off the court.
About every three minutes thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen gentleman from San
that it gets so that in that the
lord.
Is buying dinner for everybody
to on a gentleman.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative little.
been awhile since I've seen that
much intensity in this at the
basketball game it was so much
fun and to add to that the
determination there I asked him
oh my gosh that's bloody yet yet
and blew it out completely as an
MVP would so congratulations
again it was a wonderful to play
don't plan on playing next year
but I think next year I'll be
the MVP because I'm gonna host a
fundraiser so we can pay the
referees more than the Senate
representatives like stop stop
given notice attention he did a
great job we did a fantastic job
but the best thing about it was
a lot of camaraderie a lot of
team work and I think I should
win the award for the most
group they're like now and but
everybody on our our side played
very fairly I'm gonna say that
thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
It was a fraction of an inch.
So we were the only team with
we're gonna do some third
reading in concurrence tonight
and we're going to go and get
started right now the lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
number thirty six yes Mr speaker
we can but that point please the
record reflect that election is
replacing I'll go to eighty as
amended on final passage has
been taken it is now subject to
secretary Patricia Trujillo.
The education department they're
looking new agency with you make
a little bit it's breaking and
then a lot better thank all
house bill two eighty does is it
directs the agency departments
to establish technical
assistance centers for native
American education in the state
of New Mexico partner with New
state of students serving school
districts to improve native
Americans Education and with
that Mr speaker Stephanie
questions there's a right to
have to ask you if I if my
memories ride was the approach
of appropriations stripped off
of this bill.
gentleman there is a pot of
money and there is an animal you
signed between the department of
Indian Affairs as well as with a
long stay with the AGD to
gentlemen you know for the
digital and close with us to
pass on house bill two eighty.
We are on final passage of house
bill two eighty as amended the
vote is now open.
Close.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Hochman Vigil
yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
informative zero negative house
bill two eighty as amended is
only because this house
generated from Bernalillo
Representative can you are you
ready and item number fifty
yes Mr speaker this is simple
but language cleanup for
the apprenticeship council into
council it reflects educational
trends in New Mexico for
including apprenticeships in
trades and the bill also brings
Mister chair I stand for
questions there is a bit the
gentleman from Chavis said you
know that our percent of towns
and.
Thank you Mr speaker will delay
the Mr speaker I yield to the
What we're doing in for twenty
four I mean how does that work.
Mr speaker and gentleman before
workforce solutions and the way
it this is gonna work.
All it does is change who makes
the appointments to the council.
And
Speaker gentle lady does the.
Mr chairman and gentleman of
the.
Direct the secretary workforce
solutions appoints that one
bigger generated close Mr chair
I move now that I do pass on
house bill four twenty four.
We are on final passage of house
bill four two for the vote is
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Rubio
in the negative house bill four
twenty four has as this house
gentleman from Valencia in item
fifty one.
Thank you Mr speaker we get me
to the point that the record
speaker one does so it's up to
do four things one my name's a
technology in Education Act to
the digital according Education
Act.
It clarifies definitions and or
education with that Mr speaker I
stand for questions see no
debate the gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill four one do now
pass where final passage of
Was about to close.
The critical those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Is now closed by one of sixty
four in the affirmative zero in
the negative house bill four
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order business announcements.
concurrence which was a few days
ago
we will have
we'll get under messages we will
debate the motion we can debate
the motion we will be
we will be working to ensure
that the B. stays within the
requested we can either do voice
vote for a roll call vote.
For good.
And as for one before we get
there.
in the morning we are planning a
floor session tomorrow
afternoon.
So that'll be the play of the
next twenty.
Six hours or so.
Mr speaker I go to that order
business third reading of
legislation to no objection it
is so ordered.
Members of direct attention to.
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment for
substitution gentlelady to
explain the bill thank you Mr
chairman I'd ask that the
surgeon arms of my expert
witness come in.
with current case law according
to WCA the.
it exception to require workers
compensation coverage for farm
and ranch flavors was declared
Jared was could declared
unconstitutional under
Constitutional excuse me this
bill would remove that language
from the statute Mr speaker and
field.
Yes Mr speaker I Williams.
Speaker generally if it's if the
course of declared as
with the federal law.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady what we're is this not
actually clean up but it doesn't
Mr speaker John it's a state
court case ended it is required
because it will it's clean up
like you said it is it is
cleaned up and so there's been a
lot of confusion right now
You Mr speaker gentlelady could
you cite the court case.
Mr speaker gentleman
The gentleman it's Rodriguez
versus Derry twenty sixteen N.
What I've been told is that the
case number is three seven eight
P. three D. thirteen.
Thank you Mr gently home was
case Mr speaker this court case
it looks like it's twenty
sixteen.
Thank you mistaken identity so
Mr speaker the current language
specifically says what.
languages there are few.
See the the.
The first paragraph paragraph
the language of the the last
There was an amendment and the
next page page three E. there
was another.
And that's about it.
Thank you Mr speaker will to win
the yield.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
to the gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady a note here
workers comp specifically
for the domestic servants.
What it really does sound.
Speaker gentle lady so.
The mystic servants or still not
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
want to know for the debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker I do not ask that
house bill three thirty as
Was about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary.
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson both
yes.
Forty seven in the affirmative
eighteen in the negative house
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of Business messages
to junction it is so ordered.
As You LED from Santa Fe ready
on concurrence calendar item
amendments thank you Mr speaker
on these amendments are really
just clarifying language I think
our friends on the other side we
like some of these we remove
language including directly and
thirteen and and and a type of
he was at persons with too many
**** and then on page thirteen
line eighteen all we just
quickly I'm just having my
expert come in it that's all
right on and I will introduce
after done with these I also
want to mention that the that we
synthesize the language so it
wasn't so confusing it is made
it really clear that public
bodies could be brought up not
individuals and then
twenty two we remove that
language then we took the actual
language and condense it again
and then we struck aligns page
five lines three through twelve
and we're pleased with language
attorney fees
reimbursement because that would
be attorney fees from the
attorney general's that doesn't
necessarily make sense so we
just want to clarify that
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
request a roll call vote.
You have a roll call vote.
We have a motion to concur with
Gentleman from with that
Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind gentle lady from Santa Fe
please yield thank you Mr
speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from the terror thank
Judiciary Committee stripped
because I believe Mr speaker
gentle lady they put back
something that was stripped on
our side so could you tell me
moment to introduce my experts
Eleanor rush forth with she's an
ACLU lawyer just to be clear on
that that is an excellent
question this is what we read
into the Senate as well the the
summarized it the way I did so I
thought if you don't mind Mr
speaker gentle and I'm gonna go
to walk you through how the
language shifts.
Thank you Mr speaker and
we're creating and we're
striking subsection C. and worry
and essentially what that does
how how that works is that that
ends up to leading the attorney
page four between lines fourteen
fifteen all we do create another
new subsection and again this is
one those were we literally just
change the semicolon but we
sure that language was tight and
so that's what happened there
and then similarly we on page
four line twenty two we took out
the extra period struck out
violation of reproductive and
gender affirming health care
freedom Act whichever is greater
so we just again took out the
the extra language I believe yes
that is correct thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady I
Mr speaker gentle lady so on the
the last page up at least the
one I have of the amendments in
context Mr speaker gentle lady.
bodies and entities I believe
that was added back by the
Senate Judiciary Committee was
it already there previously or
was is also some kind of
drafting thing where a period
very clear that again it could
not be brought against
individual just against the
public body okay thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady so on on
Mr speaker gentle lady was this
five thousand previously in the
bill or was this something that
was also a drafting kind of
thing Mr thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen yes that we
gentle lady and so anything else
like substantive that the Senate
changed not regarding just
drafting other than that last
paragraph that we just spoke
from my perspective and I and I
did let the sponsor of the
amendment so that I felt very
confident in the language of our
bill however she did feel that
In statute our people are not
adding additional in intentions
we didn't expect so this just
really clarify that streamline
the the like the language I I
has not shifted shifted thank
you okay thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady and so I see on
my amendments in context page
three.
Has after a public body I
Senate Mr speaker gentle lady I
just wanna make sure that wasn't
touched.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman yes those were
amendments that were made before
became it before it came to the
people really dot their I's and
cross their duties over there
Mister speaker I appreciate
these answers and that really
clarifies a lot of the
information I needed so thank
you Mr speaker thank you
generated from Santa Fe thank
you Mr speaker thank you
yield thank you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentle in her job
Chavis Mr speaker gentle lady.
The Senate out of the words
individual acting on behalf of
under this act I'm wondering if
that would that language would
open that person up to a suit
under the Human Rights Act.
wonderful catch their we want to
the language be consistent
throughout the bill and that was
what the the sponsor the
amendment and make clear to be
clear about this this is only
prohibited for aging of them it
does not change that Public
bought that that individuals
cannot be held liable for this.
open them up to lawsuits brought
under this act but under other
acts that this body has a pass
in the last few years so Mister
you Mr speaker I'm I'm excited
to yield to the gentleman from
San Juan Mr speaker gently from
Santa Fe may want to wait till
you're my questions but but I I
promise or not marketing Mr
speaker I could turn the body's
attention to page three I
believe are striking the phrase
directly or indirectly in both
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
chairman of the regional yes we
are striking that language and
there was we had the
conversation with the
representative the the the
that that is true either way
with or without that language
and her concern was that if we
included in this language and
other places where it did not
appear it may bring those laws
in jeopardy wasn't a concern of
generated from Santa Fe I would
I remember.
There may have been some
dialogue on this very floor
about whether in the existing
statute there's in directly
interfere but I will revisit
minutes from the Senate side.
There's a new paragraph F..
That would be inserted.
On.
can you explain what this new
paragraph F. does to the bill
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I'm actually very
excited to talk about this
because we wanted to make sure
that this bill really work for
how health care is provided in
others what really rose that
they really wanted to convert
what's called a protections on
was ensuring that no one had
affirmative action affirmative
coverage they do not already
have.
Thank you Mr speaker German just
to clarify we never intended
this to be an insurance mandate
seeking gender affirming care I
go to a of state hospital UNM.
This would not require my
insurance company to provide
and so no it would not be that
you could you would not be able
to access any additional that
was already there.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe so in other words of
my.
procedure I was seeking that
this bill doesn't force
insurance come to do that.
Thank you Mr Mr speaker the
short answer is yes but the
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe can you help me
understand how this new
subparagraph F..
Interacts with.
There is so let me let me
rephrase the question Mr speaker
generated from Santa Fe so can
you help me understand how.
now we're talking about having
to find.
Some services if they can be
afforded how that interacts with
paragraph S. that is now new.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
one they do not provide payment
or source of payment in the
service one is required and then
this again clarifies that
insurance companies in
particular are not required to
Mr speaker generated from Santa
Fe so I guess what I'm the new
on some trying to highlight is
the way read paragraphs the
three.
Is nothing in this bill requires
regardless of the ability to
pay.
But it seems like.
We're giving the insurance
gentleman I'm sorry I apologize
the way that you raised right
now sounds like it was a
question about the former
amendment can you rephrase the
question.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe so if we look at.
amendment that they made.
It starts with paragraphes an
insulin there's three
subparagraphs of the third one
which is what you read from
previously it says that.
services under state or federal
law.
Our list of the bills it pays
how that sentence finishes and
then when I go to the next new
paragraph F. as in Frank.
concerned are we putting a
burden on actual docks local
docks that were not require
insurance companies to care the
same bird.
and we're referring to that was
already the amendment for the
house Judiciary Committee we
when when you and again you have
to strip the amendment from the
previous one of them added
affirmative care that the you do
not already provide.
Mr speaker generally from Santa
Fe so.
I don't want to.
Amendments but if you look at
what the Senate Judiciary did
they struck those amendments and
then put him back in in a new
amendment so that is technically
not actually willing to put on
insurance companies and Mr
speaker my last question the way
I read the sentiments.
Section six that used to exist
in the bill the severability
gentlemen when the bills come
before the Senate Judiciary
Committee the severance the the
severability clause is already
presumed so that that's why they
Spiegel a kind lady from Santa
Fe you'll.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
been so long since we talked I
will have actually yield to the
gentleman from Santa.
Page two of the Senate
amendments number eight.
So it says that it strikes.
Strikes the entire of line
twenty four.
And then in search.
The sum of five thousand dollars
for each violation.
My question is if a teacher.
Advises somebody against one of
these procedures.
Are they liable for the five
for those they just wanted to
condense the language to make it
clear.
So Mister speaker kind lady so
just the school would be in
violation not a teacher.
never be the individual teacher
who is who is considered here.
Mr speaker kind lady thank you
for that so.
school itself within paid five
thousand dollars for each one of
those times thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen you know it
really it again we're looking at
this it really comes down to the
times my mom will forget if
she's referring to me or my
brother or my other brother that
happens very frequently people
make mistakes and that is
something that the court has
seen before and they have
considered before that is not
school could be held accountable
for that because again we want
children when they go to school
to feel very safe when they're
at school.
Mr speaker finally absolutely we
It would it be considered a
violation for teacher council
the student that was trying to
Mr speaker thank you gentleman
again this is not a substantial
change to the virtual bill that
we debated however in terms of
your question you're asking
about
you body and we are on a motion
to concur with Senate amendments
to house bill seven we do have a
roll call vote to vote of yes
and we would have concurred
about of no and we would have
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Hochman
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
The vote is now closed but what
of thirty nine in the
affirmative twenty nine in the
negative the house house
twelve or one PM the house will
come to order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the journal show
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
addition it is so ordered.
Jan lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
committee on agriculture sec is
in water resources will meet
tomorrow Saturday at eleven
thirty in room three fifteen.
nine A. M. room three zero five
we will have breakfast burritos.
something that approximates the
continental breakfast and we
will also have lunch brought in
Mr speaker is a continental
breakfast in lady that's usually
I hope that's okay with
everybody Mr speaker issued a
gentle lady members take note.
The management's.
Mr speaker I move house standard
recess until one thirty tomorrow
morning Saturday one thirty
eight AM four PM.
