We have a quorum please rise for
today's invocation led by
the gym lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
father thank you for the work
you have called us here to do.
Thank you for the strength you
give us to do it.
And thank you for the community
help us to see you in one
another.
Work together with patients with
kindness and with the
presumption of good will.
Good morning members.
I got a photograph and he is
doing very well.
House mom and dad.
maam store and that is.
the picture when you get a
chance from Santa Fe.
Good morning Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
Thank you Mr speaker and good
morning
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house memorial
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentle lady
to explain the memorial.
Mr speaker members the memorial
is to honor a the first I think
education policy in the state
and also eager rights in the
state and
with the chief clerk please read
Mexico for as William E. one was
a state representative from
house district eleven in
Bernalillo county from nineteen
seventy one to nineteen seventy
eight which became district
had a career with Sandia
national laboratories as an
applied mathematician and
whereas it throughout his
legislative career
Representative one was an
advocate for an equal
funding included recognizing the
fundamental inequality of school
districts funded with local
revenue sources which produced
widespread disparities on a per
pupil basis between rich and
and ensuring the passage of the
equalized school funding formula
and house bill eighty five of
the nineteen seventy four
legislative session which was
subsequently recognized
recognized the basic inequality
of New Mexicos treatment of
women in community property laws
at the time which denied them
full agency in financial matters
such as loans titles and
Representative Warren was a
primary sponsor of the equal
rights amendment to the
constitution constitution New
Mexico by introducing house
joint resolution two he was
the state voted to approve the
amendment by a large margin and
whereas on the first day of the
nineteen seventy three
legislative session
Representative Warren introduced
representatives and the Senate
New England Mexico to be the
twenty seventh state to ratify
the federal equal rights
amendment and we're as
Representative Warren introduced
house bill twenty two in the
And work diligently against
entrenched opposition to get the
bill passed now therefore be it
resolved by the house twelve
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the former state
representative William E. one B.
in the City of Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker in may I
now introduce the guests at the
rostrum who are with him that
say as a young law student who
was working on the state rights
amendment back then many years
ago that it would not a pass it
would not have even been on the
Friends Buck Trier and Merion
Trier.
Daniel balls.
And Judith meetings.
was the firs
the committee the executive
director of the commission on
the status of women.
is Mister speaker
I would now move that house
committee which led to some
debate yes I would like to have
Highly yield to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo county thank you
Mr speaker and thank you very
much lady from Bernalillo
I want to say that
I'm not mistaken was that not to
win the speaker was Walter
Martinez.
I need to okay and
time was unique and a model for
the whole country thank you so
much.
These are for the debate on
house memorial seventy seeing
I now ask unanimous consent of
the house that the record show
that the role has been called
and all members present voted in
the affirmative emotion show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
The board center and the
affirmative during the negative
house memorial seventy has duly
passed this house.
Thank you Representative Warren
we are indeed lucky to be in
joining us as well.
Gentleman from Valencia.
Announcements.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
The move adoption where the
option available committed one
house bill one thirty all those
in favor say if I was a nine.
recommendation of do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
that small chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
not optional fable Committee
port and house bill one thirty
four of those in favor signify
nine has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation to do passed as
amended respectfully submitted
into small chair Mr speaker move
adoption reduction of federal
been referred house government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill to sixty two has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendation that a do
We're not going to print has a
relaxed setting if it's going to
some super house with two sixty
two of those in favor say if I
was a nine.
Suppose a yes and a good
productive.
submitted me that small chair Mr
speaker move adoption reduction
of a federal committee report on
house bill three seventy seven
as amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye those
recommendation that a do pass as
amended need respectfully
submitted this small chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are not
option of a favorable could
report on house bill three
consideration report same with
recommendation that do not pass
the house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bill five thirty three to
pass respectfully submitted it
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
All those tools may be just have
a committee report up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are on adoption no
favorable committee report on
house bill one thirty nine but a
favorable committee report on
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty nine of those in favor
had it under consideration point
it was recommendation to due
process amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr speaker move adoption
we're an adoption referral
committee report on house with
three fourteen of those as
consideration part same with
recommendation that it do not
pass for that house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
drug resolution eighty two
passed respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
eight of those in favor signify
by saying aye all those goals
may we just have a committee
reported up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
an answer for to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption remote option no
favorable committee report on
house with three fifty seven but
a favorable committee report on
Mr speaker your rules
development land grants and
respectfully submitted Christine
or yes chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are on adoption of a
federal governor put on Senate
bill one eighty eight the
official state aroma all those
Mr speaker rural development
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to is been referred
Senate bill two forty five has
had it under consideration read
report on Senate bill two forty
five all those in favor say this
and I.
This was a test of a good
productive.
delayed from earlier percent
Matthews.
Thank you Mr speaker to to just
to to make it as been issued and
today is C. N. M. day at the in
Community college in Albuquerque
but it serves far more than
Albuquerque I am particularly
honored to be
had ever worked for and despite
that it was supportive and and
empowering of atmosphere and
earlier in their lives many work
full time many had families and
many we're going to school full
time and quite frankly their
hunger for education and growth
the eight the organization is
fifty seven years old now
and I would like to recognize
the leadership of this
extraordinary institution that
Dale Cruz who is related to
someone in the house.
Board members of the junior
Trujillo.
President Tracy Hartzler who is
ands and influence of C. N. M.
is re is represented by the fact
that are Representative Josh
Thank you for the opportunity to
Thank you Mr speaker with all
due respect they are the sun
cats.
The speaker and the quick story
company my wife to work from a
function for related to C. N. M.
speaker I also want to
recognize them and of course the
leadership as well the reality
is it's UNM does a wonderful job
present our service thank you so
much for your work Mr speaker
thank you thank you gentlemen
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative little thank you
Mr speaker thank you
M..
There I can't say enough about
the services that were provided
there in addition to the
there was no way they were going
to let me not six not succeed I
would there was no way I was not
going to be successful in moving
forward and sure enough it
much so I am a proud member of
Phi theta Kappa.
And it received a full
scholarship to the university of
New Mexico as many of my
also to friends and family who
continue who have followed as
well so thank you very much
thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam Representative.
recognition to C. N. M. and go
son cats I want to thank you
also for the green chilly this
morning but I will show my age
and I am actually a product to
of the Albuquerque technical
I never say that is because of
them that I was not ready it's
because of of TV I is is how I
got ready right and so that I I
think they're not for a hand up
finding my way to a technical
college and transferred from
there to the university New
Mexico then then findings went
to law school just just fumbling
around but thank you all for for
what you've provided for me for
you Mr speaker Mr speaker I'd
like to also thank the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Mr speaker
recently my brother and I went
to Lobo's came we parked in the
that at TV I and then seeing
them first as part time faculty
then as full time where she then
retired from so Mister speaker
warming and something to
celebrate in glad to do it here
today thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman the gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
innovation is happening at C. N.
M. right now we talk about the
different stages of people are
coming in but when they leave C.
N. M. so many of them are
entrepreneurs some of them are
doing so many great things with
are.
In many ways the crown jewel of
our wonderful community college
system throughout New Mexico
including our own SFC see up
here but I see the work that's
happening out there and seeing
how it's spreading throughout
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker with the lady of.
The lady here I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
It's not that C. N. M. isn't
anymore is just as CNN is
everywhere and obviously its
duplicate that I just wanted
thank you for being here and
thank you for the culinary
treats we I'll tell you these
people know how to cook and
colleagues and the new president
and although it's not that new
but still we did our transition
thank you all so much thanks
committee lady from.
burn a Leo for bringing this the
NM to our recognition today but
today I rise to specifically
thing the president of CNM
tracing hard for and the board
of directors member whose with
happen last year.
Of those women in the trades
conference in the in the entire
state and they are getting ready
for the next one on March thirty
them have made a difference of
ever wanted and electricity
Palmer a construction worker but
you couldn't find it I want to
find them I want to know that
this state is comprised of fifty
worry about having any of those
items taken care of again and
thank you.
Representative Lujan thank you
that then TBI and was part of a
work group of students that
we're looking at one with the
change the name
that and so expanding rising
thank you C. N. M. for all the
wonderful courses I took a other
physics courses there is well
and for your partnership with
to get so thank you very much I
stand and support thank you.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
good thank you thank you for the
reminder.
I stand in support of
recognizing CNM as many of you
I was one of the founders of the
el Paso community college back
in the seventies I was a student
we collected petitions we had to
that could offer a wide array of
of classes.
That we're in those days what we
called nontraditional and I
proponent and was part of the
program in the east coast that
started of training for women
in nontraditional work lot of
service and they were the first
line women that were on the law.
Up on the on the polls and we
also had the first women and
milk production and so I.
Admired the advances that CNM
have made in the since I moved
being forward thinking for as a
board giving the administration
all that they needed to have in
order to be able to respond to
ahead of the game and keep
training our workforce to be the
best workforce in the nation
thank you so much thank you
Julie.
got to stand up for my sister so
my sister graduated from TBI and
went on to be a culinary arts
instructor at the southwest
Indian polytechnic institute and
sugar that they used on the cake
said they were just gorgeous and
we as a family appreciate how
well she cooks she does it for
us a lot and then my best friend
Thank you gentlelady gentle
person from Bernalillo and
Sandoval Representative kits
thank you very much Mr speaker I
too would like to thank
Representative Matthews for
bringing this memorial forward
truly do serve the community I
rise to thank them as an
employer as my father was
approaching retirement age he
H. back at CNM that even when he
was dying ten days before he
died I we help support him so he
could put his grades into the
system and it was one of his
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady from Bernalillo
for this memorial I just want to
say when I was a counselor on
Trujillo who I have known for a
hundred years and just so proud
of you guys one of the things
that and I don't know if people
their apprenticeship training
they offer some of the police
training that is required to
become an officer and those are
very important purpose and they
college went to see NM and
eventually to the university one
as a nurse now and the other a
study to crimen criminology and
appreciate thank you so much
thank you ladies.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
McKinsey Cibola support us and
Thank you Mr speaker you know
thanks for bringing this
memorial up I just want to see
you know I attended TBI in the
it's advanced and it taught me a
good tree and it keeps on doing
the trees for new people coming
delicious treat that I haven't
tried yet but I understand it's
delicious I'm getting thumbs up
for Representative and in our
new.
Are there any other
announcements before we go to
third reading.
this Friday and so I have
details for everybody so get
your calendars out on as of
Friday from six thirty to eleven
used to be tribe's coffee house
if you've lived here long enough
it's been a lot of things but it
now it's just beautiful wine bar
it's at one thirty nine west San
Francisco street every member
Senate one of the best DJs of
all time so DJ flow Feder will
be spending I hope that he is
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
thank you for all the hard work
that thing together.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
twenty five yes I am Mr speaker
can you get to that point that
the record reflect that election
to serve replacing Alves house
bill two forty as amended on
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
food grows we're in a secular
flows so this license plate will
help us thank you does par
Sanchez and ship supporters to
show the their pride in their
from Santa Fe Santa Fe
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker this
ability yield Mister speaker I
yield Mister speaker gentle lady
is the funding recurring is
purchased sadly we can have to
license plates but every time it
is purchased the money goes into
the fund Anteil an Intel it
son's as if we're not setting
license plate been designed Mr
speaker gentle lady has not yet
been designed.
Mr speaker gentle lady
You probably where my feelings
about license plates the
standardization about how we're
gonna do this so it's not this
constant drip of license plates
so I I would love.
and whether or not is actually
and make an impact but we still
do it too much thank you Mr
speaker there's further debate
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Thank you this is the most doing
from thousands
you know dealing thank you for
bringing this legislation
gentleman from the house was not
an institution by itself.
In fact is the most because of
the the ESSEC was one of the
bill institutions of the
speaker of the Spanish land
grant system
in the Spanish language and
settlements for trifold one is
the most because it was the
second system
was was there a religious
component the church itself the
construction is the most because
of the war a so those are the
three pillars the tensions in
fact this amount speaker before
the the the families settling
families basically lived in
tents.
and
in the first.
finalizing that so that then
they could by taking elements of
the land when itself which was a
great in
monumental feat of our early
In the span of settlers and that
was the creation of the US again
more a.
Speaker of where.
So what they did is they build
the second on one watershed
crossed over the center of the
peace the mountains and then
construction today yeah and it's
it's mesmerizing as the most
popular because it took a lot of
manpower and it took a lot of
response centers in terms of
their dedication and commitment
to the creation of the SEC
institution in a traditional
land based expanded communities
so thank you some of the speaker
thank you generally from those
for bringing this initiative
Mr Chairman leather gentlelady
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentleman from the.
Speaker gentle lady.
demand for the license plate in
order medically goes away.
Mr speaker and gentleman it does
but I hope there is and I know
that you'll be buying license
plates every year for you and
your friends.
the general.
Thank you Mr William Winfield.
Mr speaker I'm very happy to
yield to the gentleman who is
also a co sponsor thank you Mr
speaker No lady I think this is
sponsor on this bill Mr speaker
and young lady has thank you for
getting as a co sponsor thank
you for your.
There's a gentleman from Cibola
McKinley resentment gone.
No no submitted this story
before my first job the first
job that I ever had were they
gave me the money for to win
sudden came up one would need to
out there by the did to and all
of us would get together every
one of us was given the that it
does anybody know what is that
well today when I was in junior
high and in grade school I got a
whole dollars but the best thing
about it was I got lunch and
Is awesome.
And all the food water you could
drink soda.
Mr speaker once I got the high
school low budget more radical
we can do that so they learn
that would and took a basket I'd
like drugs and went to the prom
Senator think about that Mr
speaker and gentleman and I have
want to let the gentleman know
that there now is paying twenty
dollars an hour so you can come
to thousand that are a lot of
money Mr speaker I do I move
that house bill two forty as
amended do now pass final
two forty as amended has duly
passed this house conditionally
from Bernalillo Representative
Garrett ready on item number
subject to debate amendment or
substitution digitally to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker of the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirteen is public
this mechanism to our tools for
advancing much needed
infrastructure in our state this
bill only pertains to
transportation and broadband
projects this bill passed the
it will facilitate our work in
developing broadband in
particular we have worked with
members of the house Judiciary
Committee and the New Mexico
impair Bond agreements we've
spelled out governance for the
members of the board for not
public employees all meetings
are open and subject to the open
meetings act and there's the
witness was Marquita Russel from
the NMFA and with that I would
like to yield to my co sponsor
Representative Patty Lundstrom
the lady from McKinley thank you
members
I've been personally working on
this of an initiative for over
twelve thirteen years and very
happy to see that there's a
another Representative just as
economic development tool cement
because of the tremendous amount
of New money that's coming into
the state for infrastructure
sitting there waiting to be
constructed I would imagine that
after this next year will have
close to eight thousand projects
to P. three is is what is inside
of the contract in terms of cost
benefit return on investment and
most importantly health benefits
speaker I want to deal to my
expansiveness this will be the
final Sanchez sharing
Representative Catherine brown
deleted Committee Representative
Brown thank you Mr speaker and
bill forward Mr speaker gentle
lady and members public private
partnerships are found all over
the United States and they have
proved to be very successful and
Denver International Airport was
to done through a P. three and
there are a great many success
stories as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady this is
great many projects that we
currently do need and broadband
is indeed one of those I believe
Mr speaker that in my district
some little towns will be
benefited by having this option
focus focuses of of this
legislation so Mister speaker
gentle lady I I do hope for a
good outcome today I think this
will be of great benefit to New
some of the some of the families
McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady does that only to
deal Mr speaker yes I yield to
the kind gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady to
gentlemen the procurement code.
It's taken away at the point
where the agreement is signed
into law however there's a board
I understand there's a there's a
threshold for the agreements is
that right that above ten
million there's an approval
process but below ten million
which is still quite a bit of
correct Mr jelly can you
describe the process for
selecting a private partner so
for example if a municipality
one of the project done what is
within the authority.
Excuse me Mr speaker
Representative within the board.
in the there's a publication
process there are few steps
involved but it's not a
competitive bid kind of process
Mr speaker Mr Representative the
competitive process would be
determined by the board.
appreciate I have another
suggestion now here on the floor
in the form of the house floor
amendment one which has been
passed out I believe and
the two to five numbers two two
five four nine seven point two
and I believe that's been passed
out gentleman yes.
made campaign contributions but
contributions to the elected
officials of the public partner
whether it's a county or a
municipality what what have you
P. three agreement.
Gillette is a friendly
amendment.
Mr speaker yes the three of us
yield.
This is the utility a of at the
one question that I I did have
we're talking about local
government elected officials
If the agreement was being
approved by an elected state
official.
And that state official had
received the king campaign
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Mr chair and and Representative
this is a very wise way to make
sure we don't have money
influence unnecessarily and
amendment is an objection to
adopting there is a bit on the
amendment delayed from earlier
percent of but thank you Mr
speaker would the general lady
Of I'm not sure if this goes to
the amendment or to the original
rule I'm just wondering about
home rule cities and how they're
affected changes would go over
on the bill.
Mr speaker and Mr speaker gentle
lady and sponsors of the bill
thank you for accepting this as
friendly I do think the this is
The gentle lady from.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
participate in this public
private partnership as I
understand it there's only two
business entities there will be
eligible in this legislation one
For example of how.
In my work with respect to
transportation.
Yes Mr.
roads it could be any such
things.
And I would like to do for to my
co sponsor of Representative
example Mr speaker gentleman is
a the NSF as an example as a
class three real road they have
transportation planning process
it's a five year planning
process which means you don't
see construction monies for at
least five years after it is
our transportation planning
process because of the way the
federal funds are are allocated
so wouldn't it be great if I
private partners such as BNSF
then be partnered with the
public money once it becomes
available so when you think
about it it's all transportation
desperately needed and BNSF had
no way to put money into the
system because we don't have
authorization under a public
private partnership.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct what it is it's about
moving on initiatives it's
moving projects is getting them
with the hold up with all the
projects now that we have in our
capital outlay list would it be
great if we had some P. three
authorization where we can start
moving those transportation
projects.
support of these projects would
be collateralized and the
revenue stream that would be
appropriately dedicated to
return those phones.
through the same kind of process
that projects above ten million
dollars would the bonds would be
used and sold accordingly the
three P. three participation
and if it's the New Mexico
finance authority they're going
to be setting up rules and how
those bonds would actually be
any other bonding prop program.
Speaker gentle lady those bonds
would be retired for with
private sector and the public
sector that would help with the
bond retirement.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you to the for the answers
lady from Santa Fe thank you Mr
speaker I want to thank all the
sponsors on this for all their
work I know they've been doing
this for years and it's been
wonderful to see the development
I apologize I had to step out
for a moment but I was curious
do it faster he did it I pre I
understand and then do you feel
that it keeps the intent
the intent that you always had
in place yes Mr speaker and
Representative McQueen added
some parts about responsibility
of board members to be under the
government conduct act
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady in and again I I one
thing I want to I believe this
would assist with I believe this
is with the gentle lady from
McKinley was referring to but
when you are applying for
federal grants they ask you how
be hundreds of thousands of
dollars and probably get some of
it from you know capital outlay
or other places do you see this
as a way of assisting and ask
also getting the federal grants
as well yes Mr speaker and
to that thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady there is a
debate the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker and I will
will yield to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo thank you
so I am in my mind trying to
understand this for
where you know we use the
bonding process and the process
went through either of the
would those type of projects or
does this apply to home rule
cities Mr speaker gentle lady
this is not apply to home rule
state okay and gentle lady and
Mr speaker
if one of those projects is an
Bernalillo do they have to go
okay thank you Mr speaker
appreciate that.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and one's
a different those Representative
thank you Mr speaker with the
eyes stand in strong support of
this bill I was first introduced
to the concept of public private
partnerships while I served as
director of the foundation and
in the foundation or of this
down to the local level so the
land foundation was involved in
a twenty million dollar fund
including with the is
Smithsonian institute and local
and about five hundred teachers
so it was monumental it it's a
practice commonly used in the
foundation world I think all of
the sponsors for their work on
Thank you Mr speaker is jealousy
of yes Mr speaker I yield to the
kind gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr gentlelady I do
public funds are commingled with
private funds
several of us have served on
MFA.
in this room and Mister Baker
comparison because there's a lot
of requests and there and
there's a loan program but Mr
speaker and gently the concept
is the same how do we multiply.
buddy who's been involved with
MFA.
Sees that every year were able
to get more housing for low
income families across the state
whether it's
know this will be of a bit of a
and evolution as this goes
forward but what what I've seen
of the number of years that I've
served with MFA is the
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
this MFA has like a a scoring.
paradigm they have a the
there's a higher they move up on
the list
is there some sort of mechanism
or would that be handled through
rulemaking the speaker and
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I would say I would suggest
looking at what they've done
over MFA kind of have a a a
legislators sit on that
oversight board
is there is a mechanism to not
just take the scoring in place
throughout the state obviously
it can't necessarily be equal
there some needs in some areas
more than others but it will be
that there be some sort of
fairly as possible Mr speaker
and representative I for see
that.
Thank you Mr speaker and and and
gentle lady I would just
Once again look at the the
layer and Jaga this was
something that she brought year
after year and Mister Baker and
and and gentle lady I do
remember I used to sit next to
forced the vote on the floor and
defended it like a champion so
Yes briefly would like to to
speaker and kind gentleman I
feel as presents with us and
he's definitely working with
Representative Lundstrom.
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady just of it
just a couple questions
I really do believe in and that
what's going on and I really
want to thank the gentleman from
something's gonna come down the
road Mr speaker Mr speaker kind
lady there's money in the budget
I have spoken with the chair of
the house Appropriations.
and just also just some other
issues raised by GSD and just
the mechanism for resolution for
public private disputes is that
something is going to be worked
appreciate that thank you for
the time and I do support this
bill thank you for bringing
four.
The gentle lady to close Mr
speaker I now move a do pass for
What is a close member of sixty
seven in the affirmative zero in
the negative house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirteen as amended has
duly passed this house.
for placing House health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
three as amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentlelady
to explain the bill thank you Mr
need to manage their diabetes to
keep them alive and keep them
healthy so just a few numbers
approximately two hundred
three percent have it but don't
know it five hundred eighty
seven thousand people are pre
diabetic so the total of those
it's forty eight point four
this bill Mr speaker and body is
to.
Well we would love to reduce the
the incidents but we have to
take care of the people who have
it and that's what this bill
attempts to do.
The lady
you just said this I think but I
wanted to clarify there are no
Of diabetes is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman that is
correct we are this is step one
if this goes through I will be
hundred fifty thousand dollars
that is correct Mr speaker
gentleman yes.
the underlying cause and and and
quite frankly if we don't
address the issue it's only
gonna get worse and
Medicaid there so it's an issue
but Mr speaker gentle lady I
appreciated thank you there's a
gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
new grandfather thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady I see that
if there is a.
There's going to be an eighteen
percent interest rate applied to
the amount that was.
Due and owing to the consumer I
Senator Ortiz right it's it's a
right because somebody are you
know.
Intentionally thumb their nose
you pick the eighteen percent Mr
speaker and gentleman I have a
Piece of paper from the office
of superintendent of insurance
to unplayed fund paid claims
after required proof of loss has
been furnished so it's one and a
half.
Percent per month but that's
And I'm looking at the
amendments and contacts on page
seven.
That's a.
That's a.
Penalty provision usually if
refuse to pay then it jumps up
to the penalty rate of interest
being usually eighteen percent
and other statutes that I'm
familiar with and I was just
surprised to see that it's
annually and let's stop and
think about the insured if they
don't pay their bills on time we
have to pay a if if we don't pay
I don't know if there is any
more but the eighteen percent
generally are statutes as a
penalty right and I just was
interested why we selected that
things and then it's that kind
of willful.
In your face type stuff the
jumps the interest rate to
eighteen percent but this is
just my curiosity more than
There's a debate gentleman from
Cibola McKinley Representative
Alcon.
Thank you.
Your with the gentle lady from
the.
going to take a lot of.
President
of the.
What I would just wanted to a
And I know my have my part by
the hotel room read out of
insulin so I brought my bottle
The members of the house okay
but I did want to drive home to
get it thank.
It would be a lot cheaper for me
insulin I get money from from VA
so everything just comes in a
box delivered to the it's
awesome.
Well.
That was three hundred and forty
eight dollars.
Three hundred forty eight
dollars and that's just as two
week supply of insulin.
just a two week supply I'd never
paid for before the hearing to
you I'm going to do everything I
can not to pay for it again but
the it was a lesson well learned
so just keep that in mind the
members of this body thank you
for bringing this bill forward
Mr speaker I yield thank you
I'd like to say that I'm a
testament to this bill which is
why I helped co sign it
as Representative Alcon stated
control your diabetes I'm a type
two diabetic.
And it's been a real struggle
both.
Physically and emotionally to
deal with that because you
glucose monitor you have to have
all called swabs you have to
have the insulin and you have to
make sure.
That when you're taking a long
term.
high in your lows are too low
the cost for me.
Has been.
Huge and I shared in committee
thanks to friends like.
talking used needles Mr chairman
Mr.
I'm talking packages of needles
okay
if they had been to it Rudy
actually subsidize my medical
needs to their support systems
because going to the to order
them online or going to a
right thing and I really ask all
of you if you've never had a
parent to a sister a brother a
child who hasn't had diabetes
you're lucky if you have you
you eight we still kind of not.
I'm not aware of the the amount
of physical pain as well as the
emotional pain that they go
through but when you have to do
it yourself it's a whole other
that a lot of people think thank
you Mr chairman Mr speaker
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Catherine zeta
support of our lives to
representative Armstrong.
I just wanted to to ask.
insurance companies to pay for
this or included in their
insurance coverage.
gentle lady it's already in law
that they should cover it but
what we've seen happen is that
it's not available for it takes
Mr speaker gentle lady I I have
period in order to get her
supplies she spent four hundred
and four hundred ninety two
minutes on the phone in four
months in order to get the
Miss Mister speaker gentle lady
it's insurance I'm and and in a
certain way availability of the
product with the companies that
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady I think that this is
shedding light on a larger issue
Mr speaker kind lady on on
availability first of all of the
think that this is a an issue of
mandating insurance I am so for
helping people that need the
drugs and the and the
medications that they need.
speaker kind lady of inflation.
And so I think everyone in this
body can feel that the effects
of inflation and so I just of
But we have to be alert Mr
speaker and kind lady of what
the cost is going to be because
Mr speaker kindly I have to
remind the body that nothing is
from Bernalillo yield Mister
speaker I yield to the lady in
blue thank you very much so
I'm not able to get it insulin
some off label uses of it but I
I'm not a pharmacist and I don't
know for sure thank you very
much Mr speaker gentle person hi
I just want to say thank you for
is unable to and I'm here so I'm
unable to test her blood and
she's too shaky to test her
blood but they would not give
answer for no one except
herself.
So I very much thank you Mr
speaker gentle person from
Bernalillo that you know would
be we need to be able to
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
three as amended do now pass on
final passage of house health
and Human Services Committee
The blue zone closed one of six
I informative one in the native
house health and Human Services
Committee substitute for Senate
bill I'm sorry for house bill
point that the record reflect
that all action is there for
placing House with three sixty
three as amended of final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
and let me explain a little bit
about the cost of the cost
sharing in words gonna go the
first twelve dollars would be
for the issuance in the making
of the plate Mr speaker the
remaining portion the initial
department for forest fire
prevention and within our state
that's a big deal and and it's
been shown to be a big deal
after twenty twenty seven on
stop issuing this plate the
smoke about license plate
smoker has a rich history and
and in our state my grandmother
learned about Smokey bear last
year and she absolutely loves
I'd like to turn it over to one
of co sponsors for this in winds
to to talk about some of the
rich unique history about this
so gentlelady from tells Julie
Smokey bear license plate would
also Mr speaker in it.
With all due respect
Yes pueblo is
in the US that's really
important and house pueblo
firefighters were part of the
team that found Smokey bear
support my my Pueblo in my
community thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
Mr speaker Mr speaker I'd like
Yes Sir.
Thank you gentleman from San
Juan so this license plate means
a little bit more to me than it
and he was later very there in
capitation.
And one thing that was really
special Mr speaker that a lot of
people might not know is.
means a whole lot to me
for that reason that historical
reasons also hi I was fortunate
enough to get to work with the
is one of the best hot shot
crews that that there is and
Mister speaker.
able to do prescribed fires and
also Mr speaker I would like to
be the first one for my neighbor
here in Santa Fe County I would
support for the license plate
thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker I now stand
for questions to see a little
bit digit just kidding.
Mr speaker gentleman it's just
deja vu all over again as a.
I'm sorry Mr speaker I did hear
that these other all over again
Veterans Committee in Santa Fe
it was the the founding
of the the the the patriarch of
that family that treated Smokey
This is the kind of like
absolutely you know I understand
why you're doing this you know
and for me it's never been about
what we're putting on a license
the gentleman from Lincoln I'll
have you know I have a
Roadrunner on my license plate
and the Roadrunner is the state
bird which is again something we
should be supporting thank you
Mr speaker for the gentleman
from San Juan yield.
Mr speaker I will.
Mr speaker.
Registry of the kapten mounts
speaker gentleman agree to
mystery that's up there it
wouldn't surprise me in the
least if every citizen the
captain did not go ahead and get
a Smokey bear license plate the
how do you feel about that Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Speaker kind lady
I'll take it either way.
disregard for the state of New
Mexico in setting fires and burn
and are forced down and killing
cattle and everything else and
again Smokey bear license plate
thank you very much there's
Beijing lady from Bernalillo in
Torrance Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker.
you for bring this for my site I
know everybody's Akon of the
license plate but this one is so
iconic of only you can prevent
forest fires.
Not just in New Mexico but
nationally as well so I really
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman yield the speaker
I will.
Distinguished gentleman can you
thank you so much for that and
you know I I to like
Representative McQueen
I love a Secchi is yes do I love
the test Pueblo test everything
everybody brings up about
license plates I laugh you know
I love all these things I vote
for most of them but I don't
are really if they're going down
the highway and you know
everybody's going sixty miles an
hour so.
I love the concept I love the
think we need more than a
hundred license plates thank you
Mr speaker.
Debate the gentleman from San
Juan to close.
We are on final passage of house
bill three sixty three as
amended the vote is now open.
bill congratulations.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe are you
ready on item number.
Yes Mr speaker is getting to
that point that the record
reflect that election server
placing House Bill of seventy
have crime reduction grants
around the state with that Mr
speaker I stand for questions
debate the gentle lady to close.
seventy five as amended the vote
is now open.
The votes about to close.
Representative closed with a
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports to no objection it is so
ordered.
We.
Thank you Mr speaker your labor
veterans and military affairs
committee to is been referred
house bill three forty four has
chair speaker move to approve
the minutes for the did you
report.
The report.
I'm sorry.
As opposed may yes I would
Committee productive.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to miss been referred house bill
three forty five has had it
under consideration point I was
recommendation that it do not
the Oakland chair this the
report reduction in unfavorable
committee report on house with
three forty five but a favorable
committee report on house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for House
with three forty five all those
is an effort house bill four
zero two has had it under
consideration report some of the
commission added to pass an
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
those who paid receipt of of a
state line.
As opposed made the as we
reported up to.
Mr speaker a little better in
the military affairs committee
us so they'll come chair
to the of the report that option
welfare will be reporting house
before twenty four of those in
referred house bill four twenty
seven has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation to to pass as
amended in answer for the
Judiciary Committee respect
in favor signify by saying aye.
Posibles maybe yes convert
opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans
submitted a list going chair.
Without the need for.
We're gonna drive a favorable
and natural resources committee
to is been referred Senate bill
seventy seven as amended has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation of do
pass as amended finance referred
to the consumer public affairs
Those may be as seven point four
opted for.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee team has been referred
house bill one fifty eight has
Committee respectfully submitted
Dayan Hochman Vigil chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
one fifty eight of those in
favor servicing I.
As opposed to a test of a
committee report up to Mr
speaker transportation public
works capital improvements
committee team has been referred
house bill four thirty has had
We are on adoption of a report
without a recommendation on
house bill four thirty of those
in favor say about the same
time.
respectfully submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair.
The production run adoption of a
federal committee report on
house joint memorial I all those
Mr speaker we go to that order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered.
consumer and public affairs
committee will meet at one
thirty four done in time if not.
Just show up.
In rural.
Alcon yes it has the provisions
of military affairs committee
with me today at one third the.
The.
In rural.
A new nose was doing from the
unit at famous figures room
three oh seven house
appropriations and finance
committee one thirty thank you
Mr speaker signaled Gen till.
order business introduction of
legislation seeing no objection
it is so ordered click to read
House memorial seventy nine
introduced by Representative
seventy nine.
is so ordered members we will
take a break for lunch and
afternoon committees will
reconvene back here hi this
evening for some third reading
twenty eight and he has
requested that we drop the HFC
referral I have conferred with
Any other announcements.
The lady from Bernalillo.
If you offer a great morning
congratulations on those amazing
legislative bills.
We'll see you a little later
