Do we want to call our
Representative Ortez again.
Representative Ortez.
Hi I'm here I'm sorry I couldn't
hear it.
Okay I believe we have a quorum
and we have the.
Representative Gaydos.
Madam chair I'll be presenting
that but could you promote
secretary Groginsky.
She is my experts.
Okay good morning secretary I
see her.
And then we also need to
transfer and Jason Weaks okay so
okay so let's go ahead and begin
Senate bill thirty eight as
amended.
Yep madam chair members the
committee hopefully secretary
again she is on to come to
quickly turn it over to her
there's no sense in describing
it now having heard described
again.
Secretary there I am thank you
madam chair Representative Eli
thank you for sponsoring the
Senate bill thirty eight I want
to share the committee that this
bill ensures that the new
department the early childhood
education and care department
has the following clear it's
already to conduct the
departments essential functions
and responsibilities as mandated
by both state and federal law at
and and helps us with all the
enabling statute that created
part in in two thousand nineteen
into the single cabinet level
department it has five key
provisions are one it doesn't
change anything it just
transit insurance authority is
transferred for background check
authority that explicitly
transfers that authority to
ECECD from that as children
youth and families department
which previously conducted the
childcare a criminal history
background checks and so this
authority is critical for us to
remain in compliance with the
terms of our federal child care
development block grant and
helps us interface directly with
the FBI and other law
enforcement agencies we did work
closely with the department of
public safety and particularly
Regina Ciccone and others I'm on
this part of the drafting and so
it's but we bill it's very
strong and it just again
transfer that authority to us
childcare licensing authority at
remove CYFD as the jurisdiction
having the agency having
jurisdiction over child care
what's that out into ECECD fully
and formally establishing us as
the department with that
authority it also makes that
early childhood education and
care department a voting member
of the behavioral health
collaborative and of the New
Mexico developmental
disabilities council and finally
it transfers the duty of the
department.
Can be in the family infant
toddler inter agency
coordinating council from the
department of health to the
early childhood education and
care department when we transfer
the programs and the staff and
the services that all happened
in two thousand twelve I'm.
Twenty twenty and but that the
federally mandated interagency
coordinating council but we made
a deal H. under their statute so
that's what we quality ECECD
authorization bill and I do have
some individuals like they can
speak or I can stand for
questions whatever the
preference chair.
I'm and madam chair members the
committee I think at this point
in Legislature once will stand
for questions.
Thank you.
Representative Eli
We will we will not get a call
this morning
however well.
Go ahead and go to the public
and here are some of supporting
comments and for the posting
comments if any and then we will
go to committee so let's go back
here at supporting comments from
the.
Community.
The staff help to announce who
is online to speak thank you.
Please wait you are now unmuted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I am Owsley McQuay
executive director of New Mexico
developmental disabilities
council DDC stands strong
support of Senate bill thirty
eight ECECD's programs
supporting children and families
were previously houses CYFD DO
H. and PED will have a voting
members on the council to ensure
coordination and collaboration
between programs affecting the
constituents except secretary
Groginsky in her leadership in
crucial partners of the
council's part particularly in
our special education
transformation work it is
critical that ECECD become a
voting member of the council so
that the voices of young
children families and programs
that support and have a seat at
the table thank you madam chair
members of the committee for the
opportunity to support this
important legislation.
Barbara B. hill you are now and
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Barbara Vigil I'm cabinet
secretary of children youth and
families department I stand in
strong support of ECECD and this
particular bell SB thirty eight
ECECD has is our newly created
agency with the obligation to
support early childhood
education and care along with
its sister agencies CYFD and
department of HSD and apartment
health and so we stand together
to support the work of ECECD
this particular belt which
clarified some of the
obligations and
responsibilities of the agency
and look forward to a continued
collaboration with ECECD and
serving our children and
families of New Mexico thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is
Bryce didn't during the CEO the
behavioral health collaborative.
Here today to stand in support
of this piece of legislation and
the unified operation of the
early childhood education and
care department
as the CEO of the collaborative
I also stand here on behalf of
cabinet secretaries that could
not be here today to express
their support for this effort.
You so much for your time.
Amanda.
Yes.
I'm here now and you.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee I am little brown and
early intervention provider for
individuals with disabilities
Education I do a part C.
services and the provider
Representative and co chair of
the executive committee for the
inter agency coordinating
council we stand in support of
Senate bill thirty eight I'm
here today to talk about and
share information about the ICC
and the Sanchez is significant
roles it plays within our state
family infant toddler program
and early childhood education
and care department the
government the governor must
designate a lead agency and in
New Mexico it is the ECECD.
To receive the federal grant and
to appoint an interagency
coordinating council which
includes young children and
parents have which includes
parents and young children with
delays and disabilities I see
see plays a very important roles
in the someone with ECECD thank
you for your time today.
Thank you I see my list now do
we have any comments in
opposition.
I don't see anybody on the board
at we will now go to the
committee committee members I
see representative Nibert.
Actually Representative remote
this.
But.
Okay Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair is part
of.
I'm sorry I'm not real familiar
with this department so I'm
it S. W. elementary questions
but
madam chair and
expert we we work over in page
and I were talking about the
criminal investigation you know
the background check where are
we complied with the federal
regulation or or some other
regulation I do understand the
why we need of the background
checks it's not a question such
as that is I was wondering if
there's a regulation we've got
to comply with.
Madam chair representative right
thank you for that question yes
there is in the reauthorization
of the child care development
block grant the two thousand
fourteen at the Congress
explicitly stated that what
relief agency for child care and
every state needs to do in terms
of criminal background check so
this is partly implants with but
that law.
Madam chair and
MICEX for.
What are the disqualifier so
what are we looking at it as
disqualifier state of you
of do you have a list that
either comes from of that sort
do you think about what is that.
Madam chair representative Mr at
Representative right at there is
a disqualifying we'd obligating
of rules and regulations based
on that statute about the
federal and our state our state
statute that disqualify somebody
from working with young children
working with children in
childcare.
Okay.
Madam chair and representative I
I mean it for the disk
qualifiers are the
For the of New paraded in the
federal regulations for is that
our
Or is our regulations that
details of my didn't quite
understand.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
and I'm I don't know if our
general counsel Kate Gerard is
on but she's unable to be
promoted to panelists but them
that the federal government does
leave it up to states to
determine kind of what that
disqualifying factors are and so
we do we have that flexibility
as state but they do tell you
what has to I'm what what you
have to do in terms of
determining whether somebody's
that.
The background check all the
different background checks you
have to do but states do have
some flexibility in those areas.
Termination.
You madam chair and
representative of this currency
are we looking at
Crimes of theft or we looking
more just that
are you know are crimes of
violence or.
Mistreatment of children.
As.
Yes yes madam chair
Representative right by the
latter we're we're not trying to
disqualify people who had any
type of criminal background but
more that would be potentially a
danger to children or risk.
Madam chair this currency one
thing that came up in a
discussion on another bill.
While we look at the criminal
background
check.
Those are persons that actually
were ever charged now they may
not have ever been convicted it
would show in the background if
they were convicted.
However there are
cases that are prepared by the
law enforcement agency for the
to the district attorney's
office and for whatever reason
they're not prosecuted and a lot
of times what we find is the
victim and I'm sorry I'm retired
police officer but a lot of
times what will happen in these
are crimes against a person is
the victim fights that they are
don't wish to cooperate any
longer yeah are your background
checks going to go to the
agencies that where these people
live to see if they ever have
something or you strictly go to
look at the NCIC background
check.
this madam chair Representative
Rehm thank you for the good
questions the federal law
requires us to look and I'm the
full FBI checked on the
fingerprinting and also the
national sex registry and the
child abuse registry and in
state person has lived in the
last five years.
So I lived outside of the state
that's that's the federal we can
obviously go further if we want
but that's the minimum on that
we will we have to do as a state
M. and then the other thing I
just want to point out is that
in our regulations and our
statutes.
Person can always appeal a
decision made by the lead agency
so they have acted
administrative the process and
they can come and find other
evidence or the documentation
and so we always hear appeals it
up somebody disagrees with the
decision of the HSD made about
their suitability.
Madam chair in Mr chair and see
I I really would encourage you
with further than five years but
you know I understand that's the
federal regulations anyway Madam
chair in this current speed was
to page sixteen Y. fourteen and
I see you're gonna have it
twenty six member board.
And yeah.
Well.
You know what I mean you want to
get lot of involved but I
understand that why that just
you too many person health
center room I think you're gonna
have trouble I just.
I I'm not sure why you chose
that very.
Madam chair representative right
that is the developmental
disability at this is I see see
us as the developmental
disabilities council
will become a voting member
absolutely will add to that.
Voices.
In.
Madam chair in this current
state the early education and
care department.
Is this new or is this unders
somewhere now.
Madam chair representative Rehm
we were created in the two
thousand nineteen legislature
and we officially started July
one of twenty twenty.
I'm what programs together from
the public education department
seventeen families department
and department of.
Madam chair and miscreants you
we're.
Are you are the are they tied
together with our early
childhood education or the
separate.
Madam chair representative
review the department oversees
and monitors pre K. in both the
schoolbased and the community
based settings and also home
visiting.
Childcare and early
intervention.
Madam chair miscreants you one
of the things that
But it's been several years ago
and this actually is up in the
K. twelve the you know great one
to six but
What are you we got into the
budget was that we would have
the our social worker working at
a at a failing school and then
you know that social worker
would work like from noon to
eight o'clock to go ahead and
communicate with the teachers
after class to find out if.
Johnny or Suzie was having
trouble in class and then the
scene would then contact the
parents and try to find out if
they needed resources or
anything like that are you gonna
be able or do you foresee that
you would do that on the early
childhood either care or
education.
Madam chair of Representative
Rehm excellent question and yes
actually in this year's budget
legislature has approved for the
truck early childhood Trust Fund
a million dollars to help us
build out our in the early
childhood mental health
consultation workforce which
would be individuals like you're
describing that are available to
help at teachers to help parents
to connect them with maybe more
intensive services but just also
make sure that that teacher and
educator has the support they
need to help fifteen sixteen
twenty children are there caring
for and educating everyday so we
are definitely looking at
building that workforce center
grateful to the legislature
their support.
Madam chair of this currency I
think that's an excellent idea
I'm glad that we're doing that
in our building early
that's were I think our real
successful and with that madam
chair that's all the questions I
have I believe Representative
Snyder needs to be on the list
also thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair if you'll bear with
me I just have a couple
questions if I may not be.
Exactly pertinent to the bill
but I think this is the first
opportunity we really at two
See the secretary and and maybe
learn a little bit more about
the of the the new department
so.
Madam chairman my question is.
Why understanding it's it's a
fairly new agency of our
government out I just like to
know obviously we're
transferring some some of.
Responsibilities over to them
I'd like to to just tell us how
well the new agency is working
to maybe give her a chance to
give us some idea as to whether
it Sir.
Meeting Representative
challenges that were before or
whether there's things that we
need to do as a legislature to
help assisted further other than
just transferred the things that
we see a house bill thirty eight
or Senate bill thirty eight.
Madam chair representative nine
point but we'll see in a
virtually and.
Thank you for that question I'm
you know it's been quite a
journey of starting the
department in the midst of a
pandemic and setting it up but I
have to say that the people of
New Mexico have been very
supportive I've been doing this
just this morning about three
hundred Mexicans from across the
state every other week we get on
that morning call and talk about
what the issues are what the
impact is we've been supporting
them all along the way with the
challenges they're facing with
COVID and having the quarantine
and isolate I would say that but
we're really fortunate in New
Mexico that we had this
department in the midst of a
pandemic because we were able to
act very quickly and resources
fully across childcare home
visiting early intervention
prepay and support families we
know we have a lot more to do to
really reach all the families
who need the services.
Latest before your finance plan
that was mandated in our
enabling statute hopefully we'll
have a hard copy of that letter
from a property that will give
you a sense of wonder what we've
been doing over the last year or
two and then we also released
our annual outcomes report that
was required again very wisely
by all of you we enabling
statute so I feel very good
about where we are we have kind
of a national model it does I
have to say no to people because
they want to see what is New
Mexico how are we making this
work and we have actually need
incredible progress in a very
short time in the middle of a
public health emergencies I look
forward to coming in with any
more with them and I would
report to you giving us feedback
the feedback on those two
documents are to see how we can
be more responsive to the
legislature.
Well I know of madam chair and
madam secretary we're we
appreciate you coming down the
are my community and and meeting
with customers I certainly hope
that our our vision in
establishing this department I
say our vision the state's
vision for establishing this
department are really truly
fulfills its mission of
attending to those needs of of
our children before they get to
school and and that we really
can do some things that economic
prepare those children.
For the educational process and
and have better outcomes the end
of the program for years and now
in school so I I certainly wish
you the best I certainly sports
groups Senate bill or and I
imagine this is just one of
several more steps that we'll
see a future so madam chair
that's all the questions I have
and I think the secretary for
being with us today and sharing
those thoughts with us thank.
Thank you Representative I don't
see any more comments from my
colleagues or virtual hands what
is the question.
I'll I'll I'll I'll move a do
pass of my own bill.
second thank you I have a two
passed by Representative Eli and
a second by Representative
Nibert.
To
to pass the bill please take
role.
Sh.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy goes.
Yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Ortez.
Representative green.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes yes.
Madam chair John.
Yes please.
Madam chair blue.
Yes zero No.
Okay thank you Representative
and secretary here have to pass
on your bill.
One chair members of the
committee.
Thank you and have a certain
rate Representative well.
Okay now we'll move on to S. J.
R. ten.
Representative Maestas are you
presenting this bill thank you
madam chair this is the Senate
joint resolution ten on behalf
of pro tem me start already
presenting it hopefully on the
house floor as well but this is
dealing with with the
Albuquerque downs in the state
fair as we all know the state
fair own the land the downslope
leases
and into a formal agreements
with the state of Mexico for
twenty five years the lease
started at the current lease was
in eighty seven was re re done
in two thousand twelve just
fantastic owners who have
enhanced the course racing
experience of the consumers and
added to the economy of
Albuquerque in a tremendous way
as you know the pandemic hit in
March of a.
You know twenty twenty and and
literally the dust was shut down
from one day to the next
The horse racing industry was
was shut down for over a year
the the the casino restaurant
grandstands was shut down so
this is up this is a fair way to
resolve all the issues
pertaining to that the ownership
of the Albuquerque downs has no
interest and and litigating any
of that stuff.
will pay up what we know will
pay the rent that's agreed upon
but but wishes to sign a new
twenty five yearly starting
starting now so the for that to
happen legislation needs to be
passed in the form of a joint
resolution so this is asking the
legislature to allow the upstate
New Mexico in the downs to enter
into a twenty five year lease
from now until.
Nineteen forty seven R. two
thousand forty seven rather
which will then resolve any and
all issues.
and allow them to advertise
their payments
You know because of the loss of
revenue the these past couple
years and with that I'll turn it
over to.
expert witness Mr Jason Weaks.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks on a
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque downs so I had to I
get kicked out of the room I was
inside to move really quickly
this is actually a a lease
extension
as Representative Maestas
explained as a result of the
shut down downs was our clothes
for about a year and then added
really significant has severely
limited operations for about
another six months and so during
that period
rent was either paid or not paid
or or paid only in part the
original contract had a force
majeure clause in it that
allowed for the least to be
extended.
Right of closure but it did not
speak specifically to lost
revenue so in what this what the
downstate as representative of
my Estes explained was are
negotiated with the with the the
state fair in the governor's
office to come to a
An agreement we're in the downs
lease would be extended by ten
years and
downs within agreed to pay the
unpaid rent the deferred grant
this is a situation that
happened across the country
during COVID where landlords
came to an agreement with
tenants to different and in came
to alternative agreements
because we're extending the rent
beyond that original twenty five
year period legislative approval
was needed and so that's why we
sit with you today thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
at for bringing this committee
together and and with that will
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative and
thank you Mr weeks I am looking
at that attendees list for
public comment.
I don't see any hands raised
for.
Public comment in support of the
bill.
And now I'm calling for comments
in opposition of the bill so now
I will go to committee members
Representative Nibert.
The.
Thank you madam chair I just
have a couple questions and
Madam chair representative these
probably are going to be for
directed to your expert but all
ask you.
My first question madam chair
representative is how many
millions of dollars as the owner
of Albuquerque downs put into
those facilities.
Over the past four five years.
Madam chair representative
Nibert approximately twenty two
million dollars since the
current lease was executed I
believe in two thousand twelve.
M. Madam chair representative
Mr wicks that to me is a pretty
substantial investments are.
Particularly
on we spoke lands that you don't
all.
And.
Most people probably would make
that big of a vestment for
twenty five year lease so my
second question is.
Why are we only asking for
twenty five year extension.
Madam chair representative
Nibert to many it is a good a
fair point a lot of investment
has been made in the property
yeah downs ownership and
management really wanted to.
To create a facility.
That that was going to offer a
good product right I mean that's
really what their whole
intention was from from the
point that they entered into the
two thousand eight and the two
thousand twelve eight until
present the reason we're only
asking for a ten year extension
and the reason that a ten year
extension was the it is because
that was basically what we felt
fair and at least to amortize
the rest of the relevant
payments.
you know it's a ten year
extension that really is
effectively nine years since we
lost a year of operations due to
comment and you know that the
best answer I can give you is
that's just the deal that was
negotiated between the
governor's office state fair and
and and downs ownership and you
know they felt like that was a
reasonable given the relevant
circumstances you know it does
is the downturn tend to probably
enter into another lease after
this one and that expires
potentially but you know we felt
that that ten year period really
did give us a good benefit for
the relevant bargain in terms of
the rest of the issues that
we're facing as a result of
COVID and lost revenue.
Mr our madam chair and and
Representative the
You know the fact that we're
we're dealing with an industry
that did have to shut down.
We'll go revenues for.
Well over I guess a year.
It seems to me that the proposal
that's before us is reasonable
and that's that three and a half
million dollars or so can be
captured over a longer period of
time and and that seems to be
are a reasonable request as well
I I would certified support bill
of and I would certainly
supported even after we're we're
the brighter are up because I
think people who are making
those types of investments and
property that's owned by the
state or state agency of.
Should be able to recoup their
investment over a reasonable
period of time most people
looking at real estate like that
generally have about a thirty
thirty to fifty year time frame
Mrs so basically twenty five so
it's probably are fairly
generous on the part of the
owner or the less the two of.
Just extended for that
additional ten years so I
supported
Madam chair and representative
thank you for answering my
questions and I do believe
Representative right has some
questions as well.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
Thank you Mr weeks so I have I
have some questions about it and
I want to start off with I'm
trying to remember the downs
when they built that they built
a brand new building thank.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
are you talking about the most
recent investments
that happened in two thousand
twelve or or the original.
lease because I can't really
speak to what happened.
More than about ten years ago.
Madam chair and representative
of them how long it's the the
downs this of
the downs that we're talking
about actually been in
operation.
Thank thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm the the
current ownership team.
You know and it's finance as a
legal entity signed a twenty
five year lease in nineteen
eighty seven and then was
granted a second twenty five
year lease and twenty twelve so
the but the current teams
private around about like I said
ten years or so and just in a
fantastic job this past decade
it enhancing the grandstands
the.
The you know that the the horse
barns that and of course the the
receiving.
Madam chair and and
Mr weeks
so let's look at the last two
years I went out there I visited
I can't remember when it was
you know is obviously after
eighty seven of but when they
put in the racinos one I
remember going out there I was
at the legislature and I was
impressed I mean it was a guided
building but I thought it was
brand new
and maybe it was.
But
You know I want to talk about
the you know the total
investment that the spam ads
over there and why it's so
important to go it thank state
of the the way so the other
twenty five years.
Representative representative
madam chair representative Rehm
I actually pulled up document
and I can give you the quick
history of recent investments if
you're if you're okay with that
so they did a.
grandstands first for for four
hundred and sixty two thousand
and twenty thirteen new casino
building which was about
fourteen point eight.
Million also in two thousand
thirteen.
They did signage for about three
hundred thousand dollars in
thirteen and sixteen they redid
the parking lot for roughly two
hundred.
In sixteen it'd racetrack
lighting which I think was about
one point one million grandstand
remodel again in sixteen which
is about four million and then
in two thousand seventeen they
did well it looks like probably
about I don't know I just a
couple with maybe a hundred
thousand dollars worth of stuff
and then grandstand awnings and
racetrack waiting I think in
nineteen for about one point two
million and that brings us
compared to twenty twenty we did
LED parking lights in the
parking lot
fifty thousand roughly in twenty
twenty and grandstand that swamp
cooler so I mean it it over that
course of basically twenty years
they've invested roughly million
just over a million dollars a
year to improve the facility.
It.
What madam chair and.
Mr weeks.
I think we need to shake the
owners have their you know he's
been a quite a good contributor
to us
yeah I and I echo the of remarks
of Representative Nibert that we
probably ought to be making a
little better deal but we are
The.
Madam chair and in this for
weeks how many months was he
closed due to the COVID.
Madam chair representative Rehm
the downs was closed for just
under twelve months and then we
had pretty limited operations
for about another six months but
completely closed down for just
under eleven the exact dates
were closed on March fifteenth
twenty twenty and reopen on
February twenty seventh twenty
twenty one.
And and just quickly the downs
also during that when they when
they started that the closure
process had about five hundred
employees
during racing season and then
they drop to about two fifty for
the rest of the year.
Madam chair.
Mr weeks are they back up to
full employment or.
What's what's happening there.
Durable we were at full capacity
R. sorry madam chair
representative ram I don't
believe the downs is back up to
full employment capacity but
we're getting there
I I think we're we're we're back
at you know obviously we had to
you know the general operations
that we're trending towards
normal in some of the summer
months but I do not believe we
have fully recovered in terms of
on the the pre COVID implement
levels are revenue levels.
Madam chair and
Mr weeks this investment money
ones in April it's subsidized by
the state or was this just
purely from his pocket.
Madam chair representative ream
I do not believe that any of the
twenty million dollars that I
would just over twenty million
dollars over the last twenty
years with subsidized anyway by
the state that was all private
investment
yeah I just got confirmation so
yeah it was all private
investors.
Yes.
Madam chair in Mr weeks are we
having a problem with persons
applying to be.
our work.
Are we.
Or you know what is the
employment problem or have a.
Madam chair representative rain
yes so we're about I just got
the exact number about seventy
five percent of pre COVID levels
and we're just having trouble
finding employees.
that's the that's the issue the
workforce just hasn't come back
not that the job positions are
open they just have not been
able to hire folks to come back
to those positions.
Madam chair is Representative
weakside I I mean it.
Mr reached yes I think it's
something that's unique
to the whole system of.
Madam chair and.
Representative I am Mr weeks are
we finding that the our customer
base is coming back or are they
having trouble with that.
I don't believe revenues have
returned to pre COVID levels I
mean I think slowly but surely
but I do not believe our
revenues to fully recovered at
the downs
but you know we're trending in
that direction and and you know
hope that this summer will be
back to normal entirely.
Madam chair representative
remote little off topic but to
take a look this summer in the
coming months and years to
enhance the horse racing in New
Mexico we have others you know
it's it's shrunk down to less
than five right states and may
shrink down to four five in the
next decade will be one of those
I that this marvelous support
but also we need to look at the
ability to you know what we're
we're stuck in the past in terms
of the inability to wager on
your phones you know off track
so to speak we're one of the one
of the only state that doesn't
have all run sports betting so
that's kind of topic madam chair
but those are the things we can
do to enhance this market and
and and really capitalize on on
our tourism in our cultural
aspects of New Mexico.
Chair representative.
I'm sorry what part madam chair
representative a ring just that
important point you know the
court of course racing is horse
racing in the core of the downs
is worse racing so you know
while we have every single
associated with the track that
court is is racing and so we
actually did run races while the
casino was shut down.
and then we re opened the the
casino no after we started doing
aeration but we did have races
well basically and we didn't
have the other that the the
other
property opened.
Madam chair and Mr weeks what is
the plan for this summer and and
then beyond for
getting more customers and you
know improvements or anything
like that.
Madam chair representative re I
think Representative my just to
sit on a couple of those points
you know I think some.
Changes need to be made.
in in terms of trying to
modernize how we do sports
betting in state in New Mexico I
mean obviously we're not taking
a specific position in this
hearing on how that should
happen I'm advocating for any
position but certainly
finalizing the product
continuing to you know upgrade
to downs I don't know if we have
a specific investment schedule
over the next couple years but
at the current management has as
shown and willingness and desire
to invest in the product so I
would assume that that that will
continue I think what we really
want to do is get back to
appropriations as normal for
here get that baseline
reestablished and then start and
evaluating what in a longer term
investment plan would be but I
do know that the current
management and ownership of the
downs is continue to be
committed that's why we're here
on that's why we're asking for
you know the legislature to
approve this lease extension.
Okay.
Share it you know this.
While it's not in my district
yet will we'll go out to the
state fair and
of you know well and then our
big gamblers but
When you look at the investment
that's been made out there I
want to highlight this because
what a what a great partnership
we have with the with the and I
just really think that the the
you know I I gotta Act of.
Representative night birds side
I think that this is a deal
that's heavily weighted more to
the side of the state the.
To the business that we need to
encourage you without that's all
my questions thank you madam
chair he.
Thank you Representative I don't
see any more of my colleagues
can many members are what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Madam chair all move but do pass
madam chair I'll second that.
I have a two passed by
Representative Nibert a second
by Representative Rehm is there
any opposition to this motion
for you pass.
You have a do pass on site
Senate joint resolution and.
Thank you madam chair members
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
We will go to Senate Bill.
One two three.
I don't.
Senator I got a message from
senator Munoz he is not able to
attend the meeting.
Madam chair of is Jason Weaks co
workers.
You can call him.
Thanks.
Supporters on the.
Please log back on madam chair
Jason Weaks a log back on and
for a nobody else wants to do
that I'm happy to present Senate
bill one twenty two years.
All righty thank you
Representative Nibert let's go
ahead and do that.
I'm sure you'll bring Jason
Weaks on us as of next for the
you should be logged impact on
here the mobile.
Amanda can you transportation
back onto our panelists yes.
You are okay thank you so much.
After this bill we will hear
Senate bill fourteen.
As amended and then we final
bill we're here for today will
be House Bill three nineteen.
Madam chair in the Mr weeks in
logging on.
Mr stammer and could also be
another one that could log on
and could be your expert.
Scott Scammon.
Has been promoted.
Okay I see Scott Scanlon.
I see Jason Weaks okay
representative Nibert thank you.
Are you know I need madam chair
I need to two experts to keep me
alive so this is Senate bill one
twenty three this bill is a bill
that comes before the our
legislature every.
A few years I think every five
years before stanchion of the
sunset provision for the racing
commission this particular
extension takes us
two July one of twenty twenty
eight.
You're either Mr Stam under
Mister weeks would like to
comment on Senate bill one
twenty three please do so.
Madam chair.
Yes good morning.
You madam chair and members of
the committee Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for someone
part racetrack and casino and
Representative Nibert nailed it
this is a symbol of re
authorization of the sunset of
the racing commission
I think that's I think that's
about it we need we need the
racing commission to have racing
in New Mexico so we richer
support thank you madam chair.
And madam chair members
communities we can have about
against racetrack and casino.
Echo what Mr Scanlon said
without the aeration Commission
first racing and that revenues
it generates for the state which
I don't know Mr scaling
improvement is about it's
roughly sixty million a year is
that about the number.
So that's a substantial portion
of revenue for the state that
doesn't even account for G. R.
T. revenue from other sales so
supported this measure as well.
Madam chair with that to my
experts will stand for
questions.
Thank you experts and
Representative night Burt
I see one hand
Ten deal with.
Or comments.
Go ahead and make your comment.
Introduce yourself.
The New Mexico racing
Commission.
Yes hi this is Sam right when
the term of the New Mexico
racing Commission good morning
madam chairwoman.
Good morning are you making a
comment in support of that bill
I'm.
Yes this.
The New Mexico racing Commission
we we were very much ask for the
support of this bill so the
grazing can go on it has a huge
economic impact of the state
racing commission's been really
in my time on the racing
commission I can tell you we're
really focused on the health of
the animals from the athletes
and.
The game and we really
appreciate everybody's support
I'm happy to answer any
questions from thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I don't see any more
hand raised virtual hands raised
and that can be with so
committee members.
Madam chair Mister ring as
Representative ring has a few
questions.
Madam chair and representative
probably the experts is one is
going to have to comment on this
why don't we only renewed for
five years I mean the the.
This is not an industry is going
away which should extend this
out.
Mr I'm sorry madam chair and
representative Reem that's a
good question it was brought up
in the other chamber and I think
both of the committees and maybe
even on the floor I'm not sure
but but it's a very good
question the sponsor of the bill
I think took it under advisement
thought about it and chose not
to
extend from I I think the
suggestion was either seven
years or ten years
he chose not to amend the bill
but I think your point is very
well taken.
madam chair and Mr scale and
why don't you kind of talk
behind the scenes and you know
if we need to do a four member
and I don't have a problem
extending that to ten years so
it we all know how much time
just.
Just a simple bill takes about
going through the legislature
and you know it it would also
help their business plans to you
know have it.
Down the road a little bit for
for them I I really think that
that would be a
A better all the way on both
sides to do that is is there
contra other contract
negotiations that are tied to
this that would prevent that
orders or anything like that.
Madam chair and representative I
don't believe so I think five
years is sort of a typical
sunset period for
A number of boards and
commissions and so I think we're
just slotted in in in the in the
normal schedule but I will as
soon as we get off well all the
contact the sponsor senator
Munoz and see if he's interested
in in doing something on the on
the house floor.
Thank you madam chair that's all
my questions.
Thank you Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much Representative
Nibert for taking over for the
sponsor I just wanted to reflect
that when bill Richardson was
governor he appointed my husband
to what the racing Commission
and.
Someone continents and what are
your qualifications and he said
well I know the front and from
back in our but actually it it
forces so anyone that but I have
a.
A photo in my office to see the
horses up there.
So I got that for his for my
husband when he was on the right
this.
Okay.
Happy to vote for this bill
thank you madam chair.
Thank you committee members.
Madam chair of the do pass.
A second.
Thank you I have a two passed
motion by Representative Rehm a
second by Representative guy
Ecosse.
Is there any opposition to this
two passed motion.
Then you have to pass on Senate
bill one two three.
Twenty three.
Thank you madam chair and and I
want to thank my expert
witnesses that both bore the
full weight of that the debate
thank you.
Thank you.
We we did our best.
Well we're getting started for
the next one I want to know I
listen to the whole presentation
on the early childhood belt and
I was coming up the elevator and
getting into my office just as
you were voting and I could not.
Find the way to get to my on
the.
So I was there I tried.
Thank you okay we are ready for
Senate bill fourteen as amended
I see Representative small
Representative small do you have
your expert witnesses or any.
Come out.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam chair I am to experts
today their agency Sandra Ely
from the New Mexico environment
department and Amy brown from
auto on state consultant.
Okay work at them and the few
minutes to promote them to
analysts Amanda.
And madam chair while we're
waiting I wanted to see if
representative Nibert it also
wants to put this bill on.
I would be I would be happy to
to roll it madam chair this
year.
Okay do we have our expert
witnesses.
I believe I see Amy and Sandra
Representative Brown.
Excellent thank you very much
madam chair
But so I'll briefly present and
then obviously go to any comment
from the experts Madam chair of
the Senate finance committee and
committee thank you for allowing
me to us to be here today the
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
fourteen.
Is really focused on reducing
the carbon intensity for our
transportation in New Mexico
while at the same time madam
chairman committee creating jobs
and bringing investment to New
Mexico based upon this lowering
of carbon intensity specifically
madam chair and committee the
legislation seeks to reduce at
least twenty percent carbon
intensity from transportation
fuels in New Mexico by twenty.
Thirty.
And then thirty percent of by
twenty forty madam chair and
committee
this is a a bill that uses these
market based mechanisms again to
encourage investment in
conservatively that investment
madam chair and committee is
expected to total four hundred
and seventy million dollars by
twenty thirty bringing sixteen
hundred permanent jobs in that
time frame twenty three hundred
construction jobs with the
reduction.
Around fifteen million metric
tons of CO two cumulative
between now and twenty thirty
chair and committee that's
important because as we've
talked about before and I think
as as a are all the committee
knows the transportation sector
is the second largest source of.
CO two emissions which of course
Dr climate change this is the
second largest source in New
Mexico madam chair committee
Senate bill fourteen faces this
challenge in knowledges the
dangers that New Mexico faces
but really empowers New Mexicans
in industries across New Mexico
to be part of the solution in
seeking to.
Reduce the carbon intensity.
helping support investment
bringing businesses in that want
to do that also creating a
system whereby for those who are
having trouble reaching the
twenty percent intensity
reduction by twenty thirty the
thirty percent intensity
reduction over twenty eighteen
levels by twenty forty to create
a system of carbon credits.
In this madam chair and
committee these credits will be
an important part of this and
those will also incentivize and
allow other parts of New Mexico
industry to participate to
support
To support the reduction in
carbon intensity in the
transportation sector and to
create jobs and bring investment
into New Mexico in doing so
I think that's where I would
start to wrap up madam chair and
committee as a specify a few
things and then go to miss Juli
and also miss brown for
additional comments to be very
clear Senate bill fourteen does
not apply to fuel retailers for
instance madam chair those are
like the gas stations this does
not apply to gas stations that
would apply to the state of
refinery madam chair and
committee as we look to really
make sure that these
This this effort incentivises
investment streams lines cost
reduces carbon intensity and
brings jobs to New Mexico we
also
Require which is really exciting
that utilities invest at least
fifty percent of the money that
they are in from the credits
those will be generated madam
chair and committee by
electrifying transportation in
the electricity used to power up
vehicles that they invest at
least fifty percent of the money
from these credits in
electrification of
transportation in rural
communities and also
disproportionately impacted
environmental justice
communities so we're sometimes
these are the communities that
bear the highest burden from
the pollution caused by by
transportation and we want to in
stead bring the benefits to
those communities madam chair I
would turn it over to Missy Lee
miss brown for additional
comments before we would stand
at your pleasure and look
forward to questions from the
committee thank you madam chair.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members it's a
pleasure to be here in front of
you today my name is Sandra Ely
and I'm the environmental
protection division director at
the New Mexico environment
department clean fuel standard
means diversifying the economy
creating more jobs and bringing
new and innovative businesses to
New Mexico but it also means a
giant leap forward in our
climate change strategy as a co
lead for the climate change task
force I know we must do more to
meet our greenhouse gas emission
reduction goals to achieve at
least forty five percent hello
two thousand five levels by
twenty thirty and while we are
making great strides in the oil
and gas industry to reduce their
upstream emissions and it made
significant impacts in the
electricity industry and
reducing their emissions we are
now tackling the number two
source greenhouse gas emissions
The New Mexico.
Transportation secretary this is
a decisive decade on Clemente
and we must invest in
transforming our transportation
sector to lower carbon fuels
electrification if we if we
don't do that we will not reach
our climate goals it is critical
that we enact this bill for our
client but also for the health
of New Mexicans this bill will
help offer protection for
vulnerable populations like
children and the elderly who
suffer from respiratory illness
or other susceptible.
are susceptible to air pollution
will also invite you benefit
environmental justice
communities as noted by
Representative small.
As the environmental protection
division director I'm aware of
the false choice that strong
environmental policies hurt
business SB fourteen counters
that argument because it will
reduce pollution and promote
economic growth in New Mexico
thank you madam chair committee
members.
Thank you very much madam chair
miss brown you have anything to
add before we stand at the
pleasure of the committee.
Madam chair representative small
I do not I am happy to help try
and answer any questions.
Okay thank you I am now we will
take public comment will take
comments from those who are in
support of the bill and then
that would you please
The committee.
John Clark you are now in unit.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair members of the committee I
am pleased to be here today to
support Senate bill fourteen I'm
the deputy secretary for the
economic development department
and establishing a claim
standard for clean
transportation fuels will spur
research and development at our
universities labs in the private
sector creating jobs across the
state Honda Toyota Hyundai Audi
BMW and Volvo were already
leaning into clean fuel
technology Boeing has said it
will begin delivering commercial
airliners capable flying on one
hundred percent bio fuel by the
end of the decade you on musk of
SpaceX and Tesla has pledged one
hundred million dollars to
whoever develops the best carbon
capture technology and BP is a
major player in the space and
plans to boost its investment in
low carbon fuels tenfold by
twenty thirty getting this done
that will distinguish New Mexico
give us a competitive advantage
will show the New Mexico wants
to develop this expertise
diversify our economy and
transition into a clean energy
superpower thank you very much
for your support of this bill.
Gary pay any you are now and
muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Gary Payton
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico our coalition consists of
the mayors and commissioners of
the cities of Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe Santa Fe
County and Los Alamos County.
We stand in strong support of SB
fourteen we think this
legislature in recent years for
the steps that they have taken
to be able to address issues
across the electricity sector we
point to the ETA grid
modernization community solar
etcetera the key point of this
for our members is that it
addresses the most important
next greenhouse gas emissions
secretary that our
transportation we strongly
support this bill and urge you
to vote yes as you hear it today
thank you very much.
I had rich you are now in muted.
Committee members my name is
Scott Hedrick I hope everyone
can hear me.
Madam chair committee members I
work for a company called
renewable energy group we're the
one of the nation's largest
manufacturers of biomass based
diesel that's both renewable
diesel and biodiesel we also
have a partially.
Bills facility that is in Clovis
New Mexico I spent about two
things one minutes kind of a
short time to get and all the
positive aspects of the bill but
I want some economics and cost
to consumers.
The last ten years the company I
work for has invested over two
hundred million dollars in other
plants besides our facility in
New Mexico and the reason being
first and foremost is the states
with those plants reside all
have strong public policy in
support of the the climate
change carbon reduction or bio
fuels those are real dollars and
gone to to building a real steel
and concrete appropriations that
provide jobs the second point I
want to make is risk concerns in
the Senate around costs to
consumers
I have a feeling it'll be well
worth data here in a little bit
but the data does show that this
type of measure has added
roughly two cent a year increase
to the price of fuel in
California.
Gas taxes there are twice New
Mexico's that's the reason why
fuel prices are so high.
J. D. bowling ten your down
unit.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
The chamber supports Senate bill
fourteen this bill would reduce
the carbon intensity of
transportation fuels in an
innovative way that encourages
technological advancement across
the private sector it's a
narrowly targeted bill and the
implementation runway of about
two years is appropriate
assuming the carbon intensity
reduction targets remain
reasonable this bill's approach
to improving air quality is
balanced focused and it's
responsible cleaning up our
transportation fuels will go a
long way to reducing greenhouse
gas masks gas emissions in our
state and we urge your support
for the bill thank you.
Charles good marker you are now
and muted.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I'm Charles good
mockers speaking on behalf of
the natural resources defense
council action fund and also the
New Mexico Public Health
Association.
Both urged to pass on this bill
critically important for.
Public health as you heard in
the presentation earlier also
course very important to help
us.
Meet our climate standards or
goals they were aiming towards
and the we urge your well you
also heard from the business
community that this is an
apartment or built it makes good
business sense as well so thank
you very much.
You are now in muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Barbara Calif I'm speaking for
the league of women voters of
New Mexico the league supports
policies and incentives that
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by promoting greater energy
efficiency by developing clean
renewable energy sources and by
encouraging for the resource on
alternatives to the combustion
of fossil fuels and for energy
we believe industry in New
Mexico should be required to
pursue carbon reduction
strategies therefore we ask you
to please vote do pass for
Senate bill fourteen thank you.
Rosenberg you right now and
muted.
Thank you very much good
morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Paul
Rosenberg I am the senior
manager government affairs for
suburban propane we're the third
largest distributor of propane
in the nation we support Senate
bill fourteen at clean fuel
standard is a proven effective
method to reduce emissions in
the transportation sector one of
the main reasons for its success
is that it is a tech neutral
approach embraces all low carbon
carbon neutral and even carbon
negative fuels and that's what
we need an all in approach to
reduce emissions.
And not only that I it is it
will be an economic generator
for the state by incentivising
innovation and investment
introducing lower and lower
carbon fuels thank you.
You are now and muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee Charlie mark is a
registered lobbyist for the
alliance for automotive
innovation this report team
comes at a time when the
separatist pivotal point in the
development of electric vehicle
market there sixty models
offered by every major auto
maker and every all right.
Every major auto maker has
announced plans for central
increased the production the
next four years they intend to
offer a hundred and thirty
different models in a variety of
different segments however
automotive industry investments
alone will not be enough to
increase the market recreations
for EV's which is the second
quarter of twenty.
Twenty one accounted for only
one point nine six percent of
all vehicles sold in New Mexico.
Mexico has set ambitious
select the electrification goals
for the adoption of clean car
regulations started in twenty
twenty six the clean fuel
standards example of a
complimentary policy to help
address necessary conditions to
make the state schools we
Sportage SB fourteen.
And while they're here now and
muted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Anil
ended well and I'm the policy
adviser for the energy minerals
natural resources department and
we're in very enthusiastic
support SB fourteen this bill
requires fuel providers to
reduce the carbon intensity of
transportation fuels over time
decreasing greenhouse gas
emissions in the transportation
sector while simultaneously
encouraging cutting edge
businesses to choose to come to
New Mexico the credit market
which this bill enables allowed
credits to be generated from any
industry that can reduce carbon
emissions in the transportation
sector agriculture oil and gas
power generation electrification
transportation and more and this
bill it ensures that lowering
transportation sector emissions
benefits disproportionately
impacted communities directly
requiring utilities to invest
the net profits to credit
generation electrifying
transportation in these
communities we strongly support
this bill EMNRD thank you very
much.
You are now unmuted.
Morning madam chairwoman and
members of the thank you so much
for this opportunity I represent
the renewable.
Natural gas association we are a
a coalition of over three
hundred fifty.
Different industry members we're
strong support of SB fourteen
for the the issues that you for
today it's good for public
health.
Brings in strong
economic growth into the state
of New Mexico including some
good diversity to your state and
jobs of what we've found is
thousands of jobs in this.
Very are out there and available
in particularly a state that has
a lot of natural gas jobs that
need to be transitioned of the
actually into these cleaner jobs
this bill will provide a good
smooth transition for those
people in those families.
The woman you are now in muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Camilla
I amend I'm the director of the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club the representing over
thirty five thousand members and
supporters we support this
legislation and thank the
sponsors for the improvements
made all during the thought full
year long process this time
allowed us to that this concept
with Sierra Club chapters in
other states and ask for
improvements that we're
thankfully included including
doubling the aspirations for
greenhouse gas reductions and a
one hundred percent investment
of utility credits and
electrification and impacted
communities benefits and
elimination of credits for
carbon reductions not based on
transportation fuels this bill
supports the transition away
from fossil fuels and towards
electric vehicles which will cut
down on carbon pollution and
help to fight climate change
thanks to each of you.
Mary on the last year and now
included.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members I we
Representative new energy
economy and we are in support of
this bill so we'd like
amendments the major amendment
that we would like is the
removal of any reference to
carbon capture and sequestration
why because it's a really bad
idea it's an empty promise that
hasn't worked in Europe the US
has resulted in billions of
dollars for a student to
taxpayers to
from failed projects in
Mississippi taxpayers are stuck
with the seven point five
billion dollar price tag for
carbon capture that was not
actually sequestered in Texas
the Petra Nova carbon capture
project operated only one third
of the time didn't reduce carbon
emissions was on economic and
closed in three years please
amend this bill to remove any
reference to carbon capture or
sequester Asian thank you.
Hey your now in muted.
Members of the committee my name
is Paige may and I am here
representing Mexico Boyce's for
Children to stand and support
and Senate bill fourteen I want
to thank the sponsors for this
legislation which we believe
offers the right incentives to
reduce carbon emissions in the
transportation sector which is a
necessary and to protect our
environment and community health
and early pre we also believe me
credit that help drive
innovation create jobs and help
to diversify the economy so we
urge your support for Senate
bill fourteen thank you.
It is all just your analogy
unit.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes.
Good morning.
Madam chairman and committee
members we go Gonzales without
Paso electric.
And we stand in support of this
legislation Senate bill fourteen
we think the administration and
the sponsor of the bill for
working with utilities to get us
some of the amendments that we
needed into the bill we in el
Paso electric have a have a very
competitive market in both Texas
and New Mexico and we hope that
this legislation will will help
to have a regional approach at
some point of her being
transportation.
Carbon emissions moving forward
and so to that end again
recently the sponsor
and and
That's it thank you very much.
Where
are you right now on your debt.
Good morning madam chair
committee members thank you for
this opportunity and Floyd
regard with the clean fuels
Alliance America formally
national biodiesel board we
strongly support passage of SB
fourteen clean feel programs are
succeeding in California and
Oregon and will succeed in New
Mexico as well as B. forty is
expected to generate over
sixteen hundred permanent jobs
by twenty thirty or twenty three
hundred construction jobs during
that same time period it
infrastructure investment of two
hundred forty million dollars
and four hundred seventy million
dollars in wages in twenty
twenty four to twenty thirty.
Clean fuels as the US trade
association representing the
biodiesel renewable diesel and
sustainable aviation fuel supply
chains include farmers producers
and marketers are feels a
certain most difficult to
decarbonise sectors including
heavy duty on and off road
marine rail and aviation we
thank you madam chair committee
members energy to pass SB
fourteen.
Regarding your Nalan unit it
crystal currently here in Allen
unit.
Good morning honorable.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is crystal
curly
can you on initially can
actually brushing the cutting if
that should change on the
rostrum Allen I'm the executive
director of indigenous lifeways
in nonprofit in McKinley county
we strongly recommend that this
bill be amended to remove carbon
capture and sequestration and
remove offsets these are two
teams asphalt solutions we would
like to see a required
percentage amount four electric
cars sold and also include a
major investment to public
transport transportation for
electric vehicles again please
amend SB fourteen to ensure real
solutions he had thank you.
Joanne brown you are now in
unit.
Good morning committee chair of
sponsors and committee thank you
so much for your work these are
days and sponsors of this bill I
am a Franciscan sister with a
director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with state communities all
of the state we know we need
many tools to address the
climate change issue and the
moral and ethical concerns it
holds and this is one of those
tools so we are grateful for
this bill and in support thank
you.
In your now and muted.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Tom Solomon and co coordinator
with three fifty New Mexico and
on behalf of Lori thousand
supporters in the state we are
instructs apart of this bill.
I just like to read you a
headline from story in the
Albuquerque journal today
western mega drought now the
driest and some twelve hundred
years and followed by another
headline the U. N. to finalize a
science report on how global
warming it's home hard so these
are just a couple of examples of
the worsening climate crisis
that we fund selves in the midst
of today and this bill to
address the number two source of
global warming emissions from
the transportation sector is a
tangible and important step that
New Mexico can take to address
the climate crisis and three
fifty New Mexico stands in
strong support of this bill
thank you very much.
And you are now I needed.
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is Daniel and
I'm here today on behalf of
charge point one of the largest
providers electric vehicle
charging stations across North
America in your trust one
strongly supports the passage of
SB fourteen this policy will
drive private investment in the
new clean energy economy and
infrastructure in New Mexico
create new markets and jobs for
local businesses and reduce
pollution from transportation
across the state over the past
decade clean fuel standards in
the U. S. generated more than
ten billion for clean fuels and
infrastructure including over
one point five billion for
transportation electrification
including charging stations and
electric vehicle rebates SB
fourteen will drive innovation
in New Mexico's energy economy
create new jobs and electricity
agriculture waste and
construction sectors in tractors
this investment from national
and international cleantech
companies thank you close with
we're reiterating chargepoint
strong support press the
fourteen.
Deborah Condit your now and you
to.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee this is Deborah
Condit and I'm the registered
lobbyist for western resource
advocates and we stand strong
spell at support is Senate bill
fourteen at thank you and have a
good day.
Shell be Neil you are now in
muted.
So do you have to and you're on
your and.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Shelby
Nila Services BP renewables for
a company called Darling
ingredients which is the largest
purveyor of used cooking oil
from restaurants and animal by
products for the livestock
industry we strongly support
Senate bill fourteen a Darling
headquartered in Irving Texas
and we collect use cooking offer
restaurants in the southern part
of New Mexico and a transport
that material to Los crucis
where we have a collection
processing station from there
typically that material goes to
renewable fuels facility were
turned in renewable diesel and
biodiesel which reduces
greenhouse gases by eighty six
percent and air toxics by at
least fifty percent according to
the California air resources
board.
Darling is currently a small
employer New Mexico but we feel
SB fourteen would give us an
opportunity to grow our
appropriations an employment
base in the state just as it has
everywhere else we've seen low
carbon fuel standards again
rural exports SB fourteen would
thank the committee for its
consideration of the bill.
Thank you Jim apply to me I need
to enter Rapp we have given
twenty minutes to
and public comments in support
of this bill so now we're going
to hear about comments in
opposition of the bill.
Thank you.
Requests in corn you are now in
unit.
Hello madam chairman.
Many members my name is Bronson
corn I'm speaking on behalf of
the New Mexico cattle growers.
There's quite a few things and
Senate bill fourteen that bother
us and senator fourteen it does
not specify our carbon credit or
debit credit is going to get
it's value is that value chain
from citizen to citizen
originally from region depending
upon where you live in Arbor
State is the system going to
apply to all producers big and
small.
When it comes to the trading or
selling of carbon credits are
there going to be convinced
considered personal property or
real property and if it's
considered a real property can
that be transferred like a
mineral or water right.
Will lands that participate in
the trading of carbon credits be
limited in future property use
and what with the length of
those contracts the when it
comes to the third party
verification system is there
going to be enough verifiers to
be able to ensure streamlined
and consistent process thank
you.
Winchester you are now on muted.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity today I'm Jim
Winchester with the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico and want to start off by
saying that we definitely
wholeheartedly agree that
reduced emissions is a shared
goal by all parties Ian just
want to Representative the oil
and gas industry has led the way
by significantly decreasing
emissions while increasing
increasing production this past
decade.
however there can be no argument
even from supporters that this
act will reach consumers who use
automobiles hitting them hard at
the pump now supporters tout a
study that shows two cents per
gallon increase per year in
California yet other studies
indicate California's clean
standards alone have been
responsible for increasing sixty
cents per gallon the past decade
we see the same happening in New
Mexico up to thirty or fifty
cents per gallon in this will
disproportionately hurt those in
poverty in New Mexico and those
in rural areas we stand opposed.
John Blackie right now and
muted.
thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block united New Mexican
and I propose Senate bill
fourteen the standards this bill
calls for as enacted in states
like California and Oregon maybe
the average gas prices skyrocket
for the average consumer
anywhere from twelve to thirty
five cents per gallon and today
the price of gas in California
is a hundred and thirty five
percent greater than the
national average and in Oregon
it's a hundred and nineteen
percent greater than the
national average according to
triple lay these figures are
higher than before the fuel
standards were enacted the large
cost increases
disproportionately affects poor
and middle class New Mexicans
were twenty to thirty five cents
extra per gallon of gas makes a
big difference especially now
where inflation is hitting forty
your records I hope the
committee of votes no on Senate
bill fourteen which is a default
gas tax on the poorest New
Mexicans thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
You are now in unit.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to come morning my
name is Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
first and foremost Mexico for
livestock bureau opposes
environmental mandates and
instead believe that policy
transition should be voluntary
incentive based I find for
market driven innovation we are
additionally concerned with the
increase in fuel cost mentioned
by some of my colleagues as the
proposals in California and
Oregon have directly led to this
impact the proposal for you
today's that's more aggressive
targets than our neighboring
states and this legislation if
enacted will directly
disproportionately affects our
rural communities and our
agricultural producers.
Lastly I will leave you with the
noted that the biodiesel mandate
which was enacted many years ago
has never been implemented in
the state year after year this
receives a vertices suspension
from the department of act due
to lack of domestic supply and
infrastructure thank you for the
opportunity.
Walker you are now in muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Eric Walker and I'm with the
American fuel and petrochemical
manufacturers thank you for the
opportunity to comment on SB
fourteen including the clean
fuel standard as you know to
states have program similar to
this one California and Oregon
their experiences show that the
program has an undeniable impact
on the cost of fuel in the state
and Oregon the program has not
been around as long as
Californians but the price
increases are significant organs
all report the cost of the LCS
as program shows price increases
two or three times higher than
California's at similar points
in the program implementation
these calls will continue to
rise as carbon reduction targets
are lower I urge the committee
urged the committee to take the
time to provide us proposal it's
impacts on a few markets and the
true cost to consumers thank
you.
You are now in the unit.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am with Stillwater
associates we published a
detailed review of last year's
version of this bill which has
been made available to the
committee SB fourteen targets an
ambitious twenty percent
reduction in carbon intensity of
transportation fuels by twenty
thirty this acceleration of the
target means that there will not
be enough time to build a
significant presence of the
these in the state to facilitate
compliance as a result
compliance will require rapid
growth in the penetration of
ethanol biodiesel and renewable
diesel much of which would be
imported in competition with
California.
Utilizing the current vehicle
mix achieving a twenty percent
carbon MCAT intensity reduction
in New Mexico by twenty thirty
is estimated day and forty eight
cents per gallon to gasoline and
diesel purchase by New Mexico
drivers thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
And why is here now and muted.
Thank you chair members of the
committee my name is a hand the
alliance and I am with the
southwest organizing project
we respect the efforts of the
representatives that have
sponsored this bill and another
folks but we simply cannot
support a bill that supports
carbon sequestration because any
any bill that contains that is
not a friendly environmental
bill we're worried about these
credits being true traded carbon
capture is not a proven
technology for larger amounts of
carbon emissions sequestration
by offsets is unlikely to match
there is also an issue of double
dipping electric utilities have
to reduce fossil fuels because
of the PTA and the renewable
portfolio standard contained
therein and the credits and then
credits to trade oil and gas has
reduced methane emissions
because of NMED regulation and
then credits to trade cap and
trade does not work and because
of this organization cannot
support this bill please do not
pass.
What you're you're now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the community I'm Marc Fleisher
reddish with this for three
clients that oppose SB fourteen
the city of Gallup Gallup
McKinley is County schools in
McKinley paper company SB
fourteen is a tax on fuel the
result of this legislation will
be an increase of about twenty
cents a gallon.
For diesel and gasoline.
It has resulted in nineteen and
twenty four cents increase per
gallon in California in Oregon
most of these carbon credits are
actually sold out of state
interests The New Mexico
consumers will be subsidizing
those who trade in carbon
credits this sounds like a great
idea to those in urban
communities but those in rural
New Mexico this is dental tax
for those who drive long
distances with the cost of fuel
over a dollar in the last year
and inflation getting worse
daily this is not a good time to
increase the cost of fuel I urge
you to oppose the passage of SB
fourteen thank you.
Then your now and you to.
Madam chair and members of the
committee then instructed Bannon
I'm working with Charlie markets
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico business coalition in New
Mexico Chile Association.
The New Mexico business
coalition represents hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans The New Mexico Chile
Association is a nonprofit that
represents Chile farmers
processors distributors and
manufacturers both organizations
support clean and vibrant
economy but this legislation
does not accomplish that we
stand opposed SB fourteen this
legislation would permit new
regulations that will result in
higher fuel prices increased
costs to businesses.
Fuel prices cost break prices to
increase in the impact cost
impact the cost nearly all goods
and services as you know our
labor costs are already
impacting the Chilean street.
This is will have no choice but
to pass these increased costs on
to their customers resulting in
higher prices for New Mexicans.
We respectfully oppose SB
fourteen thank.
New energy economy you are now
and muted.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
service what it called so I'm
the mother of three children
from Espanola I didn't intend to
speak on behalf of new energy
economy but to speak for myself
just use the wrong new Macau
this bill should pass only if it
is amended to remove carbon
sequestration and carbon offsets
and carbon trading schemes this
fall solutions are promoted by
fossil fuel industry because
they delay real effective action
like stricter fuel efficiency
standards mandating percentage
of electric cars sold and
investment in public
transportation they create a
loophole in the form of
accounting tricks that obscure
the fact that emissions are not
actually going down and endanger
the health of communities
located near carbon capture
plants.
Still waters analysis of this
bill points out that the New
Mexico bills the only clean fuel
standard and country that allows
industries like oil and gas to
participate I question why.
You are now in muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is sent
economy representing education
economic crisis action on behalf
of our handy to determine
arguments and gentleman Mexico
I'm here today to meet today to
do to oppose SB fourteen as
currently written until serious
amendments and maybe we need to
excuse the amend the clean fuel
standards act in order to ensure
that the transition of our
transportation sector is based
on best practices as practices
would look like as simple and
straightforward if you
efficiency standards requirement
for percent of electric vehicles
sold and investment public
transit these are the tools are
proving most effective in
reducing carbon emissions in the
transportation sector this bill
as currently written hunting is
components carbon sequestration
is unproven expensive in a false
solution center mechanism for
implementation established by
that there is a system whereby
individuals and companies can
earn credits by reducing
emissions and sell those credits
to individuals or companies who
won't read the applicables
standard the global indigenous
community has asked for
protections against the
commodification of secret air
water soil and forests to see
the lesson thank Martinez
rockets other countries and
please heed our calls against
carbon market mechanisms like
carbon credits on behalf of the
echo please oppose SB fourteen
until amended thank you.
You are now in the United.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of I strongly oppose
this bill and I for one
particular reason a look at a
few different standpoints far as
hell the impact as far as
carbon.
The firm is here when these
could be explained from my
standpoint basically us you know
to basically if we need to go to
a block for all life on earth
and without it we would be at
that.
Look at what the amount of
carbon dioxide a year in our
atmosphere it's only about four
one hundredths of one percent so
I think the emphasis on trying
to control carbon emissions is
really look at it from the wrong
perspective I think we all agree
that we need to have a healthy
atmosphere I think it was
emphasizing non carbon dioxide
emissions is really not gonna
cop which what folks are it will
accomplish so.
You very much.
And what is your now I needed.
Your call the next person.
Matthew Gonzalez you are now and
muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Matthew
Gonzalez and I'm the state
affairs director for the
consumer energy alliance of New
Mexico echo thank you for the
opportunity to comment on this
legislation with all due respect
to the sponsors and supporters
we have serious concerns about
the bill I have to stand in
opposition at this time the cost
of the secretary will absolutely
be passed on to consumers New
Mexico has a large number of our
citizens already living at or
below the poverty level those
citizens already paid
disproportionate amount of their
income to their energy needs
gasoline prices are already up
dollars and they were last year
some estimates say that this
legislation if enacted could go
as high as thirty cents per
gallon if it was just a few
cents and gas wasn't already up
with all of this would be a
completely different
conversation none of our
neighboring states are doing
this so I fully suspect in areas
like where I live near the near
the Colorado border that our
citizens will leave the state to
go and buy their gas and and
meet their fuel needs but when
they do that they don't just buy
gas they're going to buy
groceries and by other things so
this will definitely have an
impact on our small rural
businesses we certainly
appreciate the effort to improve
the air quality environment but
not at the expense of our most
vulnerable citizens so we must
find that balance for those
reasons and other stated we have
to stand opposition and thank
you the committee for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you I believe that
completes our public comments so
now I see Representative Rehm.
More and the committee I
apologize because this is an
area I don't will no water about
but I want to ask you a few
questions.
Madam chair and Representative
small
so we have CO two in the air
that we breathe.
How do we capture it out of the
air.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm the Senate
bill fourteen reduces the carbon
intensity for transportation
fuels so we'll send less CO two
into the air as.
within our as we use
transportation in the state of
New Mexico Madam chair
representative Rehm direct air
capture which is an additional
technology that instead of
reducing the emissions that go
into the atmosphere actually
draws them down as you know is
an intensive industrial process
but SB fourteen is about
reducing emissions.
So Madam chair representative
small.
Is CO two emitted from the
ground currently.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm SB fourteen
is only concerned with
transportation emissions and so
these are the emissions from
transportation within the state
of New Mexico
there are
so so that's really not within
the scope of the bill Madam
chair Representative Rehm there
are
carbon sinks and carbon sources
that are natural and working
lands but that's not the subject
of SB fourteen.
Madam chair and Representative
small I assume what we will do
is measure CO two in the air the
atmospheric air and so I'm
wondering if we have a if you
will with third party throwing
error the ground just coming out
of the ground how that's going
to affect our data for
measuring.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Rehm.
So so for for SB fourteen and
measures the carbon intensity of
transportation fuels so madam
chair representative Nibert
that's not an atmospheric
measurement that's a measurement
in the different fuel sources
this is really can offer
additional information but it's
not an atmospheric measurement
it's a measurement of the carbon
intensity and fuels the ceiling.
Chair Representative Rehm that
yep that is correct it is not a
measure of atmospheric
concentrations of CO two it is a
measure of the carbon intensity
of the fuels.
Madam chair and.
Representative small.
And dry ice is CO two are we are
limit price at all or that
doesn't that doesn't that's not
under this Madam chair
representative Rehm not into
this.
And madam chair Representative
small since plants use CO two.
They might object to us not
giving them extra spear but.
Madam chair representative small
over on page five.
When let's see.
Somewhere here I saw it would
look like we were looking at the
dairy industry yes I'm sorry
it's page three madam chair and
representative fall page three
we're looking at one sixteen
there were talk to that doctor
the stock production and
distribution from extraction or
feedstock generation through
distribution and are we talking
about cattle or where we talked
about.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm that's
referring to the waste products
from livestock that can be
turned into methane biogas and
other valuable transportation
Fuel stocks and creating another
source of income madam chair
representative Rehm four the
producers so it's eight that
Madam chair representative Rehm
is part of the additional
investment and creation of jobs
through the low carbon fuel
standard.
Thank you so Madam chair
representative mall how do they.
they make money on that if you
will.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm they sell
the waste products to fuel
refiners and or if it's
something that they choose to do
they investor are part of
investment in
the infrastructure to.
Take the waste products and in
turn that into fuel and madam
chair representative Rehm many
producers especially in larger
concentrated feedlots are are
have been looking into this and
are engaged in this and in parts
of our state and certainly
around the country.
Madam chair and Representative
small I go to page seven.
One four I see that we're going
to have of required the
assessment of an item annual re
registration fee for providers.
Then on wine the fees collected
pursuant to this paragraph will
go into clean fuel fund.
And then down on the bottom of
page seven at one twenty four.
We're talking about require
third party certification of
fuel pathways applications so.
What it
these are not apply to
individuals also and our
admissions is that correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm I would turn
to the expert Missy Lee to help
address this.
Madam chair representative bring
it doesn't apply to individuals
there are two sources this could
apply to in paragraph ten on
page seven and one is the
provider that is generating
those lower carbon fuels the
other is generation of emission
reduction credits that can be
generated for any source that is
reducing greenhouse gas
emissions in the transportation
sector such as their race or the
stock that is being used to
create your rules that would
then be sold on the market.
So madam chair and
Representative small on page
seven down to one twenty four
require thirty RT certification.
If I put a solar panel on my
emails to the does up third
party needed government certify
it for me to get a creditor how
does that work.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
it would only apply to emissions
reductions in transportation
sector so that would not apply
if that if it was charging your
car madam chair Representative
Rehm that perhaps could
participate but if it's power in
your home and then when Missy
Lee do you want to add anything.
I just want to clarify what a
provider is perhaps that will
help madam chair and
representative so this applies
to rural providers which of
those sources that import bland
refined fuels in in the state or
generate fuels in the state so
could be electricity could be
propane could be natural gas or
or oil is so it is why is this
SB fourteen applies to them it
also provides benefits to other
Sources or sectors of the
economy that want to reduce
emissions in the transportation
sector like agriculture or
of Force drugs you know any
source that can reduce emissions
and transportation would also
benefit from that so a provider
is not an individual like you or
I it is defined in the act as
Importer blender or refiner of
transportation people.
You madam chair and
Missy lie what I end up from
what you're saying is so if
they're generating.
Electricity from coal or oil
products.
That our electricity costs is
going to go up is that correct.
Madam chair representative
during no it's not it's not
necessarily related to our
electricity costs for just
electric renovation the portion
of electric generation that we
go towards the transportation
sector
could be regulated or what under
this under a surface B. fourteen
and it doesn't mean that you're
elector costs are going to go up
at all but it does mean that
your fuel cost electricity it
takes to fill your car will go
down because it costs a lot less
to run your vehicle on
electricity than it does on
fossil fuels.
Madam chair Missy lie on page
two we're talking about.
the credits.
Well if.
Is the producer of what Tricity
has to pay the credits or obtain
credits for coal or oil products
to generate it.
And that cost you will be
transferred to the
consumers and so to me that
would raise the price of
electricity is that correct.
Madam chair representative bring
we have not seen any analysis
that suggests that there will be
a cost increase electricity in
fact I would say that our
transition towards cleaner
electricity puts our utilities
in a pretty good position to
meet the emission reduction
requirements using a twenty
eighteen baseline
Yes thank you.
Madam chair and Missy why.
What is the cost between a
kilowatt hour of electricity
from PNM analysts say a kilowatt
hour from California where they
have the standard.
Madam chair representative right
I do not have the answer to that
question.
Yeah madam chair and and Missy
lie.
I remember the price suffered
from numerous sources of
electricity in California is
much higher and of course then
the yep the Browns issues well
thank you madam oh sorry I
apologize for that thank thank
you thank you so much for
Representative Rehm and madam
chair the price per kilowatt of
electricity is disconnected from
the purpose of SB fourteen which
is to reduce the carbon
intensity of transportation
fuels madam chair and and
Representative Rehm
That that
part is connected via the
special right now Madam chair
representative redeem because
while EV's let me.
Send a message to make
connections and stable
Well elector vehicles are
permitted to become a very a
much much larger share of the.
Light and medium duty vehicle
market right now they are a very
very small share and so madam
chair representative Rehm
though those are just I just
want to emphasize that
electricity costs are are are
not connected to transportation
costs right now and
In the purpose of SB fourteen to
reduce the carbon intensity of
fuels
It we can't we should not in my
opinion then strong opinion
madam chair representative bring
a equate electricity costs to
to transportation at this time
because the views are such a
small share of the
transportation market.
Madam chair representative fall
anytime you increased production
costs we're seeing that with the
ETA that we have then the price
of the product yes the increase
to offset.
That production costs for the
company's gonna go bankrupt so
we're already seeing an increase
in our of our our electric bills
in New Mexico from PNM on that's
where I get my energy and
and I mean it's just simple
business how it's going to go
up.
So I think the public needs to
be aware that if you if we have
this that energy costs are going
to go up because the fuel
production or the electricity
production costs will go up.
That thank thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Rehm
the so on a different system I I
I am in a service territory Sir
by el Paso electric after the
Energy transitioned Act and
after acquisition
by the infrastructure
investments funds Madam chair in
committee el Paso Electric
residents actually saw a
reduction in utility bills and
that in the a credit to their
bills that was post ETA post
acquisition by the
infrastructure investments funds
Madam chair representative Rehm
With the final conclusion of
legal action around the Energy
transitioned Act and
With the yo securitization on
the horizon madam chair and
committee that's projected to
lower energy costs set and
finally madam chair
Representative Rehm specifically
to the point of fuel costs right
now the price of oil which I
look at as I'm no many do every
day the price of oil is well
above is above ninety dollars
that's the West Texas
intermediate price the
The spy the rapid increase in
demand and the slow response in
supply.
Specifically within for for oil
madam chair Representative Rehm
has driven the costs.
Up at the pump has driven hello
but higher price than what we
saw a year ago.
Madam chair in the along with
the supply chain squeeze and
other things that's what's
driving increased costs at the
pump that New Mexicans are
paying that's what's driving
inflation madam chair committee.
That is very much the within the
oil and gas.
Business right now and so the.
Those are the increased costs
that we're facing those madam
chair.
Committee Representative Rehm
have nothing to do with fuel
economy standards or anything
else.
Those are
the
Oil the private sector oil
stakeholders whether you know
the the majors mid majors
independents sovereign own state
oil companies are seeing their
largest profits since
think it's since two thousand
and eight that's what's driving
our increased costs madam chair
committee.
Madam chair and representative
spoke with me go into in a
different direction and in try
this so I was playing around on
the internet and.
basically a hundred fourteen
gallons of gas creates one
metric ton of CO two so do we
agree on that data point.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
I would turn to miss Juli as the
technical expert.
Members of the committee it
might depend on whether that gas
was generated in California
Oregon and send in New Mexico
where the carbon intensity would
be less but it that's our
standard possible to all.
Gallon of gas I would not argue
with you on that point.
Okay so we're we're I'm just
going to use that as our data
point you know for for this so.
If we have a vehicle gets twenty
five miles to the gallon that'll
travel twenty eight hundred and
fifty miles that vehicle.
So most people drive around
about fifty thousand.
Miles per year.
That equals five point two
metric tons.
And if we look at California
they're selling carbon credits
for around a hundred and fifty
to two hundred dollars.
So.
What each of us have stronger
stand.
That.
Cost will be about a thousand
dollars a year.
Her user.
Are you know each each vehicle
if you will in in New Mexico
that's a gas vehicle.
And.
Unfortunately our.
Our less privileged people.
Are the ones that are going to
be driving electric vehicles
they're going to be driving the
gas cars.
And
Are you I think everyone needs
to be you know we heard a lot of
people talked about the how much
fuel was going to go up and how
much it's gone up in California
but just the simple math on this
everyone can expect to pay a
thousand dollars more per year
madam chair I've I've got more
questions I know there's others
I know Representative Snyder and
he's more students on this than
I am so I'm going to transfer
the thank you madam chair.
Receive.
Representative I'm I just got
the message from a Wonda Johnson
Representative Johnson and so
she's kind of the the virtual
gavel to new so she had to step
out so yes you can.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I'm not going to
labor the point the.
Most of my points have been made
of.
That settlement.
Madam chair and representative.
People look at this bill and see
the name of the bill.
We think you'll standards act.
I've had a number of people say
well they're just cleaning up
the the gasoline and diesel it
goes in our transportation
vehicles is that really what
this is about.
Madam chair Representative thank
you for the question Madam chair
representative this is a
technology neutral approach to
reducing the carbon intensity by
that anymore twenty percent by
twenty thirty.
In thirty percent by twenty
forty so madam chair
representative Nibert it's
inclusive of reducing the carbon
intensity of that that that that
gallon of gas are gonna do so
but it would be encouraging
madam chair and representative
Nibert
of.
Having alternative fuels perhaps
like
some of the biodiesel or other
other.
The electrical charging where
that's appropriate and or other
approaches that reduce that
carbon intensity Madam chair
representative Nibert
as we get into some of the
higher carbon intensity you
that's probably where we're
going to see the need for some
of these alternative fuels not
just state of landing Madam
chair representative with
traditional feels I would say
Missy that you want to add
anything to.
You know Madam chair
representative just that there's
electricity factor
electrification that not
everybody's thinking about to.
Well and I think we all
recognize that sure we're headed
toward
more transportation being.
Experienced through electrical
needs but
are in a state wide cars that
is probably not going to be
practical minute parts of the
state for some time to come but
that aside the primary mechanism
in this legislation for meeting
these are at all use your words
so Representative these bold
goals
yes to create this carbon.
This carbon credit.
Mechanism whereby.
In order to.
Reduce that carbon someone is
supplying aid credit and I
suppose that credit market is
established by the government is
that really the mechanism that
that will be utilized.
Most frequently to achieve these
ambitious goals.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert.
That market is one of the core
approach is here I I absolutely
but madam chair representative
Nibert
While acknowledging that I think
it's also really important that
I highlight the
Why Alectra for cation madam
chair and representative member
in particular even in the more
rapid time frame the twenty
thirty time frame shouldn't be
discounted Madam chair
representative Nibert were
receiving will have over forty
million dollars out the door
after H. B. two to help support
charging infrastructure across
the state the commitments of
many of the autumn the large
automakers to go significantly
are entirely electric I think
what will rapidly transition
that Madam chair representative
Nibert the
the E. I. B. created carbon
market is absolutely there to
help folks who can't meet those
those targets.
Representative I I hate to
interrupt you but can we take a
pause for your for just a minute
I'm getting a message that if we
can take a pause on this and go
to house bill two nineteen.
Madam chair of I would yield the
floor if I could come back and I
will allow you to come back I
think that this matter can be
done quickly and I it sounds
like this particular matter
we'll take a look a little bit
more conversation and so I want
to make sure that
that we we have the opportunity
to to keep this other matter
moving along so I appreciate
that and so if we can take a
pause and get Representative
Pettigrew
up for house bill two nineteen.
If the staff can could see if
he's in the in the audience.
Good morning madam chair.
Good morning I appreciate you
being able to jump on quickly
because we'd like to get back to
their previous matter
Representative so if you could
explain your bill.
Madam chair I have Brian more
with Mexico's association
counties fees on if you could
elevate him as well and while
we're doing that I will expedite
this madam chair a committee
members this is a simple Bill
modifies our existing law on the
maximum salary determination for
elected county officials.
Madam chair we have to do this
this way article four section
twenty seven talks about tells
us that no law could be enacted
giving extra compensation to a
public officer service agent.
Or contractor after services are
rendered contract made nor shall
the compensation of any officer
be increased or diminished
during his or her term except as
otherwise provided by the
constitution.
What we're doing here madam
chairs were we're putting an
increase on on economic
classifications A. B. NH of up
to fifteen percent.
Madam chair and committee
members a state you all a copy
of the two thousand and eighteen
FIR that was performed it went
to your amendment in M. L. E. G.
I. S. start does account there
was no FIR for this one I wanted
you get wanted everybody be be
very comfortable with the
understanding that this has no
fiscal impact on state
government this is all at the
county level so.
This bill promotes local
government autonomy by allowing
them to effectively manage
salary ranges for both elected
and non elected positions and
fixes the disparity that can
exist between the two.
In addition it works at the
discretion of the county
commission to make a decision
based on the county school
school.
Situation conditions.
This legislation will help our
county government keep pace.
We'll keep pace with track and
maintain qualified candidates in
the local marketplace that is
constantly out pace but
outpaces government wages.
The New Mexico eight legislator
has the responsibility to
increase the caps but the county
leadership has a responsibility
to choose the increased about
all none or some.
Finally and most importantly
this and this increase does not
affect current county officials
if charter in the commission
change changes the salary
structure increases will only
affect reelected or newly
elected officials.
In the clothes madam chair that
this legislation supported by
New Mexico Association cabbage
the pressures of Philip the
county clerk's affiliate.
Assessors office and the
sheriff's affiliate with that
madam chair is.
Mr Moore's on annual setting
thing you can and also for
questions.
Thank you Representative Mr or
are you on.
In order to expedite madam chair
I I think that's pretty
straightforward if there's any
questions from the committee I'd
be happy to take.
Thank you Representative it can
do we can we put it the pull up
staff.
I just want to mention Brian
Moore is on the panel hello I
see okay so.
Mister Moore would you like to
to weigh in thank you madam
chair members the committee
Representative Pettigrew did a
great job the last time we did
this was in twenty eighteen and
all it is is provided the salary
cap and now we have an increase
caps for four years and we think
it's time to allow county
commissions and counties to make
those decisions for themselves
we really appreciate your
support.
Thank you Mr R. and with that
can that can we go to the polls.
Something's wrong with the polls
not.
Coming.
Okay should we go then to a
public comment do we have anyone
for this legislation.
And and staff I I can't see if
we do so if if you whether you
know what okay and how about in
opposition.
Okay well then I guess we will
turn it over to representative
tive that neighbor.
Thank you madam chair of Madam
chair representative
There's two things that always
struck me as odd R. when I
served as a county commissioner
of the first one was.
Representative.
The county commission add to
Approved all these are.
Request for rate hikes because
it was based on on statute and
that the county salary scale for
the elected officials was set by
statute and the I guess there's
good policy reasons do that the
I just thought it was odd when I
was a county commissioner of the
that we have to do that the the
the second thing that always
struck me as odd is that.
New Mexico
has different pay scales based
on population in the county at
and so my my first question is
With this legislation I notice
you continue to reflect
differences between the counties
faced large whale population is
that accurate.
Madam chair and thanks committee
go ahead Brian.
your lies okay I yield the madam
chair I yield Brandt.
Thank you madam chair thank you
the reason we do this why is
this the way we've always done
we talked a couple times about
doing a constitutional amendment
that would eliminate the need
for the legislature to to go
through this process but we've
never gotten there and not.
But we're always open to new
ways of doing things but this is
just kind of went and work in
the past.
Representative.
Yeah we're two minutes maybe
Representative Madam chair
representative.
You know those are sure us.
Yes.
Bernalillo county makes quite a
bit more than the chair of and
Socorro County or catching
County were even my home county
Chavis that are many times the
size of a Bernalillo about they
don't have to population and
they may not have White the
intensity of of activity but
having to cover many square
miles.
Means that you're out on the
road and for the show out on the
road being.
Senator sorry Sir a lot of that
time.
Is is in the car traveling to
various places and and get all
related by.
Things like that maybe the more
urban our insurance doesn't have
to encounter and yet the pay
scales a lot different and
likewise on the county
commission side
are you are you have county
commissions in the larger more
populated counties that that the
right quite a bit more that I
challenge Mr and
A lesser populated county in yep
really the same work the same
responsibility probably the same
time commitment
is involved M. I don't know
about the clerks and things
maybe it's more complicated to
run.
The election and in the
Albuquerque area of New in a
smaller County but but the
the responsibility and the time
commitment so is is largely the
same error and yet we
differentiate all the stops Hey
scale based on the size of the
county now I understand some of
the really small counties are
probably can barely afford of
the pay scale up so that's allow
that we were already County
seven hundred some are residents
of that county R. and the our
lack of a substantial taxpayers.
Yes Sir probably difficult to
make some of those those
payments but
again I've always thought it was
strange that that The New Mexico
does that and number two that we
by statute create the upper
limits of these various elected
positions.
And what's even stranger is.
At least in Travis county when I
was on the commission the chief
deputy made more money than the
elected official because of the
supply and demand of our in that
case Sir sheriff's deputies so
the sheriff's deputy chief
deputy was a of a higher salary
than the actual elected official
and so you you always got up
welcome you have a salary when
you wear from elected official
to chief deputy.
Even though you gave up the
reins for the elected office and
I support the legislation but I
just wanted to are reflected
couple things that we do in New
Mexico that struck me as odd
when I when I serve on the
county commission are but
they're a bit there certainly
are entitled to it and and
Representative
Madam chair representative you
do you did you did tell us that
the current elected officials do
not get to participate in this I
rates the pay raise only goes
into effect after.
You become elected and and so
it'll be new people that are
elected they get the benefit of
it not the people that are
currently serving a term those
are set by the prior statute so
with that I'll I encourage my
colleagues to support the bill
but maybe at some time we need
to have a more
comprehensive.
Debate on whether that it served
and all are counties well thank
you madam chair and thank you
our representatives.
Thank you Representative I also
wanted to to note that the staff
who is moving quickly with our
changes here have a uploaded FY
are I'm to the the share drive
and then else's so if anybody
wants to look at that real
quickly before you vote that is
available.
Are there any more questions
from the committee.
Madam chair of I would just say
give us a moment to look at the
material and and then after
program time I will move it to
pass and madam chair all second
that do pass.
Thank you
Let me know when you when you
are ready.
Madam chair representative
thank.
Conflicted here because the FIR
stir these for this increase in
the past they've always shown no
no
No impact and
Trying to read through this okay
so does still descending Kate
that the only place that's
impacted is the is the county
level so.
With that and madam chair with
respect to some of the comments
from Representative Nibert I
agree completely you know we
have five counties classe.
which is over seventy five
million and a hundred thousand
or more in population.
We have eighteen class B. which
is over three hundred million
with under a hundred thousand in
population.
And
Class B. under over seventy five
but under three hundred million
in under a hundred thousand in
population and then one in class
H..
And.
There is a big disparity between
what does raise rates are in one
of the comments I made in the
very beginning is is increasing
this to the point where.
There isn't quite as much
difference between the W. in the
and the elected official and so.
When somebody turns out in the
air parent it's going to run for
office will actually take
anywhere from twenty to thirty
percent pay cut just become an
elected county official.
In many cases and so this kind
of helps with that if you look
at it from the two thousand
nineteen.
It was done in two thousand
nineteen.
they went for four years five
years without a raise so
you know less than four percent
annual increases if you look at
it from Cole a standpoint the
same thing with this one over
this this will be impacted for
up to four years and and it'll
be less than four percent co
increases well and so it's it's
not out of range with respect to
what we're doing definitely at
the state level with respect to
our state state government so.
Thank you Representative are we
ready to so you go to the
committee and take a vote.
We're good here madam chair okay
so it would you like to make
emotions against so the staff
can go ahead and get those down.
Yes I would move a do pass on
House Bill.
To nineteen to nineteen and I'll
second that motion.
Madam chair this would actually
be the committee substitute for
House Bill to nineteen
Madam chair of the more motion
is that we do it do not pass on
the house bill two nineteen and
they do pass on committee is
that our committee substitute.
Yes.
Representative.
Government elections in Indian
Affairs substitute for House
Bill to nineteen and I'll second
that madam chair thank you so
we've got a motion on the floor
can't can we take go to for
about.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative day goes yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes ma'am.
Representative Zamora yes yes.
Madam chair Johnson.
Madam chair blue.
Seven yes you're on the.
So Representative you have
you got a bill.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you committee and for all
your hard work and for squeeze
me in today.
Thank you.
If we go back to Representative
small.
Thank you very much madam chair
Madam chair I know that
Representative night Burt was in
the middle of questions and.
El what I'm gonna do is I'm
going to ask if we can I I just
been called by the speaker he's
asked that we get to the floor
so we're going to reconvene we
are trying to get all these
bills through but a at this time
we're gonna reconvene and the
announcement will be made on the
floor as to what time that will
be so I I apologize for having
to stop is that point but I know
that they're still conversations
that.
Questions that needed to be
asked and so I think we need to
spend a little bit more time
getting those answers for the
committee so with that
please listen to the and pass on
the floor as to when we will be
back in committee thank you
committee chair.
