Another makes great
with that I press to meco
sponsored athlete thank you Mr
speaker good morning madam chair
good morning committee
privileged to be this my first
time in this committee and
hopefully not my last so I
appreciate you giving us an
opportunity heard this morning
yeah I I echo the speaker's
comments I actually confessed
that no coach is real name is
always known as coach and I
think that's pretty common in
the building there's certainly a
lot for him I think among staff
and members and then when you
look at the the lyrics itself I
just want to read a couple of
them and and for the public you
can you can pull up House Bill
five one zero and read the
literature self there their and
they're completely but we all
know of course the the fish in
New Mexico questions record
green
that's what I think sets us
apart from the poses up north in
Colorado who want to set there
the green Chile capital but I
really like this section here it
says you want red chili I give
you read showing you one green
chilli I give you green chili
and any rights come to my
kitchen and I think that is so
Representative of of the heart
of New Mexico right there that
kind of hospitality particularly
talk about sharing our family
our friends our kitchen with you
with red or green so purchase
option this this morning I'm Mr
Mr speaker Mr leader
I see the words on.
The bill I hear you saying them
but I'm having a very very hard
time understanding what the
words mean.
We do not in context so if you
can give me that context before
we go to the audience for com
and I'd like for you Mr leader
particularly to help us hear
these words.
In concert.
With they're meant to be heard
manage.
Yes Mr speaker expert witness
put in rebel and he'll take it
from here thank you Mr
Singh thank you I don't think
on the microphone.
That.
Coastal.
You'll still.
To.
The.
Come to my.
It's going.
According.
The question.
Right.
all right well let's go to the
audience if you are here in
support of the.
State Chile song please raise
your hands.
If you're.
One of the opposition raise your
hand on the zoom support.
All right if you'd like to say
something in support.
Great awesome.
Okay now the committee.
At Mr vice chair first do you
have any questions yes that that
I coached and asked me to bring
my guitar.
I'm actually quite disappointed
before I go to the rest the
questions we have to musicians
on.
On the day is here so.
If you would like any of your
bills are due this committee I
think you should get.
Right.
Mr Mr thank you.
I just want to thank god for
bringing this bill forward like
I think the speaker Senator this
man's a legend everybody in
northern New Mexico notes coach
many rebel
I was at an event in with love
interest played a couple
Saturdays ago and I know it's in
LA never knew that that was just
in a lot but once they say
coaching does all my final sorry
but he knows him as coach I
think you did a wonderful job on
this on coach and I think it's
going to hit the chart well flu
recorded sooner Mr reported it.
Recorded already the and we
recorded the song already just
good so.
By the issue to run a couple of
CD's with we should get it we
should get it on there and start
playing that thank you for
bringing this forward gentleman
Preciado it and it was a
blessing here this morning using
coach.
And madam chair of
representatives of again you
know at the very enjoyable
morning the only bad thing that
I was when I first got the
record.
Webcast of don't worry.
You see the okay.
We appreciate you coming coaches
really enjoyed really good that
the give me the same day so I
can practice selected so.
Of these that involve expand by
are you still for New Mexico as
well.
Also market by.
The first lesson you know
started out with the Mexico I
really.
A lot of comments on the out all
I have to get your permission to
user next I saw.
For the late in for my radio
commercials.
Thanks but thank you
Representative Mason before we
go to a vote I thank you so much
coach and the sponsors to bring
this bill I remain disappointed
that the Sanchez didn't sing
along truly I do but there is
still opportunity for that thank
you so much it's it made me
hungry and it made me cry a
little bit and the me very happy
and the problem the thing is
that and New Mexican
representing the state we'll go
with yes what phone what you
said madam chair the months
again yes we put an amendment
that would help lower I'm open
by amendment in this committee
Go ahead Mr.
Madam chair like to make a do
pass motion for the state Chile
song second.
Go ahead and okay Representative
Lujan Representative Mason yes
Representative Mirabel Millia
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative for us us vice
chair Castellano yes and chair
or tense hi.
It's a tough one yes yes it's
good the path of with that you
have a due pass Sanchez Lara
House Bill five ten thank you
coach thank you thank you guys
all right.
Thank you.
that's all on the docket for
today so it now I think we can
