Members of the chambers roll
call is now open.
Well as close we have a quorum.
Is rises it is invocation led by
the delayed from committees and
one Representative Johnson.
I come humbly before you this
morning time to ask you once
again thank you bless our body
of servants our veterans our
In all that we do and all that
we are.
We ask all these good blessings
upon your name amen.
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
Please.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
objection it is so ordered good
morning members.
Because the basketball game.
Representative going thank you
Mr yes Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial seventy nine we removed
from the speakers table and then
or substitution the gentleman to
explain the memorial.
This memorial this recognize our
roughest the needs of the
showing how tough you are by
going on a bike ride to run
cross country ski and snowshoe
think that would explain a lot
more than I can.
House memorial seventy nine
list of multi sport winter
insurance party and whereas
every presidents day weekend of
sports enthusiasts converge on
grants to participate in the
Rose contestants are challenged
to bike thirteen miles up the
steep paved road leading to
mount Taylor then run an
additional five miles on a snow
on a pair of snowshoes in track
the final model to the summit of
mount Taylor five thousand four
racers teams and payers and
whereas quality kids is a three
part children's race that takes
place at the finish line for the
adults are out on the mountain
responsible for planning and
hosting the race are Isaac
Atencio president Kendra brown
vice president Stephanie gains
Edmiston and transition leaders
Isaac Atencio start finish Roger
Sigmund bike run shin and Jake
extended to the mount Taylor
contract on the declaring margin
of twenty twenty three mount
Tabor contract signing in the
house of representatives would
organization.
Chairman thank you thank you Mr
speaker at this time I would
like to introduce yes that are
this time with the.
The vice president of the
Quadros on extent.
Roger singleton board member.
Militants killed board member.
Lows gains have Bob iterations.
Local Bromsgrove magic in.
And and women's men by growing
Representative requests yes it
may have made to introduce the
other guests on the rostrum
from Bernalillo civil McKinley
the mayor of the city of
requests he is also the director
of the kids what brought full on
for the city of grants more
It's a he's a city count for he
is also the the the what some of
the leader of Zachary will give
this.
members of this house to get
down to grants on presidents day
next year.
And participate in the squad
I'd love the the house memorial
seven.
That is and I ask unanimous
consent to the house of the
record show that the rule called
complex if it in the next drop
on.
That to the motion motion chair
members as president or in the
affirmative.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of seventy in the affirmative
zero the negative house more
estimates nine has duly passed
this house.
Certainly Sir in the gallery
your guests we have Amy Fortin
who's a committee assistant with
house transportation public
works a couple appointments
recognize conditionally
nonmetals.
Very cool thank you gentleman
Thank you Mr speaker on the
those would required in all
thanks for the the capital were
handed out today and if you
mom cater that moment just right
at twelve thousand feet in
elevation and it's some to see
from up there you can see
Albuquerque Santa Fe.
I
do another public announcement
certainly Sir okay Mister
speaker today is transportation
You know all about district I
mean come you all.
Lost it.
hundred and electric car out
there and displays rule you
forcing Water and see if they
have a bunch of goodies and
stuff in hand also if you would
be a able to go up to really
appreciated thank you Mr speaker
announcement Mr speaker to do is
national potato chip day.
I heard.
I was pushing for
Thanks to Representative Alcon
these dental tips happen every
year and as long we could do in
the lower here will keep under
really nice Mr thank you might
get an extra bag.
Is that all for three bags.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker will you give me to
that point that the record
reflect that elections are for
placing House memorial thirty
five final passage I don't has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment for
some wonderful fourth graders
from supper all in my district
come to my left a couple moments
ago and they were talking about
why the force important what can
it at that Mr speaker can you
introduce my guests that are in
the gallery certainly you I have
I see a lot of it teal T. shirts
up there and I want to ask all
of you to rise you all or
students from Mitchell
Thank you for working on this
important piece of legislation
with the gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker and there's
importance of force for state
and with that with the chief
clerk please read the memorial.
Certainly diluted to read.
House memorial thirty five
ecological cultural and economic
benefits and make New Mexico
land of enchantment and whereas
that New Mexico's forests cover
almost one third of the state
provide essential ecological
services such as providing a
habitat for wildlife oxygen
clean water the uptake of carbon
dioxide and cooling temperatures
disappear many species important
to have a home.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico the
importance of for us to the
involved in protecting force
commended for those agencies
efforts and encourage them to
continue to work with private
landowners tribal entities and
social media student work and
other out of the box ideas to
raise awareness about forests
and to continue to provide
funding for student experiences
stewards of the land and leaving
no trace will out in the forests
by removing trash and fully
extinguishing campfires and
would further resolved the
copies of this memorial
minerals and natural resources
department the State Land Office
the department of game and fish
The debate on the memorial to
generating for Catherine
settlement is yes of course
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker all the
delay the yield yes Mr speaker I
to come and visit my ranch ranch
in Magdalene of where our
wildlife and our cattle coincide
with each other for the humans
on our ranch keep up sixty miles
wanted to rise in support of
your memorial and making sure
that the the kids know all
aspects of being good stewards
we all know well to our go to
well how are force or important
in the devastation we suffered
in the past year with the amount
All over but particularly the
students that brought this
forward with the sponsor and two
coats a doctor skit Dr Seuss the
Lorax unless someone like you
and one percent Duncan thank you
Mr speaker
I rise in support of this cause
is sponsor of Smokey bear whose
funds are going to go for
Smokey the bear Smokey Baer okay
just making sure yes Sir.
The gentleman from coal thanks
that that I work as a watershed
restoration
Madam I my project is restored
thirty three thousand acres of
right parian area we've done
acres of mastication of standing
that's all cedar so we've done a
lot of work in the for us to to
clean that up I think it works
not burning down our our
a rancher is protecting the
resources that this support us
in the job of being a watershed
manager is protecting the
resources that support our state
forests be careful in the way we
manage our resources so that we
can leave such a good future for
our children thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen seen
to know how we found the facts
on one third of the state is
covered in forest which is
designated but I believe the
gentleman from Colfax curry and
all those counties really summer
as well this is something we can
members present voted in the
affirmative is emotion show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
no objection it is so ordered.
The vote is one of seventy in
the affirmative during the
negative house memorial thirty
five has duly passed this house.
and Baca.
Excuse me sorry I'm on third
reading apologies stealing from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
today as we have our premier
athletes from the house of
representatives are brave men
and women who will lead us to
scenes providing any support for
the.
Most likely twisted ankle.
taken care of us up on the
rostrum today so of my
particular limit is one of our
athletic trainers from New
Mexico please stand Sir.
The other parameters to such a
great job for our state for
student athletes they provide
the care we provide
You know as far as first
as a father as a coach and as a
community member I want to
celebrate and thank you all the
athletic trainers across the
state for all the to do thank
you Mr speaker thank you John.
And I hope everybody proudly
wears it because it was created
by Brandon vote K. K. O. B. and
is supported by New Mexico
the blue wilderness that was
carried out by the United States
for service.
And I do appreciate this whole
chamber taking the lead in that
on the objection of a Mr
media and the American people
there were a hundred fifty head
of cal's destroying the healer
right parian areas and tree
terrorizing hikers.
thermal imagery and visually
assess the target area over a
three day operation nineteen
told the judge that leaving the
carcasses to rot on the
wilderness for would cause no
significant environmental impact
immediate action had to be taken
the Forest Service also told the
judge they were given absolute
power by Congress under the
organic Act of nineteen eighty
and gentleman of stray cattle
fall under the jurisdiction of
the New Mexico livestock board.
And especially our livestock
kids.
survived a multiplied for
several decades if disease was
present.
Another claim the Forest Service
made.
statute it claims there is
states the livestock concluded
includes.
All domestic or domesticated
includes horses **** mules
cattle sheep goats bison swine
poultry ostriches the committee
ready is camel it's and farm
Tag it on social media.
And let's stop the over reach
but the US Forest Service Mr
speaker thank you very much
thank you gentle lady the
not need to be that contagious.
Up on the Canadian river we had
not nineteen head but seventy
eight the head of wild cattle.
A group of cowboys wrote down
there our back together those
cattle took them to the sale
sold them just shared the money
appropriately.
the house of representatives Mr
speaker thank you.
The gentleman gentleman from
catching grant is the legal
fortunate that we haven't been
able to get everybody to work
together a supporter livestock
boarded our cattle growers and
their hard work and I know
there's a lot of we've we've
I've made several efforts and
Representative Chatfield and
knows how to do that and I know
that we could do that and he
laughed and resolve this issue
issue work everyone's happy
thank you Mr speaker and
the jerseys on their chairs
these are different this year.
These jerseys Representative or
R. or are recognizing the
women's basketball team this
year.
We wanted to since we had the
women central the international
one is a yesterday and we wanted
to make sure that we recognized
jerseys we won't see these again
and I want to encourage everyone
to wear their jerseys tonight
when the plane about four games
thank you for supporting the
basketball team are the how are
thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to follow on with our
caucus chair to celebrate
women's history month hi and so
it's so cool to see road runners
facts when they did that they
lost twenty two straight games
to the Lobo's before then they
have won sixteen straight
against them so maybe it's time
for a little bit of a change
history as a as a state and this
is part of that so just standing
in honor of that thank you Mr
speaker thank you it'd like to
appoint a committee comprised of
ago and we do only have those
trophies because we earn those
trophies Mr speaker we are the
reigning champions for the past
several years so we gotta keep
those trophies in the house Mr
Chavis.
Mr speaker we do have to protect
this house yeah that's right.
service where they please to the
Senate.
Go the long way.
The sergeant at arms to escort
Before we before we go to the
next of a business we do have
our had students from was on a
Did you leave.
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order of business committee
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too much been referred house
chair Mr speaker move adoption
word optional federal government
for the house labor veterans
military affairs committee subs
to profit to forty five of those
consideration reports and with
recommendation to do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption optional
Federal commuter portent house
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety one has had it
under consideration point it was
recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption with adoption of a
adopted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works a couple of Bruins
Committee too was been referred
house bill three twenty has had
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of it will be
reporting houses but on house
bill three twenty as if there
was eight of us in line.
under consideration point same
as recommendation that it to
pass an answer for to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Hochman Vigil chair Mr
Posing a test of a committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works capital improvements
committee to miss been referred
Senate bill three thirty two as
amended has had it under
consideration point it was
as amended all those in favor
say of of a state line.
Those may yes Committee reported
insert for the taxation of a
committee respectfully submitted
Dayan Hochman Vigil chair move
adoption reduction of federal
committee for the Senate bill
three ninety six as amended all
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I will go to that
order been waiting third.
Business third meeting of
probably longer morning session
so that we can accommodate the
basketball game this evening
agility from the weather the way
Sunday was something does
receive it it are you ready and
substitution the generated
explained will
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you body and basically this bill
three counties will be impacted
and there are other Rio Arriba
Otero and McKinley County
section two of provides the
next census in twenty thirty.
And then section three sets up a
process and the procedures for
drawing new districts
and election procedures of
beginning in twenty twenty five
so I would just like to kind of
instance of over sixty eight
thousand it's the third largest
land size County with six
thousand square miles
of according to the senses of
forty one thousand and their
land base is five thousand eight
hundred square miles and there
the twenty twenty one budget was
square miles of five thousand
four hundred square miles and a
population of seventy six
thousand so these are the three
representation of three county
commissioners and without Mr
hello I also want to say that on
your desk I handed out a map
terms would take place over the
next.
during the election clips
with that Mr speaker I will
stand for questions there is
debate the gentle lady from
McKinley said Juan
Representative Johnson.
this bill forward.
Mr speaker.
I brought this bill forward
because in my district there a
group of a huge group of people
could do it but certain counties
who had.
Who had less than the
representation they want brought
it forward to me and I told him
census was forty thousand it was
really that there was a huge
undercounted don't know if
you're aware of that but in the
last census there's a huge
undercount for a myriad of
commissioners are really the
first level of government and so
there was an entire group within
my County that wanted to move to
the county but they are strong
villages they have been in
existence for hundreds of years
and and they thought they needed
more representation on the
every single one of these
counties but people came forward
voices came forward and said we
are not Representative our voice
is not heard we are not
Representative we feel like we
Thank you madam gentlelady so
this bill will affect a
commissioner's ability to engage
and represent their constituents
more.
was brought to my attention and
and by members of this body and
members of the Senate that they
thought they needed more
representation so we're trying
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Rio Arriba and other
counties yield.
I certainly yield to the kind
mind was open meetings act for
me
the NM estate from an inmate in
nineteen seventy eight sections
ten fifteen one to ten fifteen
conducted in full public view
that the actions of the public
bodies be taken openly and that
the deliberations of public
Mr speaker and the kind lady
yeah there are it it's kind of a
problem in in small rural
in violation it is a real
problems I I've had county
commissioners from Rio previous
state you know I really wanted
sometimes to just have an
informal conversation about
what do you think about that our
house that can affect your
district here's what it's going
to do in mind but I don't know
what's going to do for years and
so we have those kinds of
the three county commission you
really can't do that and and
that's a problem I think for
good government so and and I can
see where smaller counties where
a massive square mileage massive
land base you know it's it's
just hard to.
a quorum for three member
commission versus a five member
commission so for a three member
a county commission inform is to
government in the whole county
for a five member board V. three
that's how it works that's a
quarter thank you thank you Mr
thank you gentle lady I just.
ones where I've been at events
where you know when
commissioners there and then the
the they have to you know we
have to inform the other that
that you know who's who's gonna
it's extra work to you know and
you Mr speaker additionally
there's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative of the cruise.
Thank you Mr speaker does
commissioners I certainly am one
of those
and I was part of the five
member.
Board and I appreciated that
very much I Mr speaker gentle
lady but do you suspect do you
think of that there will be
increase of ideas and possible
solutions for any given County.
and and I'm really am of the
belief that in a democracy you
know the more of the more minds
are better you know it it's it
two.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
about debate would debate be
increased to having five versus
three.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
more time it gives people more
time to consider the other
perspective and to think
carefully about it and and
hopefully the idea of debate is
Thank you Mr speaker.
General.
I I firmly believe in the idea
of increased representation.
right before and an after having
doing doing that Mr speaker I
felt that I wanted to speak and
can you expand a little bit on
that aspect of this particular
Again these County sizes in
these landmasses that we're
talking about a huge there are
I'm there are twenty two
counties that are over the
have voted themselves to have
five commissioners recognizing
that they need more input from
different parts of the county so
you know when I kind of looked
it was taking those things into
consideration that I brought
this forward so with this with
the size of the population like
census and when that when the
state put more money in for the
count we knew that you know.
in the last census given you
know the day we set that I was
chair of the county census drive
in in my in Rio Arriba county
and here's what happened the day
county and then there are a lot
of changes at the national level
that contributed to that so so I
think that the counties that I'm
talking about are pretty much I
Mr speaker gentle lady one of
the things that over the many
years that I've heard and I've
never heard otherwise is that
that people want more
Representative they want
representation they don't want
Thank you Mr speaker with gentle
lady from the chairman of the
Santa in Santa Fe and tells you.
I was coming into the session
trying to figure so.
Some remedy to a long lasting
both sides a it's a very tie
District of a fifty fifty so I I
sense and always have my years
to the grindstone of the river
the community from both sides
and the schools because it's a
priority that I want us to have
and it is for us to County Board
travel sixty six miles of this
review board to come to a
meeting once a month the once a
month to comes it comes the
other side of the county because
It's one person listening to a
small group and as a person that
has yet to understand all the
needs that being supported to
the because of what I just
that I did due diligence and
reach out and share the thoughts
the needs of the people of the
committee of chaparral when you
look at the the the base of
webpage whatever county they
have had for thought and
for over ninety six percent as
part of.
That being said it's a bigger
body of people that I speak
fluently more commonly Spanish.
little invites to the county
commission meetings to account
for Mr round tables to even
budgets last year I put in for a
is that we don't want we can't
afford to put somebody there I
put money from junior bill to
support and fund this facility
for six months out of the year.
It was voted down three zero.
And since I cannot hallways
since the minutes of the issue
of trying to find common ground.
now as of a few weeks ago my
county commissioners said it
runs at fifteen and a half
thousand and growing every year.
so that being said hoping a
little bit on the technical us
of aspects.
How is each county to develop
and that's up to a local
control.
What is a process to me during
the commissioners of the
districts.
know that I I neglected Mr
speaker to introduce my expert
witness Senate's Lynsey Bachman
she's the director of
Legislative Affairs legislative
secretary of state's office they
have kind of the in this
legislation that they will have
almost a year to look at these
districts to draw them and then
So if I'm understanding
correctly the two incumbents
have will do will be to income
so we'll have to run against one
another.
I'm no no Mr speaker and not
themselves into you know a
current district there might
there could possibly be
potential if if you had two
people on the county line I you
know sometimes that happens on
run into the in that district
and then they'll they'll job the
two new districts and other
people will then run for that
office under under this law if
a is a little is a little tough
if so under under statute right
now if you are if you run in an
even number if you're an even
elections that's how the state
statute is so under this under
this a plan he will probably
have it depends how they number
in that cycle that said in
statute.
Thank you and I appreciate the
clarity because I think it's a
there's been some dialogue back
and forth the number of I stand
the elections board Maggie to
also so we've got this language
and came to the realization that
the substitute had to be
recreated to fit this to
coincide nothing is being
statute already so we re wrote
two to coincide to fit the
bodies to fit the state and the
for the future or whatever else
you might want to come
afterwards to the other places
body of a County grows a such of
kids who have a voice I think
the voice will definitely help
my community of chaparral dental
you it's it is what it is.
The responsibility of the county
Reason that they did rate of the
the with a splash prime they
have no parks and rec department
so it makes it impossible to
bring something like the so
whether this issue gets resolved
the Mescalero Apaches what's the
benefit of this so we're talking
to spectrum that would really
benefit of having a
representation and a voice and I
think you again representative
discussion opening and hardly
and see it for what it is it's a
great opportunity to give equity
to the population thank you.
gentle lady from McKinley thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady hi I have a little
different take on this bill and
wanted to ask some questions Mr
speaker gentle lady
particularly because it deals
specifically with my County
to of that county commissioners
agreed with that that really who
came to me where the where the
people in the county and we have
and again it's not you know you
this for a number of years and I
couldn't get it to changed at
the county commission level.
Mr speaker did okay Otero County
I agree with this bill.
support this including our
representative Mr Madrid.
Mr speaker gentle lady did
McKinley County agree with this
bill Mr speaker and kind lady
voices in the county
coming to me and asking me to do
this bill and that is why I
brought it forward.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
speaker gentle lady who actually
came to you from McKinley County
that asked you to carry this
bill.
Mr speaker I had to
representatives from that area
now and then I also had
senator Munoz who felt that this
would be a good legislation for
so my question to you is is
because the New Mexico
constitution allows for counties
to do this the counties have the
it's allowed under the New
Mexico constitution for a county
to create five five members Mr
speaker and kind lady it is
voices in the county that had
asked to a counties to consider
it they didn't and so they came
to the legislature and as has
been said in this body before
that come forward who aren't
represented and I think that's
our job as a legislature.
Mr speaker gentle lady my
question is what's the process.
Mr speaker and kind lady we are
we think it's by ordinance in
the constitution I have my
expert witness confirming that
right now.
Mr speaker gentle lady what
hello what is the process for
bringing an ordinance forward.
that is a
a county government process and
they would bring an ordinance
forwarded the building a
recommendation to their county
commission as I understand it
county as an example brought
forth on ordinance for
consideration would that be
considered one way.
putting on on the agenda and
then they would have a than they
would have a conversation about
it.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
have lots of population so what
with the population be per
district in McKinley county if
it went to five members.
number fifteen thousand that
would justify commissioner.
Mr speaker and kind lady
actually larger counties even
population that would be
Representative would be fifteen
thousand people of that you know
probably I don't know probably
half for our adults I I don't
would be in that break down.
So Mister speaker kind lady
what's population of Bernalillo
county.
Six
hundred and seventy five yeah I
have it here I for got.
Six hundred and seventy five
thousand.
lady I need I'm not making the
correlation here that you would
not be bringing forth a bill
that would also include
increasing the number of
commissioners for Bernalillo
Mr speaker kind lady I did that
I I brought this bill forward
again because I had voices of
entire state here we're just
addressing three counties and I
get that the numbers are very
different at I'm not doing it
equalization formula for the
homeless state this is just for
at the proportional number of
Bernalillo county per
commissioner.
At over one hundred thousand and
then the purported proportional
when we talk about local control
and drawing maps is our veto
power by the secretary of state
on those maps.
I as the current statutes stands
district maps the new ones and
they'll report them to the
secretary of the state under
current law if the secretary of
state has problems she will send
it back to the county commission
and then report back and that's
kind of how the process works
now.
a second notice and say you're
not in compliance and then it
will go back to the secretary of
state and then the secretary of
state will have the final say on
the boundaries usually these
how do we you know can we get
some help and that's pretty much
how it works Mr speaker gentle
lady was this bill brought forth
just want to again say that
we've talked.
From day one about local
control.
There's a process inside the
constitution for counties to
to this but I assume that
there's populations or groups
that would like to see this is
is the reason it's brought forth
but I do think it becomes a
slippery slope when we have
being because
we need to have more
representation when
proportionally
counties like Bernalillo low
this completely out of the water
gentle lady you'll bring a bill
like that force thank you Mr
speaker thank you is generated
from Los Alamos Santa and Santa
Mr speaker I kindly on to my my
neighbor from Los Alamos and
those other counties thank you
Mr speaker gentle lady could you
describe a little bit for the
body and for the speaker what to
because I know that you were a
county commissioner for years in
Los Alamos County and I know
that we have several county
commission former county
commissioners and I think a few
current county commissioners in
speaker gentle lady so first I
want to say being a legislator
is completely different from
being of what we call in my
community a county councillor we
Mr speaker and gentle lady but.
You are on the ground when you
are a county commissioner and
your constituents know you and
they talk to you on a daily
issues that that we had to deal
with Mr speaker and gentle lady
you know range from ensuring our
ball fields were kept up that
brings but all of the negatives
it brings traffic road really
big demands on our
infrastructure gentle lady Mr
negatively affect us or perhaps
advance legislation Mr speaker
and gentle lady that might have
positive impacts to us and also
the rest of the communities in
ensuring we have recreational
programs child care helpful
community health programs Mr
speaker a huge array of things
is are those kinds of things
free only count talking with
commissioners dealing with the
many trials and tribulations of
rural New Mexicans just dealing
it's very hard to be a
committee.
Should R. and to address these
issues on a regular basis so I
know how big the job is Mr
means we represent about twenty
eight hundred people fund and
what that means is we have the
ability to pay a lot of
council when I was on the
council I was I didn't have a
family so it would be our
children I should say and at
that point in time it was very
Yeah I don't expect necessarily
that seven is necessarily but I
can see Mr speaker gentle lady
the advantage to having more
demographics Mr speaker gentle
lady stand three it's it's very
three's a very small number and
it's very hard
so having said that what do you
think is
What is important to the work
for your county commission
members what do you see as your
issues Mr speaker gentle lady.
statewide elections it's a huge
job so they they assess income
of the SS taxes property taxes
they they have to make and make
government to work with the
surrounding.
Counties to work within the
county to see how they can how
they can really kind of in
rich the lights of the citizenry
in there county that's an
wastewater systems it just
depends where you are how much
work is been done that the
counties take care of that
they do planning and development
they operate numerous public
housing and housing development
projects and sometimes they do
the planning for that they bring
in the money they get the the
can find affordable housing for
citizens and are committed in
our counties
they have the run of the county
sheriff's department they run
I mean so these counties have
huge huge duties to their
citizenry and and that's I think
why we need more voices on these
commissioners has grown just as
our responsibilities have grown
Mr speaker gentle lady and I
think your reasoning as well
taken and I'm glad to be
supporting your bill Mr speaker
Thank you Mr speaker the kind
gentle lady from Santa Fe Rio
Arriba Sandoval and yes please
yield yes Mr speaker I yield to
the kind gentleman from Montana
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so.
commissioner and Bernalillo
which does have five
commissioners currently
represents my getting that
number right Mr speaker gentle
state and talk about three
counties.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so.
These three counties than how
did you arrive at the thirty
five thousand number was it to
out there if they didn't I
apologize but it's the kind of
when you ask you do this on that
second page that handed out so
you know I was trying to make it
counties you know twenty two
counties above above that number
have commissions of of five and
lady so.
There's the Luna County that I
see on the sea and it has three
commissioners Mr speaker gentle
lady has twenty five thousand
it's it's still pretty small and
we just pick I pick the number
thirty five to.
Include forty one according to
the last census.
was under counted as well as the
Tero was awesome McKinley under
candid you believe Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and kind
gentleman I can tell you
everybody was undercounted in
the census a couple sessions
ago.
And what we know is native
American communities are highly
undercounted Hispanic
communities are highly
are important because they
affect our our federal counts
which brings money into our
counties and into our state so
of course we wanted to have the
best count possible.
Torrance County or cedar county
could fall in that thirty five
thousand population range if
they were properly counted
Mister speaker.
latest census so when you're
looking at getting numbers for
the state you always have to
rely on the last census and and
we just have to do that you can
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady and I'm glad we're on the
topic of funding because Mr
speaker gentle lady the amount
of funding that it's County yes
it is important to keep that
legislation as I don't see an
appropriation to the counties to
help them implement these
changes Mr speaker Sir and
commissions but Mr speaker and
gentle lady at least in my
County.
Just the costs to implement the
over a hundred and ten thousand
dollars per commissioner Mr
speaker and Mr speaker I'm I'm
of the belief that the
legislature should not be giving
that the the expenditure budget
for Otero County well in twenty
twenty one was a hundred and
forty one million you also had a
very healthy balance and a very
Well I would respectfully tell
you during the government
committee where this was held Mr
speaker gentle lady.
We didn't have one voice other
than one elected
representatives.
quite the opposite Mr speaker so
if we're saying at the
legislative level the people of
the terror county want I
commissioners Mr speaker gentle
lady we certainly didn't hear
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
I'm really struggling here
because I don't I don't remember
but I I know we had several
voices that were in favor of
the county if they wanted to
they with whatever money funds
they have on their balance could
do this themselves Mr speaker
but also Mr speaker gentle lady
to get that properly funded Mr
speaker we also have to make
sure our roads are in compliance
Mr speaker we need to have our
county assessors office or
county treasurer's office or
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars extra and Mr speaker
gentle lady I'm just wondering
why the appropriation is not in
this bill if the state is
Mr speaker and kind gentleman as
a member of this body I
continually support for funds
for all those services by
continuing the support more
this bill is it was really a
more of a matter of democracy
rather than budget and I don't
think the people in Ukraine are
worried about how they're going
to get the chairs around the
table.
congressional Hispanic caucus
kind gentleman and so my whole
life has been devoted to civil
rights and equity
back to the people of our state
however Mister speaker gentle
lady I see these numbers are not
adding up for me Mr speaker
gentle lady.
gentle lady and therefore Mr
speaker gentle lady I would say
this does not equate democracy
Mr speaker why why didn't we add
And gentleman it's not included
in the legislation Mr speaker
gentle lady then why is it not
if we care about democracy which
we claim we do why did we not
three counties included in it
we are all free to run a bill to
include any other county.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
constitutionality of this bill
Mr speaker gentle lady have we
read in the constitution article
four section twenty four Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman with
them because one of our.
Mr speaker and reasons section
one fourteen number six the
gentleman has rhetorical
questions he should just supply
the information although still
under the rules is not
necessarily
Representative one Mr speaker is
a practice for use in the body
all the time if if the Germans
being argumentative that's one
thing but to say that debate is
limited to only questions that
we don't know the answer to I
think is an incorrect reading.
information and Mr speaker
gentle lady this pertains to the
state constitution is the state
constitution not something we're
privy to talking about and
debate Mr speaker gentleman it
then I will take you to our
state constitution and I want to
ask a question about it Mr
speaker but I will tell you what
the constitution says so an
Mr speaker is relating to county
precinct or district affairs Mr
speaker gentle lady this bill
relates to county fairs and
seven.
I'm sorry article ten section
seven Mr speaker it says right
here the board of county
commissioners by unanimous vote
then adopt an ordinance to
is blatantly unconstitutional
because article ten section
seven says that the county
commission has the authority to
do it and I'll take you to the
for us to get there Mr speaker
and kind gentleman I can answer
that question we looked at that
very carefully in the drafting
of this legislation but what you
in the room together to say how
are we going to how are you
going to do this in a meaningful
way that is still.
In keeping with our constitution
and the fact that we're
this one because I believe if we
were supposed to be doing this
to increase the number of
counties it does very clearly
state that the county is the one
that has to vote to add a five
ordinance to increase the size
of the boards of county
commissioners to five members so
Mister speaker gentle lady I
don't see that as something that
doesn't violate the constitution
Mr speaker and I thank the kind
gentleman it's I just as I said
we went over this with the as
gentle lady well I certainly
hope I don't see you in court
over this Mr speaker gentle lady
and gentleman gentleman we're
we're not going to make I I know
I can make threats and I'm
talking about representation for
these counties currently doing
feel like these.
People who are representing
these three counties that would
be targeted.
Mr speaker you just me yes Mr
speaker generally I'm sorry I
thought we're supposed to turn
to the the speaker to we feel
like these folks are being under
represented right now Mr
speaker.
like Mr speaker gentle lady
please Senator County we try to
work hard we try to get folks to
our commission meetings and we
try to.
Voices heard Mr speaker gentle
lady and I certainly know their
gentle lady there's a gentleman
from Chavis entertainer
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentlelady yields Mr speaker I a
I have been interested and have
talked to.
One of the representatives in
Otero county on your side of the
aisle about this bill so it's
gentle lady hi I think it is
important that the body
understands that.
Unanimously one hundred percent.
Of the sitting county
And gentle lady there are
provisions within our
constitution for the people of
any county including Otero
This body as someone said
earlier
has been a strong supporter this
Legisla- this legislative
session.
and I've also heard in this body
the sometimes local control is
good and sometimes it's not.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
There's a lady down on the for a
that has to many times and says
she represents the largest
district in the land are you
you might have an argument on
your hand if you said she didn't
do a very good job of
representing our district would
you say would you agree with
that.
Mr speaker kind gentleman yes.
Is preeminent.
I think the constitution speaks
Mr speaker and kind gentleman I
think I think there have been
different readings of the
constitution here and now we
have a lady to that environment
debate.
First their first sentence says
the board of county
commissioners by a unanimous
vote my adopted an ordinance to
increase the size of the boards
of county commissioners to five
members period.
Within the constitution and have
been used by several counties
historically.
would you repeat that question
I'm sorry I didn't hear.
This provision Mr speaker and
gentle lady that we just read
out of the constitution has been
There are provisions within our
constitution four counties and
the people of those counties.
Mr speaker kind gentleman yes
that is correct so Mister
speaker.
The constitution speaks clearly
The provisions for the people of
the county to recall their
commissioners if they feel like
they're commissioners are not
representing them and on top of
that correct.
Mr speaker kind gentleman yes.
So Mister speaker and delays the
point of my.
Of my County Otero County.
Are not in favor it's one
hundred percent unanimous
objection to this piece of
For the size.
Is a.
as the as the gentle lady down
from has the largest one in the
landline told.
I've been told that several
times as you have.
Heavily populated but
geographically much much
smaller.
So I think when we have elected
the people elected by the body
to represent them.
forward we have a problem.
So gentlelady I have.
An amendment for your bill.
The house floor amendment one to
kindly read the two to six
number.
Two to six number is point two
to six OO nine six point one
thank you gentlemen I believe
the amendment has been passed
Gentlelady all out paraphrase my
amendment for for a speed I can
go by line by line on on the six
points but what it would do
of the commission today on in
any of these counties that
should this bill pass it does
unfortunately pass that those
sitting commissioners would be
friendly amendment it is a
fairly amendment.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman I
would say that the process in
itself protects kept us sitting
commissioners right now because
they will draw the boundaries
they're in charge of drawing
those lines right now kind
gentleman.
To do it is is unfriendly or
friendly
Mr speaker I would say this is
Cajun lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment the motion table the
amendment.
But those members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Rubio votes yes
representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
Who is a cool moto forty in the
affirmative twenty six in the
federal Indian lady status at a
in a total apologies reserves
thousand back to you thank you
Mr speaker the gentle lady.
local control is important.
Yes
I think it's imperative
I have a question Mr speaker
gentle lady does a commission
need unanimous vote or majority
law or propose law in the in the
current law it it it has to be
at if they if they vote to
expand their commission from
three to five it has to be a
commissioners would have to
to the redistricting they decide
where the district boundaries
are and they decide with the
now.
And Mr speaker gentle lady is
that a unanimous vote for a
majority vote.
So gentle lady there's another
problem.
And I think it's a problem that
the body ought to consider.
adamantly and vigorously stand
up and oppose of my piece of
legislation so I know you
understand what I stand here
today.
Because the people of Ontario
of is a parent but are you
wouldn't be standing here but
there is a process for those
people to address that and
several times we have tried as a
issues like this to the people
at local level I think we're if
we pass this we're making a huge
mistake.
And it will not be in the best
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative provide Goliath.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady.
Gentlelady isn't it true that
you and I have similar
backgrounds fighting the fight
of civil rights.
Mr speaker kind lady that is
From the time that we began the
battle probably way before us
the basic premise is that
representation matters when it
of a census it is to redistrict
is that not correct on gentle
lady Mr speaker kind lady yes
representation matters is so
center and is at the core of the
fight for civil rights for
representation and for the ride
represented.
By individuals.
That Representative.
Mr speaker their interests
round of representation is that
not correct Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker kind lady yes.
the way thank you very much for
this so I'm rising today.
Not just as a state
representative not just as
having been fighting the battle
event I rise today also as the
Co chair.
Of the Senate caucus.
Of the Democratic Party of New
Mexico.
Our population are CENIC
population in those counties.
Specifically Otero County.
One of the main points and then
wanting to support this piece of
legislation.
Is because of what you've been
saying over and over and over
remained true to the populations
that do not feel that they are
currently being Representative.
In a large reason is because.
authority.
And use those centers don't
represent.
The populations.
That they're supposed to be
and county seat County
commission right now that
doesn't represent their
interests and fight for
representation Mr speaker and
gentle lady other than.
representatives have the
obligation the responsibility to
respond to those populations
that currently.
chair here is it our regional
coordinators right here it these
are all representatives of the
Hispanic caucus around the
state.
And every single one of the
that they do not have.
The power or the authority Mr
speaker to be able to.
Ask for anything.
Mr speaker and kind lady yes and
I I would like to add that any
time.
Any time people without power
they are not easy to bring
forward and they are not easy to
solve but I think it's incumbent
on all of us to hear voices that
it's clear that they're two
sides of the aisle for a reason
there's clear it's clear that
when we have two sides of the
aisle we have fundamental
The people in there county.
And then the three counties that
were mentioned today.
Do not support this.
Mr speaker and kind lady yes
that is correct thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
And so therefore we're hearing
from.
And those seats a power in those
counties have been based on long
time family traditions of
represented Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
But the people that do not.
Control the money.
They do not control the power.
In those seats of government
currently I am particularly.
Concerned about Otero County.
These in.
Mr speaker and gentle lady seats
of power.
That.
The working population.
Yes thank you.
It is.
populations are indigenous
populations in the state
actually are the landowners.
The traditional landowners and
hold office in those counties
they don't represent those
interests so Mr speaker and and
gentle lady on page
In a democracy.
Given the right.
we have a census and decennial
count because the basic
foundational promise of a
democracy is.
Right now.
In Mr speaker and gentle lady in
Otero County for example we have
gave us with three percent
representation.
That three person representation
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
To be able to elect.
Representatives that reflect the
diverse population of that
particular County.
And there's a reason for that
and that's why Mr speaker and
gentle lady we you're correct we
have an obligation to defend the
bill is that correct Mr speaker
kind lady yes that is the
purpose of this bill thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
Is one voice one vote.
And if that's not protected.
By.
Just our constitution but by all
responsibility to be the voice
of those that are claiming to be
and that rightfully are claiming
to be under represented or not
represented in their particular
representative as as
representative of willing of
that is mentioned that we've we
hearing is.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
wondering why we hear it.
Representative my these
Representative few gentle lady
Lara Representative Roybal
Caballero and I can go on and on
We represent those populations
of color and because Mr speaker
Representative and gentle lady
we represent those populations
voice to be their voice today in
this piece of legislation and
it's so very important because
these counties and I've worked
The the powers of government
work in McKinley as I do all of
that as I do we are.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
I also in time along with
representative Garcia and others
C. representation.
Trying to see just having to be
able to to address the bodies in
And I would just Mr speaker and
gentle lady the inability of
lines and lines and lines of
To no avail so Mister speaker
and gentle lady on behalf of.
The that is Senate caucus
on and that's the caucus that I
understand we can understand the
plight because we've been
fighting that fight.
We've been organizes in our
community to to organize our
communities so that we can have
I have to I have the
responsibility to represent the
unspent I called Sliq that by
Overwhelmingly are.
Seventy percent or more of the
state.
And I say that to say Mr speaker
and gentle lady that you
AS you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I've worked every census
since nineteen seventy gentle
lady.
On the point of the census and
the data that you used and the
population counts one last
question when you were doing.
Preparation for this and the
significance undercount of this
last census and I think it was I
think it was attributed to to a
large extent because of the
pandemic but there also was an
did it affect the data that was
given to you.
Mr speaker kind lady I know I I
looked at the numbers knowing of
mean that's that's kind of
common knowledge really I think
in the state and counties and so
that is so I knew that there
gentle lady that when we move
towards the next
the census and redistricting
something that can be addressed
at that time the right now Mr
speaker and gentle lady we're
focused on only those three
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady once again I
strongly support this piece of
legislation there's a gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Duncan.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm coming
at this from an old county
commissioners standpoint could
you tell me who represents our
whose governing body within each
county.
Mr speaker No I'm I'm just
wondering if you could tell me
who the governing body was
within each county within the
state.
Mr speaker kind generous
Mr speaker kind lady could it be
the town where are the county
clerk.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
there I elected offices and
Because of the in the county
treasurer and the probate judge
thank you cover the monitor
speaker kind gentleman thank you
I'm kind gentleman and thank you
Mr speaker and kind gentleman.
They're like to to do a job they
don't have a vote on the county
commission thank you so Mister
gentleman yes thank you Mr
speaker
This sounds a little bit like
the tail wagging the dog and I'm
gonna give you an example and it
may not be the right example Mr
Senate chambers and asked them
to change laws over here that
impacted you.
Are we getting close to what
this sounds like.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
think so.
Thank you Mr speaker the speaker
with the kind lady from Rio
Arriba Sandoval and Santa Fe and
Taos for you.
an important way for citizens to
have their voices heard.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I
certainly think the referendum
is a process for people who
take a referendum to a
a commissioner to a public body
and let people know how the
voters really fulfill Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you very much
more difficult than some other
states for Mr speaker gentle
lady pointed out I think we've
heard conversation earlier this
morning that the referendum
predict that folks from a county
might choose to have more
representation that is choose to
have the five commissioners Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
speaker gentle lady when you say
that if the citizenry voted say
sixty five percent maybe even
seventy plus percent in support
of something do you think Mr
supports something Mr speaker
down with Mr speaker kind
gentleman I certainly do and if
I were a county commissioner and
I agree and Mr speaker gentle
lady I not been a county
commissioner I I have had the
privilege to serve on the the
Los crucis city council and I
would agree Mr speaker gentle
lady to get over sixty if you're
over seventy percent of the
there were examples in our state
recently in fact Mr speaker
gentle lady where a population
did have a referendum they had a
choice place before them would
affirmatively to support that
position.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman I
would I would say that would be
amazing to have that kind of a
turn out and supported that of
the county commission after
being delivered those results
chose in fact not to follow the
citizens res research wishes and
Mr speaker gentle lady under the
surprised if the if the county
commission would listen to a
referendum like that Mr speaker
gentle lady I I share that in Mr
speaker gentle lady that is why
that would be included in your
legislation in fact the
referendum was placed on the
ballot Mr speaker gentle lady
and in fact Mr speaker gentle
lady seventy four percent of the
commissioners at that time chose
not to they said that for for
reasons that were important to
them that I'm not speculating on
the speaker gentle lady they
said no and so Mister speaker
want more representation and
they are denied that
representation than Mr speaker
gentle lady I think that makes a
very clear case for us to take
up the bill as you bring in
citizens to the opposite
on that county commission level
and so thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady for your
answers to my questions is the
Arriba Sandoval Santa Fe and
Taos County please you.
Mr speaker I yes I agree I yield
We go backwards because I just
talked to my county
commissioners I know we're not
in this would Torrance County
but I do have some questions.
So can you.
So we're doing a ratio of thirty
only have five because when I
divide six hundred seven four
thousand comes in nineteen on
county commissioners so why why
we not applying that to these
I in this logic Mr speaker
gentle lady why.
Finally it was a kind of we're
I just because really you
counties my county we do have a
city council as well
and also I'm gonna just remind
the body that we we are talking
response brief gentle lady and
then we can move on to the next
line of questions thank you Mr
speaker I was just trying to
figure of those a logic and then
I do understand we have city
council suffragists with looking
Do you know why will I get I
want to ask why Los Alamos has
more they have seven do you know
why that is by any chance Mr
speaker and only.
that I have with this just going
back to the funding because this
was a a huge concern for my
County looking into the future.
It's not a terribly prosperous
Their biggest concern is and
this is again in the future.
How would that affect them if if
they're struggling to make ends
they just don't have the money
to pay thirty two thousand
person sixty four thousand
they're very concerned about
that so could you explain how
Sign the commissioners if that
would be in the census of twenty
after the census of twenty
thirty go into effect in twenty
prepare for this.
Well Mister speaker gentle lady
from having to help them so much
in the capital outlay and
understand how short funded they
are in a lot of stuff my biggest
concern and their concern when I
Dents areas so.
Michigan gentlelady they they
definitely have the issue with
this because my concern is it
Torrance County to suffer the
brunt of that when they don't
have the money for this mandate
and I still believe the should
The most densely populated area
would be Moriarty which would
give them more of a voice
because when they would split it
it would split and it still take
part of Moriarty to try to cut
RD rounds of more population
more well known that they lose
their voices to the gaming at so
there's too many variables into
no and I'm I can't support a
counties do and I could not do
this to them to where they'd be
struggling to not be able to
make ends meet so thank you Mr
speaker and a lady there is for
the debate the gentleman from
Travis Etienne the
Mr speaker and I kindly yield to
the gentleman from Chavis Eddy
and Lea.
Thank you Mr speaker
In New Mexico.
We.
The voters of each cabin.
They have elected county
commissioners the.
representation they receive.
Can I am not allowed to move in
different representation.
Mr speaker kind gentleman yes.
our constitutional duty as
representatives in this house to
override the will of others.
Elected officials things
Thank you Mr speaker will the
need for more three can use with
thirteen commissioners.
I am sensitive to.
A constitutional argument that
was or tribulation.
The gentleman from Otero.
For county commission moving
from three members to five
members could you describe.
How that process would work in
the constitution.
the.
This would this would create new
statute we have gone over and
over with this with the
secretary of state there are
the house the Senate and signed
by the governor.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
specifically under the
constitution.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
currently it says they may go
from three to five commissioners
by ordinance that's what's in
Mr speaker kind gentleman any it
would be effective the way they
would vote on any other
ordinances that it would be
passed by county the county
according to my constitutional
copy also quite right.
What has to happen is this.
Of all the commissioners to go
has to be a unanimous decision
right now.
Mr speaker could you describe
provision.
Three commissioners to five
commissioners so they're not
voting on it this is they're
just carrying out the statute.
to five commissioners Senator.
Mr speaker and gentleman with
this legislation yes those three
counties.
Mr speaker and gentle lady told
A choir have special powers to.
If you will circumvent the will
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Or do they stand for reelection.
Every four years Mr speaker a
Commissions it would take more
than one election cycle for the
It seems reasonable
voting rights are not.
later you're saying that people
are being denied the opportunity
to focus commissioners office is
that the representation Mr
gentleman is that minority
populations in this country and
in this state
are not afforded.
All the all the opportunities to
people how people get elected
and how they are allow the right
to vote can be can be very
restrictive and and and we have
voting rights laws and voting
rights practices over the years
as I said everybody at it then
heard the voices who have been
voting rights that contributes
to a low turn out and you know I
could go on and on about it but
that's not what this debate is
about it's really about do we
The opportunity to go from
sprint commissioners to five
commissioners is already
available to the citizens of
those counties.
responsible for monitoring and.
Repairing any of those problems
with the actor.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
reason we're doing this is that
the voters are being suppressed
in those three counties is that
the representation.
lady.
For every commissioners called
over the.
Election process to give
Is the reason for this piece of
legislation.
suppression in those three
counties that is preventing.
say it's a variety of factors
and I won't go into all of them
the fact that you have a
referendum in a county with
seventy four percent of the vote
is asking for new commissioners
Gentlelady elected body.
Elected body wars the seventy
I don't know Mr speaker and
gentle lady has submitted voted
out of office.
Is the proper procedure in this
case.
today.
Is the proper procedure and in
fact circumstance.
Established constitutional
processes thank you Mr speaker
general idea of yes I yield to
the kind gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you
Speaker and gentle lady.
putting in a statute.
That seems contrary at least to
the plain reading of the
constitution but is my.
That is not a constitutional is
that correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
written FX three counties
immediately but in the future
really it's about all counties
it's a about all counties moving
forward so it's more than just
three counties because we're
What.
The way that this is being
interpreted.
Is that.
effort on our part S. Census not
a single County Mr speaker and
gentle lady there are other
provisions in the constitution.
that state that we cannot target
Mr speaker generated it
impressed me you're adding in.
A order that is not in the
constitution.
county do you understand the
point I'm making Mr gently Mr
speaker and kind gentleman yes.
Speaker and gentle lady
be included in this.
All of the three that currently
fit the way the provision is
written.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I am
it one community in particular
where it's unanimous.
I am concerned about that and
I'm I'm concerned for the
unnecessary.
everybody's talked about the
letter of the law and I think to
some degree.
I I think you're you're saying
this can be done because.
Mr speaker gentle lady if you if
in in the entirety of that
portion of the constitution.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
speaker and gentle lady rather
than talking about the letter of
the law has been has been
discussed quite a bit and I and
I also briefly touched on Mr
speaker gentle lady.
through that reading that the
state is not supposed to do
something that is forcing
something on a local
communities.
Would you agree with the plain
we're legislature is that we
come forth and when we don't see
laws that work for our citizens
we change them otherwise why
reason we're here is to look at
law and to say is is working for
the people we represent and
that's why I brought this
forward kind gentleman so thank
We have different ways of
changing the law.
This is specifically a
constitutional provision
Jennifer wanted to change the
public to then determine whether
or not this is something they
want to do to change the
constitution the agency speaker
gentle lady my concern is if we
And they're and they're the
constitution it appears to me
that we if we find a creative
work around.
We'll do that even if it only
So Mister speaker gentle lady my
my concern is this.
I hear a statement back home
quite often which is.
Mr speaker and and and generally
what we what I've heard is that
the community here
Representative wants this.
That is a huge concern Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
And I and I think.
I think what you're going to
unnecessary.
Definitely on wanted at least in
a couple of communities as a
matter of fact Mr speaker
generally the only with the only
way that I've heard anyone
discuss how people in those
Mr speaker gentle lady even if
there is an undercount.
Nothing in the census and when
we go to re district allows us
to figure in an undercount.
What I think the numbers really
are.
Some of speaker and gentle lady
what we're what we're being
asked to do here is.
I assume.
Mr speaker I'm and and generally
what I would say is.
For reading into all a lot of
what other people want I believe
you know what your community
once I believe you know a real
top of that is for speaking for
the people who we don't know who
exists but we're going to say
that they exist and they're not
being counted Mr speaker gentle
lady I don't believe that's the
speaker and gentle lady
Recently
pushed back very hard with
especially with members on that
A of how we were going to
govern the hours and what is
going to be taught in our
schools and what hours of
professional advancement would
sacrosanct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
we're saying here today is.
And this is the way it appears
to me just the justification and
Because of the clear writing of
the of the constitution or the
constitution slightly ambiguous.
believe we're doing here is
we're legislating of the people
and not for the people of those
communities for that reason Mr
speaker gentle lady I cannot
long time and I'm very
appreciative of all the speakers
and I would for just a minute
like to yield to my my colleague
The ability for you you please.
We just a gentleman.
Thank you.
Mr speaker into the members of
the body thank you for the very
know we talk about the statue to
move and listen to this question
today it was the start of the
will of the people that have to
be part of this in twenty
sixteen the will of the people
statutes by Otero County they
chose not to act they chose not
to give voice of what the reason
for the rhyme or reason.
Otero County we we get three
days of early voting.
And that doesn't to go to the
extent there's many more but the
body needs only to understand.
We're not trying to revamp it
we're just making a road that
leads to people have the will of
the.
not but it's a responsibility
that as legislators.
Counties are failing for lacking
taken a hard the to what you've
heard in debate and political
galleys is returning to the
people a chance to have their
voice a chance for the county to
thank you Mr chairman thank you
to all of you for bringing this
legislation.
We mean that thank you.
public conversations that's when
change starts to take place and
I think.
I think this bill whether or not
it passes through this house and
come and with that Mr speaker I
ask that the house government
and
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for three
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
you ready on item number two.
Thirty two.
On your on line.
Yes I am Mr speaker thank you
substitution or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
House bill four zero seven we've
heard this term a lot but it
really is a straight for bill
and modifies language in the
other passages of it had not
been updated since the nineteen
forties the amendment.
Those can you read the two to
six number please yes two two
six zero one nine point one that
And if that's alright Mister
speaker I'd like to introduce my
expert witness well the
amendments being passed out have
To the members so deleted
explained the amendment.
Okay
so the first part the amendment
section do is actually just re
adding.
To the statute that was
of the in my items.
three and four.
Just fixing a typo.
And then item I just adds
clarifying language.
number one to house bill four
seven we're we're good they're
delayed is our debate on the
amendment.
Is your objection to adopting
language to the existing statue
that hadn't been looked at and
about eighty years and this bill
also raises the cap that the
what.
Yes the speaker does gentlelady
from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker yes I do yield to the
gentleman thank you Mr and
raising that cap to one thousand
dollars in this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
yes okay that's a reasonable
amount I
any of very to a couple of folks
I now move that house bill four
zero seven twice amended do now
pass.
Does not close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Constanta
with yes Representative Ferrary
vote is a vote of sixty five in
the affirmative zero on the
negative house bill four zero
seven as far as amended has duly
passed his house and this is
your first visit many
graduations.
Thank you Mr speaker would you
get me to that point that the
record reflect that elections
are for placing House with three
sixty two as amended on final
passage has been taking it is
now subject to debate amendment
sixty two as amended in a man's
the emergency medical services
act to allow certified nurse
practitioners to to provide
And it had a right now you have
to be a doctor to be able to do
this and I just would like to
extend that to be allow nurse
practitioners to do that and I
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee speaker
gentle lady can you tell then
for the liability impacts would
mainly in my district and the
doctor that's been doing it for
the last twenty years is
retiring.
What this is all they have to do
is oversee they don't have to
actually physically do anything
so I really don't know if the
what the.
Shortage of nurse practitioners
to follow this in for.
Is.
do now pass or a final passage
of house bill three sixty two as
amended the vote is now open.
yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes
representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
number forty yes Mr speaker
could you get me to that point
the record reflect that election
is server placing House
Judiciary Committee substantive
roles with two thirty two with
an emergency clause has been
taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
technology the office of
broadband broadband expansion in
law enforcement without a stand
for questions there is debate
definitely from India and the
county.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so.
I I do have
certainly create some time
efficiencies for law enforcement
regarding people wanting to see
certain video things like that
so there are some other good
bill Mr speaker gentle lady
could you tell us which
department it refers to.
let's take it secretary each
section them of that and see
what the answer is Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Section one okay specifically go
through I'm six one is tourism
from all of the world and with
this bill we want to protect
tourism department's proprietary
information and the consumers
individually identifiable
information provided online is
systems and we really is
it's the publication of which
would reveal specific
vulnerabilities we're looking at
protecting IT systems we had an
different had usernames and
passwords and it so we want to
protect the passwords
the people in the.
Office that was hacked they were
always we do eight characters
letters in uppercase lowercase
special characters
the put protocol was what
somebody could steal at that
point look at and then and then
what I really would like to
drill down to is how some of the
language in this bill would
affect the integrity of
elections and this is under the
information technology systems
the publication of which would
reveal specific vulnerabilities
that compromise or allow on
questioning or challenging the
use of certain Alexion of
systems software
connection to internet things
inquire into that Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker kindly
note would not.
Mr speaker generally could you
explain how that would not be
Four of
records stored or transmitted
using information technology
systems.
Mr speaker and gentleman so I
I'm I did read that language
might involve the
I guess you call the the hard
could that hard case to the
computer whatever's in that case
of the computer it's not just
records stored there could be
there there could be an issue
there Mr speaker gentle lady of
course we don't want people
hacking into the computer
systems but there are times
to look into that cannot be
precluded
Mr speaker gentle lady how does
this bill how would it interact
with the New Mexico election
code Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker committee does not
have interacted election code
Mexico has its own provisions.
mean by information technology
systems and that includes such
things as computer hardware
storage media networking
equipment physical devices
belabor the point but I think it
would be very nice to have.
Some assurance for clarification
in this bill that so this is
still have the right to request
lady thank you for the time if
there's further debate the
gentleman from Sandoval
Representative Martinez.
Thank you speaker Mr speaker
starting on page one.
On the starting line twenty two
and going over to page two.
protected here.
Because I would think the
department of Veterans Services
would have much more.
tourism tourism exchange so this
is a big big deal now we're the
only state that has it and where
we are
looking to make our state.
The World Wide or people coming
is that what is that what you're
asking.
Yes
world's getting out was the
department of Veterans Services.
Mr speaker kind of them and
they're not engaged in
commercial activity.
Affairs we haven't got to but
but we have plenty of time to do
that right.
Mr speaker kind lady of I
completely agree.
Mr speaker I guess I'm just
confused as to why it wasn't a
blanket coverage for some of
these other agencies why.
so many people we had to narrow
it they're working with making
sure I agree with this and ACLU
agreed with us and tourism came
to us and said this is what we
we can work together on it okay
thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady I do look forward to
that
Thank you very much for your
answers.
Permission granted.
There's the debate generated
from McKinley Representative
Lundstrom.
You Mr speaker will the gentle
lady you I do you yield to the
Senator Ivy Soto director of in
the from do it director of
cybersecurity Rajai it the state
LFC last summer.
Thank you Mr speaker kind
gently I move that we came up Mr
speaker and gentle lady as a do
Task Force I'm curious Mr
speaker gentle lady this is part
of the Mr speaker candidly
dissidents thank you I I did had
to just a couple questions Mr
gentle lady and and experts does
this include state contracts
that may be outsourced.
Mr speaker candidly no good I'm
glad to hear that because we
had for the gentle lady was
regarding sensitive details
about utilities hi I'm reading
that in the FIR that this would
be exempt I'm just curious so
That has been removed from the
building has been removed from
the field thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady I have the FIR that
assumed it was updated I
appreciate the answers thank you
do now pass passage of House
Judiciary Committee SubDiv for
House Bill to thirty two with an
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
The clerk to call those members
of the recorder both.
Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
votes yes Representative Ferrary
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
The vote is now closed where
would of forty six in the
affirmative nineteen in the
negative house bill house
Judiciary Committee substantive
It's.
Seven.
government prevents committee
substitute for house bill one
forty one of final passage as
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the generated explained the bill
Mr speaker thank you house bill
one forty one will add a new
registration plate this is the
national logo plate that has
been used by various other
states to honor the family and
retained by in the D. to defray
the cost of producing and
issuing the new plates and the
remaining thirty five dollars
will go to the law enforcement
protection fund with that I
gentle lady does agility yield.
Mr speaker hi yes go ahead.
Mr speaker generally I just have
one question for you and that is
over the Legislative close.
Mr speaker I do now move that
house bill committee committee
transportation bill could public
works and government prevents
committee substitute for house
bill one forty one the vote is
now open.
What's about to close.
yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
rose to one forty one has duly
passed this house Julie from
Santa Fe are you ready and item
number thirty three.
Thank you Mr speaker we getting
to that point for the record
reflect that election is served
amends the long term care
dementia trainee Act we passed
about two years ago it's a
correction was about fourteen by
all the parties affected and we
just want to clarify some
amendment one to H. B. four four
six as amended.
It would you kindly read the two
to six number yes the two to six
it is online would you please
explain the amendment thank you
Mr speaker thank you body what
this amendment does it just
clarifies what the annual
continued education requirement
is that we anticipate it will be
Is your objection to adopt in
the amendment see none you have
an amended bill back to you
gentle lady thank you Mr speaker
with that I I stand for
questions see no debate the
generator to close I thank you
amended the vote is now open.
The vote is now open.
Those ones.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Castellano.
yes Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes
representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
One of sixty four in the
Mr speaker we give me to that
point that the record reflect
that election is server placing
House Bill five ten on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
This is moments of culture of
history of heritage of the most
important question we get asked
in New Mexico Mr speaker and
bit of a performance Mr speaker
only if it's part of your
expertise to money and I see no
objection it is so ordered would
generated from Santa Fe did.
C. trying.
That's my my best gringo of.
Attendance.
For what it's worth.
New Mexico so we know the
Fishel's the official question
is in New Mexico line twenty two
you want read showing I give you
hospitality that kind of
treatment towards someone even
if they're not family even if
they're strangers so look
forward to this live performance
there and we highly recommends a
nice little course going on for
us Mr speaker.
would interview care to
introduce your expert witness.
from Idaho Saccone are beautiful
Pojoaque valley's to with his
In the.
yeah yeah yeah.
On the coolsocial yeah yeah yeah
yeah.
See the video to the echo of
those.
It is still a little candles of
it.
But.
The most asked New Mexico
question.
Red or green.
The live it'd let it.
Green chili chicken and she love
a.
the milieus the quota of
Cool and then you will economy
love the.
You originally.
I'll give the red chili.
To long green Chile.
Red or green.
Red or green in the control be.
The official New Mexico
vegetable.
Welcome to David and Commons
cafe.
May I take your order please.
The pretty woman with a Mona
Lisa smile.
What would you like this
morning.
Yeah yeah yeah yeah.
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah.
question red or green.
The most asked for New Mexico
question.
Red or green.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close I now move that
house bill five to do now pass.
Close.
yes green.
Representative Ferrary both yes
green Representative Rubio yes
Representative Rubio votes yes
representative Thompson.
sixty five in the affirmative
zoom in and the negative house
bill five one zero has duly
passed this house.
Mr speaker in lady from
Bernalillo.
Deleted from Bernalillo gently
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that order of
business committee report seeing
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker your agriculture
state gives the water resources
committee to is been referred
Senate bill two seventy one as
amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that do pass
Welcome you for the Senate bill
two seventy one as amended all
those if there is if I was and
I.
This bill is a yes Committee
productive.
To no objection it is so
ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
sure you do on Senate chief
clerk Mr be under.
committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy five Senate
bill four thirty three Senate
bill four seventy one with
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the house
Committee substitute for Senate
bill fifty Senate bill three
forty six Senate bill three
eighty eight Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
Senate bill two zero three as
sherry do on Senate chief clerk
this is ruby entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate joint memorial
three in requests the
concurrence of the house
substitute for House Bill twenty
seven as amended by the house
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill ninety
the house House Bill three forty
two as amended by the house and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted shared
data on Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
Mr speaker I move ago that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered
announcements.
don't often have a the Pulitzer
Pruitt prize winning books show
up on my desk but this was
brought to me by
a colleague and friend who
actually worked for the
back working on a project with
through the
The administrative office of the
courts and she is providing the
book it's not about a particular
right now so this book is for
you to right at your pleasure if
you have ever have time to do so
it's really about poverty and
I got a little more information
I don't want to take up too much
time here but I hope you enjoy
this and have the opportunity to
process this
three ten from unit Yuma in room
three six three oh seven.
signal anywhere else Benjamin
There's a collective gasp in the
chamber those news thank you
announcements related from Santa
Fe your house of.
will be meeting at its usual
time on Friday but I also want
to alert people that we will be
also meeting on Saturday
starting at nine AM.
Nine AM Saturday members taking
note the lady from the you.
I'm sorry from Santa Fe thank
you Mr speaker your house covers
Signal gentleman from those from
Jenny was on the less than one
percent of New thank you Mr
speaker you have station a
revenue committee will meet
tomorrow morning eight thirty in
room three seventeen thank you
signal.
referred to the house government
elections and in the Affairs
Committee the two to six number
is two two six zero nine one
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee see no
objection.
The name of the sponsors of the
two thousand and the name of the
bill is actions of current and
Bernalillo Mr speaker you know
have house health and Human
Services Committee will meet
tomorrow morning Friday in room
three oh seven at eight thirty
What time are we supposed to be
somewhere this evening.
Mr speaker to answer the
gentleman's question the tip off
go through for those playing in
the game I recommend warming up
so if you're gonna be suiting up
for the game tonight please get
there at least forty five
minutes depending on of course
pressure on the gentleman from
Rio Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
to make sure he shows up
employees.
Bring in the muscle thank you Mr
speaker all right members do not
pull hand me tonight and please
do not come back if you have
those trophies.
recess until ten thirty tomorrow
morning when we come to
celebrate our anticipated
victory over the overconfident
For a take that motion I want to
thank all of you for a
productive day enjoy afternoon
committees and we shall see you
