Representative vice chair
Senator.
Mr Smith
Restaurants says I'm gonna
practice session this.
All the wrong or what.
It is.
And.
I'm gonna do form your woman
because we.
People several sectors.
Representative Cook.
This.
Representative Lujan.
But.
Is
your.
All Representative Serrato.
Representative.
I care about the.
If
you are.
Quorum offers are thank you
welcome members of the committee
Betty
Good to see everybody and we
will go ahead and we're all
going back and forth I know
between two committees but I
would like to recognize
Representative Roger Montoya and
ask him to but
House bill one seventy three on
the table.
Good morning.
Madam chair and committee
members of it's a beautiful day
I see snow the said snow and
moisture are on our state and it
is indeed a great thing.
Just a few moments ago before I
present house bill one seventy
three the rural infrastructure
crisis response act I was given
notice that there's a glitch in
the funding mechanism and an
apology profound and and
consequential policy from Marcos
Trujillo the W. W. secretary
that they need to re work the
funding.
Wondering what is the pleasure
Madam chair of doing at this
moment there shared me that over
the weekend we could have it
worked out and maybe bring the
bill up on Tuesday.
What what should we do.
What is your plan well house
rules dictate that we have to
have an amendment twenty four
hours before the committee
hearing so.
You can go ahead and present the
bill and present the idea if
you'd like to do that now and I
would encourage you to do that
and then make the change in the
in the bill before you get to
the next committee that's what I
think she.
Okay given the consequence in
the importance of this
particular bill I will go
forward and do just that I may
have to make some adjustments to
my written statement.
thank you in advance for your
patience this is a very complex
issue that I'm trying to bring
remedy to.
Today present house bill one
seventy three the rural
infrastructure crisis response
act otherwise known as Rick
Ross.
In my first year as a law
lawmaker.
I have seen the value and I try
to live by the motto that policy
is best when it meets the
people.
The genesis the request is to
deliver and respond directly to
the many critical crisis
infrastructure and durable
equipment events that rural
villages unincorporated towns
and tribal communities in our
state are faced with.
The bill directly provides
relief to municipalities with
populations less than twenty
thousand.
County populations of one
hundred and fifty thousand or
less tribes mutual domestic
water associations and water and
sanitation districts with less
than six thousand build clients.
The bill was designed as a
stopgap response to the twenty
twenty one rural needs study
which as you all know was
created as a by product of the
real economic opportunity task
force.
It also draws direct inspiration
from the voices of sixty plus
rural leaders.
That are bipartisan officials
who attended the rural leaders
summit that Isaac Dakota casados
my chief of staff and I hosted
in the capitol last month.
Many are in the virtual audience
today.
So why create yet another fund
for rural infrastructure when we
have the water trust board the
colonials Fund the trouble
infrastructure fund or have
federal dollars to DFA
governor's funds for emergency
events FEMA covers those.
Representative this bill because
house bill one seventy three
meets the dire needs of rural
New Mexico in a new and
inclusive way.
Which otherwise would cost
billions of dollars for our
state to address.
Today countless crisis events
are occurring in rural
municipalities counties and
tribes throughout our state.
Amounting to tens of millions
each year.
Unfortunately for many of our
rural communities the broken
infrastructure and durable
equipment which created the
crisis event remains on fixed.
Creating health and safety and
environmental challenges that
are dire.
Many of our rural communities
apply to fix their
infrastructure or durable
equipment through capital outlay
process which is absolutely
insufficient.
As evidenced by the recent ICAP
requests just released that
surpassed five point six billion
dollars this was reported just
yesterday.
How does H. B. one seventy three
provide unique remedy number one
rule governments have limited
financial resources if any at
all.
Actors the federal I mean
there's a state statute that
requires municipalities.
To reserve one twelfth of their
operational budgets for
situations like this for too
many that amount is sadly
insufficient to address the
unexpected infrastructure will
infrastructure or durable
equipment crises.
The report establishes a crisis
response team.
The DFA.
And to collaborate collaborative
we bring equity and expedited
financial assistance to our
rural communities with the
assistance of our colleagues.
Number two unlike other funds.
Our state has the record the
request is supplied broadly.
Thank equitably throughout our
state and in a timely manner.
Regret is designed to respond to
crisis responsibilities within a
fifteen to thirty day unlike
other options offered at the
state board of finance for the
New Mexico binance Authority
which can take months.
Due to the change that was just
announced to me about thirty
minutes ago.
We may have to rethink this
piece but I have a critical
assurance from our governor she
wants to help this happen she
doesn't know how I can say that
she's going to make a magic wand
I also have a commitment from
the New Mexico board of finance
to see that during the intro we
can find a vehicle to see that
we can bring remedy in this
manner.
How much is recruit providing to
our rural communities and how is
it funded so this is the part
that gets a little bit tripped
up.
Because of the amendment that
will calm and hopefully we can
bring this forward on Tuesday if
it's the pleasure of our chair.
The team at the border of
finance has as I just stated you
know.
Are working madly at this moment
to kind of figure out some
options for us so by by Monday
we should have something twenty
four hours in advance as
required by our state
constitution.
Madam chair I would like to
introduce my expert witnesses
miss Priscilla to settle the
executive director of the
southwest New Mexico council of
government and I'm only Senator
the regional field manager for
the RCC.
Thank you some of the director
of local governments government
division will be on the call
just to answer any technical
questions that might pertain to
the notion of creating a bureau
under DFA.
With that are you back madam
chair.
I believe my experts are in the
waiting room.
Yes recognize some.
Good morning everyone thank you
Madam chair for this some
opportunities but before your
committee and the members of
this committee representative
madam chair so I'm personal this
that I am the director of the
southwest New Mexico council of
governments I cover the
southwest corner New Mexico and
regional planning and I am also
the chair for the New Mexico
association a regional count on
councils which is all of the
council the government's so what
I like to speak to you today
about is in my career in which
I've been on working in this
field for approximately thirty
four years that I completely
support this bill and so
currently and I'll just take I
think are good example is
probably the best way to expect
to this is that currently I do
have a system that is dealing
with the public health threat
and trying to alleviate that
before it does become a public
health threat in New
contaminating groundwater due to
the source is not working
adequately and on many other
issues so nonetheless what has
happened is that it's depleted
the fund of that specific
source system therefore leaving
no resort left they spent over
three hundred thousand dollars
of the reserve trying to
alleviate the system and
therefore there are no
opportunities for them to secure
the funding to be able to
alleviate this this issue before
it becomes a public health right
so in my technical assistance
that's what I love to do best in
my career is try to find
solutions for these problems and
in my work with working with all
different funding agencies
whether it's federal state I am
well versed in all of those
funding agencies and I can tell
you that there is nothing quite
like this and so this bill for
me it really truly represent
about helping the most rural and
frontier communities that are in
desperate need the other thing I
want to mention that sometimes
we don't realize is that when
the.
Those things happen and there's
a potential are there is a
contamination of someone that
there's other things that happen
as a result of that and that
could be I need PA ministry to
border if we can't resolve it
with that and act in the state
of order then it becomes an
administrative order consent and
then you begin to assessed
penalties and then the the
the association for example in
this case what assessed
penalties and when have the
ability to even pay those
penalties because they been
depleted up all the reserves
that is just one example and in
my thirty four years I can tell
you example after example after
example but I'm I take it one
step further than that and talk
a little bit something outside
of of what I typically do and
that is order and waste water
and that is that currently we
are seeing other deficiencies in
other forms and that is there's
fire inspectors that come in and
do I inspection and realize that
there's co deficiencies that
could automatically shut off
hospital it could shut out the
school district it could set up
a number of things that we've
been facing those realities
right now in and I'm sorry my
region but throughout the state
so those are a couple of
examples that I wanted to share
with you and then lastly what I
like to articulate is that one
of the things that we are seen
as a person who's worked with
infrastructure for all these
years is that the life of the
asset is no longer what we
thought it was they could be
right we thought that and the
replacement of the asset code
and can could we be replaced
within thirty years that is no
longer the case unfortunately so
what is a brand new system is
now in this particular instance
is ten years old and we're
having issues because that issue
is not I mean the the actual
system for whatever reason lines
are seeping so edge the and the
actual list on this the station
pumps.
I'm not working adequately after
these ten years and that's
what's led to this situation
that I'm talking about today
that's just one example but I
think I can also talk about
flooding that has caused damage
our property because of burn
scars that's another example
there's been fires within
resident and within residential
areas to the just to because of
the drought and then you have
other contaminants within that
and then the other thing we need
to realize that in dealing with
so many of these things there
are natural contaminants in some
of our groundwater and that's
just a reality so those are
things that I can certainly
articulate and and be happy to
answer any questions but on
behalf of myself I am completely
in favor supporting this bill
because I'm the one on the
ground level that is working and
providing that assistance local
governments and it'll domestic
than others to be able to be
that person with the with the
resolution of that of that issue
and then lastly the association
of regional councils which is
all my directors of the council
governance is full in full
support of this project to help
make sure that we get the
resources to the most role the
frontier committees have the
greatest need and thank you for
the opportunity to speak before
you madam chair and
representative.
Thank you.
Thank you this is for those of
you who don't know there still
is kind of a legend in the state
she has been Original caught
director or as she I don't know
if you're director for thirty
four years but you sit in in
that in leadership positions
over the years she is now kind
of leader that
what do you call it the
unofficial leader of the costs
they do it they actually vote on
who's going to be that finally
caught director in the state and
Priscilla well that position
she's just an amazing job I am
the state we are grateful for
service and we're grateful to
have the kind of expertise that
she brings to the center to the
state into this legislature
thank you so much and I'll call
on Ramon Senator.
Madam chair if I may before we
go on.
I the collected to to put forth
one of the most critical pieces
on the us in this bill is to
allocate twenty three million
nine hundred sixty thousand
dollars per year to the REC
brought over ten years we will
make amendments as to how we get
there I just wanted to include
that in my
you know call that I got just
before trip me up just a bit so
please continue Ramon was
federal.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that I want to settle and I
work for a nonprofit
organization by the name of
rural community assistance
corporation we provide technical
managerial and financial
capacity development services
and training needs to public
water systems across the state
of New Mexico.
I would like to start by
thanking Representative Montoya
for this mission for his vision
and development of this much
needed bill.
So New Mexico water systems are
now between sixty and seventy
years old.
Released by the legislative
finance committee on June twenty
third twenty twenty one
identified the estimated cost of
projects programs and policies
from twenty eighteen to twenty
twenty to address New Mexico's
water issues exceeded four
billion dollars over three years
according to the two thousand
and eighteen state water plan
municipal water and wastewater
infrastructure projects
represented the largest area
need with more than one thousand
one hundred projects at a cost
of at least two point eight
billion dollars well this is a
significant amount of projects
at a high cost based on at a
high cost based on my first hand
knowledge a high percentage of
public water systems didn't
participate in the regional
water plans leaving a large void
in our understanding of project
needs and the funding needed to
address those needs from FY
twenty sixteen to FY twenty the
state provided about eight
hundred seventy six million in
support of water projects from
ten separate funding sources
primarily to local and tribal
governments according to the
rural infrastructure study
released in December twenty
twenty one we have five hundred
and seventy six community water
systems in the state of these
approximately eighty eight
percent or five hundred and
seventy community water systems
serve populations under thirty
three hundred people
approximately sixty seven
percent or three hundred and
eighty seven of New Mexico
community water systems service
than five hundred people as a
result the large percentage of
these communities don't have the
necessary revenue to address our
infrastructure needs for the
capacity to submit funding
applications and it goes back to
a person I was just talking
about in that we have aging
infrastructure that has lived
its useful life and these
communities that don't have the
capacity to raise revenue or
complete funding applications
they're the ones that are
dealing with these emergencies
so the circumstances places on a
path to need it for the passage
of this legislation please allow
me to provide a brief example
very similar to the one that
percentages percent so recently
the New Mexico border for.
I know it's provided
approximately a hundred and
sixty one thousand dollars to a
community water system was water
supply well have gone dry not
only was a community without
safe drinking water but they
were in financial distress after
spending approximately forty
four thousand over a ten month
period to purchase drinking
water for the community
fortunately the board of finance
provided the funding to purchase
water for up to three years
until a long term solution could
be developed in conclusion whole
attempting to address this
community water systems needs we
discovered that the county's
office of emergency management
or the state's office of
emergency management did not
have the resources to help this
community deal with that
particular crisis.
So as a result the rural
infrastructure crisis response
access crucial to providing the
necessary resources to protect
our community public health and
safety and similar to what
percent of us just saying we
have innumerable amount of
examples of situations just like
this where every year we're
dealing with on the ground kind
of crisis situations that we
don't have resources to deal
with so with that.
Students need on behalf of RCC
we send a strong supporter of
this legislation.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Montoya.
Sure expert witnesses
Representative.
You're on mute.
Madam chair committee members
yes it does.
Thank you very much are there
any members of the.
Audience who wish to speak in
favor of this bill.
Seeing none will go to the
members of the committee and I'd
like to recognize sat
Representative Lujan.
Madam chair of the.
There's several members of the
audience our recent have.
Okay I see I guess they're
members of the audience I
didn't.
Committees.
Just click.
I'm sorry I'm sorry Jeff Carr.
Yes are you there there we go I
was.
Try again Jeff.
I keep getting I keep getting
muted now we can hear you now
okay.
This is Jeff Karam the more
people last.
now speak I won't get into the
technicalities of sounds like
it's already been happening but
I'll speak from my experience.
I've been admissible judge here
I've been on the council mayor
pro tem and down more.
Of economists and I can tell you
that this bill is sorely needed
for communities such as eagle
nests of which there are many
across the state we are lucky in
regards to we have tourism to
keep us going.
but we're still very very poor
community we have to struggle
continuously with with funding
for almost everything we can
possibly need and let me and let
me add this is that in this this
time of climate change and all
the things you're saying are a
tornado here in the in in the
last a couple years ago maybe it
was a year and a half ago.
Something we've never seen Santa
Maria on had one like ten years
ago or maybe longer of where we
had the strong winds that that
came through here and hit House
county the hardest.
Not only do we have aging
infrastructure as we all know.
Things that need to be replaced
but we have emergency management
systems that need to be
stabilized and maintain ours
we've been with that email
service for seven months we
finally got emergency funding.
were it trying to hire people
right now.
we can't and we'll have
volunteers by summer and things
like that but we we we need this
bill badly and I
Applaud Representative Montoya
for working so hard to bring
this forward and I can't tell
you I'm sure I speak for many
mayors across the state.
we support this bill we need
this bill please pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you more car it's great to
hear from local mayors said it's
very
Very helpful to this body I'm
gonna call on the next person I
don't have the name its C. and
C. and.
D. D..
Madam chair this is Monica
Abeyta executive director of the
north central New Mexico
economic development district
can you hear me OK we can hear
you just fine Monica thank you
madam chair members of the
committee our organization which
is the cog for the for seven
counties in the northern part of
the state stands in strong
support of Representative much
why is bill
I know that a lot of technical
information was presented
earlier so I will skip that and
just talk a little bit more
about the.
Allocated aspects of the bill so
as cons we receive probably all
of the funding request that
really are already covered by an
easy to access our we get calls
all the time.
About things that you know there
really isn't any way to address
and so this bill really attempts
to do that it attempts to look
at a proper process that's
faster for addressing emergency
and crisis needs it looks at a
dollar amount that's appropriate
to cover the full need of the
entire state especially in the
rural areas and it also is broad
enough in terms of including
equipment and other other issues
like that that is really much
more comprehensive the key to
this is a rapid response you
know that a lot of times
communities have an emergency
situation that needs to be
addressed quickly and there is a
lot of things built into the
bill to ensure that this funding
can be and may have made
available in a timely manner so
we are in full support of this
we hope that this is a long term
solution for our communities
that we can work with the state
and basically elected the
projects that need the support
to the state for these resources
thank you very much madam chair.
You Monica like to now call on
my commissioner James Martinez
Rio Arriba County.
Good morning madam chair good
morning James good to have you
here.
Thank you I'm honored to be here
so good morning again madam
chair of the committee my name
is James J. Martinez Rio Arriba
county commissioner and
commission chairman I represent
a district one.
One of the more rural districts
within Rio Arriba County it
includes the beautiful into the
valley which you know well madam
chair Dicks in our article
through chess Cordoba she my and
parts of Hispaniola you know as
commissioner I enjoy going
around my district listening to
the concerns of our community
purse.
And so often we are hearing the
concerns with the aging
infrastructure of our community
water systems.
The lack of access to natural
gas in more rural parts of our
district.
Now in particular during this
pandemic we're all.
Multiple concerns former school
staff members and students who
were forced to be on remote
learning for many of our
families do not have access to
reliable high speed internet or
broadband in their homes in
order to access the class work.
Not only that but we're also we
have concerns of solid waste
operations.
Our waste are produced water and
water systems and so we're
thankful for Representative
Montoya and the others who have
courageously brought this act
forward Rio Arriba county is in
strong support of this bill as
you can see by art by my example
and the others that have already
shared this is a timely act well
overdue because of the needs of
our constituents and community
members just as in closing I
just received a call from a
constituent in the community
part of all of where their
community water system is aging.
They have water that is B. to go
this is a drinking and they've
come to me as their commissioner
to seek help and so where the
county can provide a certain
level of support we certainly
look to our representatives at
the state level for assistance
so thank you madam chair members
of the committee for allowing me
to this time to speak in favor
of this bill thank you.
Thank you commissioner
appreciate you coming on thank
you madam.
Thank you I'd now like to
recognize Lopez.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is beau Lopez
I am the current more for the
Thomas Springer
I have been trustee more pro tem
and now I'm on my second term as
mayor and I just wanted to echo
what is being said here that the
Thomas Springer stands in strong
support of this bill we work
diligently to keep R. I. C. I.
P.'s up to date we tried to keep
our five year plan.
Up to date it's it's a living
document that's always changing
but we do have aging
infrastructure has been
mentioned previously
and we've had instances come up
in our community where from our
waste water plant to our lagoons
when the actual project was done
in the sixties well they used
river rock and so we had an
instance where one of the rocks
became on large and it cost a
clog.
Overflowed our our overflow pond
and we were having to replace
pipe of a boat five hundred feet
other things that came along
with the project but it was over
a hundred thousand dollar
expense that we're on a very
limited budget and any did put
us in in financial stress for
for our town and so this this
bill would help alleviate some
of these unforeseen
circumstances and so I just
wanted to make sure that a I
mentioned that I think
Representative Montoya also for
looking out for rural
communities in this state and
we we do stand in support of the
bill thank you.
Thank you more Lopez it's good
to hear from you and we deeply
appreciate it I'd now like to
call on that community
development the
I guess analyst for the north
central a call.
I'm assuming that's Chris Madrid
but.
Good morning madam chair to hear
me.
Yes we can thank you good
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Christopher Madrid I'm the
community development director
for north central New Mexico
economic development district of
for the past twenty years I've
been working in northern New
Mexico in rural communities I
want to thank you all of the
committee and Representative
Montoya for shining a light on
the needs of our rural
communities.
invariably in my experience each
year there are unexpected events
that take place that take out
critical infrastructure that we
had not anticipated and usually
it's very difficult for those
entities to provide funding in a
timely basis and becomes a
crisis these events are caused
by the floods that occurred I
remember eight nine years ago in
Rio Arriba county that took out
roads culverts bridges.
Right now the extreme droughts
are taking down our water
systems in number ten in lower
Brazos and other locations and
then just more recently here the
winds are also there are other
events one project in Rio Arriba
county our construction project
it turns out there was a on
March water line that was only
nine inches below the surface
and because it was only nine
inches below it had ruptured in
a totally saturated all the
grounds and we didn't know about
this until we got into
construction mode and once it
wasn't covered that cost serious
cost overruns and delay of time
that we had not anticipated.
And these types of funds would
have been available to help
address that type of situation
as well.
And with that I just want to
thank you all for the
opportunity to present and your
consideration of this important
bill thank you.
Thank you Christopher good to
hear from you right now like to
recognize I Taylor
Reagan's Taylor reckons.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee.
Now I can hear you yes thank
you.
You're still muted.
Can you hear me now.
Yes okay great the morning madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Taylor
again speaking on behalf of the
members of New Mexico cattle
growers association and New
Mexico will growers.
We're happy to support
legislation like H. B. one
seventy three and its efforts to
rebuild insisting role
communities in our time of need
thank you for your time.
Thank you Taylor and I'll call
on Isaac Centers.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee hi my stick to
go to Saddam's I am the co chair
of the native American
democratic caucus for the state
of Mexico on behalf of our
twenty three native American
tribes including our nineteen
problems as well as our tribal
nations are on the Apache as
well as the Navajo reservation
we stand in full support of this
bill we believe that this is a
strong issue of equity but must
now be kind of looked at in a
very rectifiable way for for
constituents that have otherwise
been overlooked or forgotten for
our tribal communities this is a
a challenge every single day as
we look at providing clean safe
drinking water tore Communities
sewage systems electricity and
broadband basic infrastructural
needs that that at times are
still readily unavailable to
these communities so on behalf
of the native American
democratic caucus of New Mexico
we stand in full support of HB
one seventy two thanks so much.
Thank you I thank you and I
think.
I now called on everybody.
In the attendees waiting once.
We'll go back to members of the
committee.
And I'd like to call on now.
Thank.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
many.
Works and our rural communities
for.
A number of years with our.
Person.
Hi and I can attest.
Knowing that these issues.
justified.
Today and throughout.
The entire instrument throughout
the work that I've done that the
need is at times Graeser.
Help.
It relief and there's I mean
that I want to thank.
Right here and for yes
yes finding all the work that
she's done with our cause will
communities.
We've tried to reach many.
Many different types of funding
that we know that are out there
and previously mentioned by
sponsor of the bill that.
This is bringing something
forward because of his diligence
and work and information that is
gathered and putting all
All communities and
conversations and an
understanding that the real need
to bring the Ford the way he did
and just a very comprehensive
way I want to say thank you for
doing that work Representative
Montoya and I think that.
Even though we have all these
other funding mechanisms out
there the the needs aren't being
met.
And.
That's been the testimony over
and over and over again that we
keep hearing so I'm sorry that
to hear that you're having or
you're in you might need an
amendment to for us to have some
clarity on the the finances of
around this
Representative Montoya and I'd
like to know you know what
that's going to look like that I
also want to say I understand
the need I understand that needs
are being met and I understand
Why and how you put this all
together and commend you and say
that I support what you're doing
but I would really like to see
you know what these changes are
but I think that this that this
conversation can continue and I
will support this piece of
legislation today
by the comments I made and I
just want to say hi to more car
haven't seen you in a long time
and thank you for your continued
work and and services to
to your community up there and
go fast and to all those that
came for today with testimony
that have been coming forward
for many many years into their
communities and have had
leadership in trying to figure
out solutions for their
communities and I think that
this is this is well crafted and
and the intent is is very clear
to me but I would like as you're
moving forward Representative
Montoya to know what this
finance those financial actually
look like but you have my
support as measure and and the
intent of this piece of
legislation and thank you for
for all your work invested
everybody else here today I
appreciate the time madam chair
and
I support this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you come on Representative
our.
Thank you madam chair and
representative it's great to see
in your face.
Thank so glad that you are doing
well you were thoroughly messed
and so
when I saw those pictures my
heart dropped and so it's great
senior base again and
Recover quickly I'm so I have a
few just a few quick questions
so is is the money that you're
asking for is in the budget.
The no it is not currently in
the budget okay and what.
Okay I just received I'm getting
texts from the New Mexico board
of finance that they think they
may have found a remedy so I'll
keep you posted
this is a really interesting
process you know we we got the
bill filed a little bit late but
it's they're really working at
this very moment to what they
can bring to us so at the moment
it is not in the budget.
To be honest with.
Thank you that's going to that's
going to create some problems I
don't know if we're gonna be
able to get this through must
begin figure that out
and I got appropriations after
this
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and members yes the
next stop and it gives us a
brief but I hope in full time
period to address these critical
issues yeah yes and I realize
it's a hail Mary pass but
willing to throw.
I do realize that I mean you're
not you're you're not going to
have you know.
Very nice place I'd appreciate
that I'd I love it you know and
it's and I think all of us in
this in this committee we
understand that that the need
for it for role I mean the
things that affect us don't
affect everybody else we have a
water tank in the legend County
that we've been trying to fix at
the funding it's like we're
allocated a certain amount of
money in capital outlay and that
does not meet the needs of our
community you know this argument
made over the years maybe
capital outlay should be based
on square miles.
Instead of allocated evenly
which you know it's like it
takes many of us hours to go
across our district when we have
people in the metro area it
takes fifteen to twenty minutes
to go across the entire
district.
We we struggle with capital
outlay because we're trying to
build roads and sewer systems
and things like that and the
metro area and they don't know
what to do with the money half
the time I wish I had that I
wish I had that problem so I
just thank you for it for this
bill I'm my only heartburn.
This is just my personal hybrid
that we you know down south they
do have access to to to the
Cologne yes I.
And up north where even more
limited the contest goes as far
as the court I believe is where
the cut off in that and so it's
just in my only heartburn is I
would love to see more help.
Or something that helps people
in the northern part of the
state so we can be more equal
because down south they have a
lot of these issues because they
have more funding opportunities
and so that's my only heartburn
is we're doubling up down south
we're still not really I'm
taking care of some of the needs
of North.
Madam chair response.
Madam chair committee members
Representative Fajardo thank you
for pointing that out they have
learned in my first year that
and I'm thankful for the cook
colonias Fund The troubling
infrastructure fund the water
transport those are.
Absolutely necessary devices
that were created I believe in
the early twenty twelve twenty
two thousand eight two two at
twenty twelve.
They do not allow for broad use
across the state there
prescriptive to certain zones.
Thankful for that this bill is
needed.
This bill is the first opening
the cleaning of the US secretary
of state a second if you will
for funding.
At historic levels we have to
begin to prioritize.
The needs of rural New Mexico.
Across party lines crossed.
Every barrier that we have
created just to find that
equity.
I believe madam chair that one
of our mayor's job mixin was
wanting to speak and she texted
me twice that she was not not
allowed is there a chance that
you could give a minute or two.
If.
I.
I did not want to go through the
that members right now because
we're in that process thank you
very much and we'll see if we
can elevator as a panelist and I
in the meantime I'd like.
I'd like to create a whole
heartedly with Representative
Argo we all face these issues
And there was legislation that I
carried regarding the making our
tribal and rural colonias in the
More equitable and that will
come again I can tell you that
and and I think it is the job
that this committee during the
interim to put all these things
together in a package and to
come forward I was kind of a
strong package as as a as a
committee for the rural
development the state and to
think this speaker for kind
creating this committee and
adding to that because real
development just really such an
important part of land grants
and cultural affairs and and we
needed a place to have this
conversation and to bring these
ideas together as
representatives from the rural
communities of our state and
with that into alcohol on
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair
you know being a freshman
representative as well as
members Representative Montoya
I I just on well Paul all the
capital outlay its
infrastructure needs that are
out there we get requests that
are the amounts are unreal and
and and having discussions with
community members we're always
putting a patch if five hundred
thousand here ten thousand there
for the sake as in and you know
with all this federal monies
that are coming in for
infrastructure I think this
committee is a perfect way to
get out of the two point three
billion dollars.
Get on two hundred million
dollars and fix the needs of
these communities and I'm not
and I think this is the perfect
place to start with this bill
and I support this bill because
they're our communities in in a
rural areas that need this
there's sewer infrastructure
there's water lines that you
know it impact whether fiction
every day I'm sure eagle's nest
Springer I mean there's a wide.
Right in need for this and and
I'm glad that this case
Representative about this
forward and I hope that it goes
somewhere and we start working
on the needs of the communities
that we represent because they
are there are needs out there if
we could use this federal money
to get the needs that we need
done capital outlay will not be
as overwhelming as it is today
and I think Representative
Montoya and I'm glad that you're
here with us seeing that great
smile in the morning makes my
day and I want to thank
everybody that the committee
members and everybody that's
here this is a big need and I
think it is important imperative
that we start working on this
and I think you guys thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative now now recognize
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam chairman and
chairman thank you madam chair
and I want to apologize to the
sponsor of the bill for my delay
was having a lot of computer
issues but I was glad to catch a
presentation here so much
support from the public comment
on you know I would appreciate
that this bill is is that this
is the rural development and
land grants and cultural affairs
committee and I like to look at
that from that perspective is
this good for rural development
land grants cultural affairs and
it is clearly because in the
rural infrastructure needs study
that you reference and I know
you will have worked on the talk
about the profile of need
specifically for water I'll just
look at and they talk about in
the short term the American
civil society of civil engineers
estimates the drinking water
needs in New Mexico for repairs
and upgrades at least one point
four billion dollars you know
twenty eighteen state water plan
estimated all water stormwater
wastewater projects the four
billion dollars and a lot of
that is just because our rural
communities are so separate
indeed to develop that is such a
big big element so I really
appreciate that this bill
directly addresses that I have a
couple questions one is I I
understand the bill is for
critical need but that does that
I guess I should say does that
exclude
Preventative efforts so that the
costs are that much more height
does that does that make sense.
I
think I understand the purpose
of your question we attempted
and are attempting to to put
this bill for.
To begin to address what I see
is a giant iceberg you know how
do we even contemplate the
billions of dollars of actual
need.
In my first year of traversing
my best district alone and
through the help of the rules
economic task force I was able
to travel to jump in Gallup and
more to.
I saw firsthand that our leaders
are struggling to do great show
that.
Let alone address the crisis
need.
So that.
She's she works with the.
To this thing and I'm reading
used to be.
They just did thank you okay
great
I believe that it will.
Help this enormous issues as far
as preventative.
You know we're stopping the
hemorrhaging really and it's
it's a bit of a bandaid I
believe we probably need
quadruple the amount of money
that we proposed at twenty five
million roughly.
But it's a start.
And I feel compelled with the
full force of my heart and soul
to push and advocate for rural
areas I wake up in the middle of
the night and finally laying our
people are suffering and I will
fight to the end to ensure that
we get a product.
That addresses as much of this
issue as possible but we're
gonna need a full court press
it's going to require our
governor to get behind this
fully I'm sure that she is as
well as well as all of the state
agencies or nonprofits are
called X. and most importantly
those leaders at the front lines
those mayors and commissioners
and planners and unincorporated
areas that are voiceless I will
stop there I hope I answered
your question Representative
said Russell.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
response yeah I I understand I
mean the public and the critical
need is expensive and I I do
hope that over time we can
expand to include you know aging
systems that are nearing the end
of their life but that they
haven't broken right that that
that the the river with river
stones have not moved yet and
then because those costs are so
much worse and and the impact so
much difficult but I do
understand your point because
right now that you know there is
there is hemorrhaging we have to
resolve that I'm I appreciate
the schools Superbowl because we
can just a little bit of
something we have to do
something that's going to work
my only last controlled mention
is is the one million dollar cap
and annually and it's just
because so many of these
projects one project can be two
million four million and really
to make that impact I'm hoping
that that could be something
that is also addressed in the
bill as you move forward.
Vice chair set up though I I
called you solely Representative
Cadena and realize it's replaced
her thank you for the question
in devising this bill.
As quickly as we did.
It was logical given the numbers
that we had to cap it twenty
five million over thirty three
counties do the math it's pretty
simple but my intent was to
bring voice to bring focus to
this critical needs and if
that's all we do at this
juncture which I hope it's not
and we move into the interim and
roll our sleeves up and get a
real product that will have been
worth it.
I would have gone under serious
criticism and probably if you
last if I had put true number of
perhaps a hundred million.
To give a little bit more room
for the realities and the needs
of our local leaders but I felt
it prudent and I followed the
directive of our of our drafter
to fashion this is the first
step I hope that I answered that
question.
Thank you madam chair in the
Representative those are my
questions thank you thank you
everybody
Thank you all for your
participation that we would like
to see this bill go forward
we're gonna roll this bill today
Roger Representative Montoya in
an effort to get a better a
better man and better deal
structure together to take a
vote in the state to state
should be a very short
presentation at that time with
really just talking about the
amendment when I first read this
bill I'd like to say that I
should be put twenty five
million and actually fixing the
problems that we have right now
or should we put twenty five
million into building
infrastructure and I quickly
realized we need we need.
I I understand what happens.
In Rio Arriba all the time and
as a as a tell other legislators
I used to think my job would be
about education and early
education and I and eighty
percent of my job has to do with
what
that's just the way it is I
learn more about water for
people like Ramon and Priscilla
and bill Connor from the New
Mexico rural water association
who have really help me
understand the depth of this
problem for those of you who
don't know my canon has just
been named the US state engineer
I think that's a great move
forward for all of this and to
lead we have somebody in that
position now and ready to work
and we have moved that Mary Joan
Nixon at as speaker and so I'll
probably end with you more mix
and and if you can come forward
and just says a state your
support or opposition to this
bill.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Montoya and the
committee meeting members thank
you for recognizing me it was
kind of hard this is proving a
point that when we're up on the
mountain in rural New Mexico
it's very hard even to get in on
the zoom meetings
I to stand in strong support of
HB one seventy three and I
applaud Representative Montoya
for bringing forth this bill our
rural communities all have aging
and failing infrastructure
the needs are truly becoming
quickly a public safety issue on
top of the mountain where we
live in angel fire our water
rights are major factors well as
are aging tanks and lines in the
waste water treatments
most of our water lines are
underneath our roads so when we
go in to replace the two inch
pipes that need to be up to par
and upgraded to four to six inch
pipes we also have to replace
the streets it's a constant
battle with R. I. C. I. P.
trying to get the bandaid like
you've all been talking about
and I also appreciate the fact
that our EMS and our schools
desperately need communications
towers what's easily at the
fingertips of those in metro
areas we're still very far
behind years behind in rural New
Mexico
I stand in support of this bill
and I thank you for allowing me
to speak on behalf of it and I
thank you for recognizing me.
Thank you thank you madam Nixon
and I am I do we to have all
these aging pipes running
underground running under wrote
you should know there is that
what they call horizontal
drilling may have dress now that
will drill under road and then
you can run a six hi for those
of you who don't know you need a
six inch pipe or fire suppressed
you know that's what that's a
pressure you need to have a fire
had been working and in the
states we need fire hydrants
working in rural areas so if you
build a system I I just want to
add that your information using
our there are horizontal pipes
and and what we really need in
this rural infrastructure bill
is actually more training for
local mayors in rural districts
and and I think that with this
new structure of my camming
coming on board
with trying to do real
development in a cohesive manner
for the long haul you know we're
not looking at one here we're
looking for the next twenty
years CENIC's years
and with that everybody's busy
I'm gonna I'm gonna close this
committee today and and I am
going to roll your bill
Representative mon Montoya and
that we will see you all next
Tuesday thank you for your
attendance thank you for coming
and thank you for your service
good bye.
The meeting is adjourned.
