Present.
Representative.
President she's walking now.
Yeah.
See here for the cheese.
Representative fox the bill.
Representative little here.
The green here Representative
Zamora here's.
I wrote here.
About.
The court okay thank you.
We will begin our at a our
meeting today I just want in an
accident that we do have a full
agenda please read to the point
we have to be on the floor at
ten thirty and public audience
and supporting and opposing
comments we're going to limit to
one minute we're going to start
with.
Senate bill three five one I
don't see.
I don't.
To do it later but I can't do it
that maybe because they have a
second chance our I do see
a fire superintendent tribunal.
Maybe we can.
This.
Of okay let's to Senate bill
three to four.
Senator.
good morning madam chair good
morning the.
This is just.
Representative Sims we'll be
back.
Lows discussions.
Of the.
Of the bill twenty four of the
three.
In the schedule.
This will upcoming commissions
find patient compensation
processes.
Chloe's office.
This is a mild case issued a
statutory.
Four dash for four dash for.
For that for for what I do and
then this is a.
Hello Sanchez.
Thank you Representative and
solace madam chair and thank you
for having this this morning
I also would like to introduce
our new Bernalillo county
assessor from young Lara
and are just here a past.
You'll twenty questions.
Hey let's go to the audience
those in support of the bill
rates in half.
And those in opposition these
are just like the okay Sir.
It's part of the bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Clyde ward
working Bernalillo county but
I'm here today is representative
representing New Mexico counties
association of our affiliate
Assessors affiliate and get
straight
representing them we stand in
full support of this bill as it
helps with.
The ability of.
Once that is over there.
Photo.
The things that.
we heard this is here in Santa
Fe County and I just wanna let
you guys know this is something
that's been great for my career
which is allowed me to continue
in the and career it's a learn
about appraise.
After I started twenty two years
ago I'm here now and this is
something thank you continue US
if each of those processes
office.
Thank you income.
From the webcast.
During the COVID part of Senate
bill fifty four.
Seeing that do we have any
opposition.
On the west.
CNN and then in the audience
committee members Representative
three yeah madam chair and for
the first Mr Dworak was.
What that Legislative Council so
we worked together a long time
ago.
We have one state after this.
After the session but.
Missile are we talking about
would use.
The.
Where training why the trading
was we were talking about
before.
Madam chair representative of
yes so these are actually set in
regulation by the taxation and
revenue departments property tax
division the courses are done by
the international association
association officers which is a
worldwide organization that sets
the industry standard for
appraisal the tier horses
sometimes they are taught here
in state of New Mexico I do
sometimes they're having to go
out of state forces and each
level towards the amount
certification so it's you know
level one courses through our
resources that is increasingly
more difficult up until
commercial model the.
These are very expensive as well
as difficult to value of when
the county assessor find out
property on the protests were
has the value.
The rate the appraiser who also
has to have this certification
as an industry staff to be able
to appraise property when we
were before the war or even
yield in front of the District
Court judge if our freezers do
not have the certification their
credibility as an expert witness
legislative opinion about this
is challenged and not stack up
to a few pre is in the industry
with the same certification so
it is important for us to ensure
that our staff at all county
assessors office have the same
level of certification.
Thank you madam chair.
Ludu that upset.
Have a motion for the past and
second to have any opposition.
Seeing that please show all
present voting in the
affirmative.
and Representative officers have
to pass.
Thank you thank you.
Okay we're gonna go to Senate
bill three five one with that
is.
Senator Stewart.
Senate bill fifty one.
It's to create.
Our leader.
In the rule Legislative Council
we're not talking about
Legislative Council Service
we're talking on the legislature
also.
Committee
members of the.
Health.
But even with the parties in.
Council
Voting members on it I members
and advisory members the members
are generally the leadership
positions from the.
to the three parties and both
chambers.
I honestly don't think I should
realize hello Senator Stewart
told me.
The voting members of the last
council cannot Silvercity
members of the interim
committees.
And is this yeah hi I know this.
Problem with that is that we
have been difficulties sometimes
committees constituting a
quorum.
Representative Rehm is on point
corrections and justice has been
three years out of high and so
it turns out this is reliable
the number of CCJ
the only reason it matters is
for purposes of a quorum in a
fitted from committee you can
drive not far away place without
for then they have we have to
start calling the leadership to
have reported member who's hi
ordinarily a voting member so
people get per diem.
And services.
And so that's the purpose it
doesn't allow
the legislation does not allow
for the
member of Legislative Council to
become a voting member of the
structure formally created a
flight provided health services
for LFC.
But it does allow for the
Senator created by Legislative
Council is that.
Okay let's go to the audience.
Do we have any comments in
support of the bill.
Senate Bill in the audience any
opposition.
What's going to have I have.
Right these are committee
members.
Representative Rehm of Madam
chair representative Chasey
amount or stand this because
you're on Legislative Council I
will be here okay you you're
actually yep okay.
When we have a CCJ meaning you
can be a voting member secretary
of state in the current the
current law.
Madam chair will miss.
What this is doing but Madam
chair Representative Chasey.
What he asks this so we have
members of the Legislative
Council I'm talking about R.
four four on Legislative Council
correct.
Enrollment.
Not only does this is about
legislative members okay.
Got it.
Now.
Legislative Council Service okay
sure Senator status thanks okay.
Members
that we
will pass yes.
We have a due pass mission
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Chasey have any
opposition.
State insurance Gretchen.
You have to pass.
Three five one.
I don't see.
Go to committee substitute house
bill creates for you can.
What.
Created for.
If you have.
It's a committee of the past.
In.
Eleven the start of.
Yes.
Okay go ahead okay thank you
madam chair.
And this is with.
The speaker Smith report back to
us because we are rolling in at
the a bill that this committee
has already tax which is house
bill two five nine it has to
deal with the licensure street
private investigators that was
Representative rings bell and in
order to be efficient as the
bill moves through thank you the
house floor of the Senate Senate
floor we are combining all the
different licensure pieces into
one bill.
So we now have what we've
already approved Monday morning.
Which is changes to the
uniformed by syncing Act your
design.
Veterinarians social workers and
physicians.
Now adding private
investigations.
So it's it's billion already
seen you've already approved
but we will stand for questions.
I think it's more.
Okay let's go to the as since we
know our Senator and our
superintendent also to the
audience for comments and
supportive.
The committee substitute in
opposition CNN the private
investigators to like to.
I don't see any any hands raised
on the webcast so committee
members thank you madam chair
and committee members of so my
private investigators has passed
all the way to the floor.
Well it was here want to deter
sharing we did that so I think
this is a great idea we'll skip
one big bill get it so.
Anyway.
Representative middle manager
you should with regard to the
under.
Okay.
Have a motion for do pass the
second and then I just
Representative what I'm gonna do
it.
So.
Opposition please.
So yes Sir we have a do not pass
on right almost every eighty
four in the past committee since
two.
And then I see no opposition
sure
permit.
Thank you for.
Hey
Senate bill one three six.
Joint Memorial eight yeah he's a
hologram.
Okay.
Right now all of.
When.
Two
items.
Thank.
All.
Madam chair you're moving too
fast.
I'm gonna move on to the house
bill four to four.
Come on in shares.
I can see.
Thank you what's all right
Jennifer has.
To.
Not.
There are more women.
you madam chair.
The committee I want to present
to you house joint memorial
Kate.
this is.
Whenever I myself and
Senator.
Hello.
To.
Pass the loan.
It's going to allow.
for more to be actions following
up I know you guys are trying to
move fast and we'll give you a
quick little synopsis of what
happened.
Forward when I was a kid madam
chair of the committee.
Was a park it was part of well
it just been transferred over
from is from the federal
government to stay in New Mexico
and they purchased this yes this
place four million dollars it
was an absolute gorgeous places
right next to the national.
Senator it had it was it had the
hospital with a lot of history.
The hospital had a lot of
history there it was a of a
tuberculosis hospital one time
people came from all over the
world game of errors Hospital it
was a place that was the as kids
we used to go if you just want
to take a little stroll and not
go very far.
View of Littoria we would would
take a little stroll through
there see the The Addams and so
so forth in the and landscapes
we played football after pretty
grounds and so forth it was
actual beautiful place
unfortunately as time went on it
if the state did not maintain it
well and it sure is and at one
point about I would say about
twelve years ago twelve years
ago the state decided to vacate
everyone around the parade
ground so this is only for city
blocks we're not talking about
you know there's huge huge it's
the roll down to about four city
blocks thank you.
Four city blocks and thank you
very much.
And so
There's there's help helping all
housing that was around it was a
housing for the nurses and and
the hospital staff state to work
at the hospital okay so
they decided that because of the
lack of maintenance and so forth
it went ahead and vacated the
tire square there thank you to
all with and and then later on a
few years later the one I have
and build a new hospital.
About half of a half a mile down
after about a half mile down the
road to the park ready hospital
and the hospital was literally
vacated it would be equivalent
to anybody in the hospital right
now the just remove the patients
leaving that as this hang in a
minute that's where they left
the hospital.
So the hospital that was
protected that'll started here
started destroying the place a
lot of stuff on your name at and
so
the the as a broker of the
broken to all these different
houses some of you would not
burn we we also do fire and then
does it more funding after all
that vandalism so for it one
head and not the whole hospital
them leaving some of the housing
the parade grounds again as I
foresee loss I don't think
anybody really know unless
you've been there so I'm gonna
give you kind of a quick what
would be here Santa Fe imagine
that where we are here in this
building there's a little space
of of of non developed area
between here and and the of.
The pharmacists and the little
square there were positives
areas and so for imagine if the
state of New Mexico on that
little island right there is
nothing between this building.
And they turn around the baking
everybody around the the plaza
if people are living in just
simply because of the lead paint
to the specificity of our
hearing very close to the case.
And then the other day the law
for the which is our hospital
use as a representative for
hospitals and just the way it is
Senator now it's an old building
because of some buildings
building.
They to go ahead and thank you
everybody at the end up knocking
it down even this big space on a
little.
People from from you can imagine
what that would what would
happen if you did that and then
police protection you lock
people here and there Anil start
living in their turn this whole
place up you can imagine what
that would be so the little bill
just sat there and thank and
community members who all
rationally decided to confidence
and try to save it it is the
only national for more four is
the only for that is a national
landmark in New Mexico is only.
And so they're they're here
they're just needing their set
to auto center much was
basically abandoned it and if it
wasn't for the village's center
which is adjacent to about as
far fiscal years two thousand
the command with volunteers and
so forth and brought in funding
about three million dollars in
funding and and projects bring
the different people coming
together and clean and paint it
clear not all Phillies and and
how both things down state
actual they have to go through
the state of New Mexico New
Mexico for everything including
water power there's no power
water and gas it's all be cut
off.
Because they wouldn't prepare
future water leaks the shut the
water off field almost a hundred
trees for.
And so it's been it's been
destroyed basically from lack of
of the state of New Mexico
taking initiative all of the
supporting this year's national
landmark that we have sitting
there.
I'm rule of this is something
that might my my entire county
is one this year
The state aid and investment the
reason I'm asking for an
exhibition is to allow those
secretary I'm not only to police
four blocks and two but to try
to get there with it would allow
them to get grant to all of the
repairs in the water and and
infrastructure through to
legislative session.
And so if if it ever when it
gets involved in still the loss
the state of New Mexico
if they would still have control
of the of the buildings is still
there please insist will allow
them to.
Reserves and and protect the
investment of the investments
they've already made a three
million dollars this investment.
There's a beautiful museum there
have the restore but no power
for the majority of cases of
unconditional light very don't
have any of that and then they
have us here next to that that
the driver restore.
I'm gonna allow them to thank
you I just wanna let you know
there are thirty nine of Sanchez
on this on this issue here both
the house and Senate and I and
and I know that going on because
I just it's such a lot there's a
lot to figure and and so this is
an opportunity thank you madam
chair about to level exclusive a
few things please share.
New Mexico thank you for your.
The this concerns.
To be a great.
We've been mentioned earlier
fifty four well we're releasing
twelve building from the state
of course outside of city limits
yes restrictions from us we
support regional respond
revenues are no services.
State and federal health systems
are.
Electricity gas group because
of.
Our franchises will cover.
The other thing is liability
insurance and we will certainly
do out there we have a separate
lines of the general liability
insurance policy for improvement
and improvement projects we do.
Verification of all of the
city's
general liability insurance to
cover that yes savings.
Of those combs said the village
has developed and is workers.
So much with each other for a
hundred and sixty years our
system the whole staff what was
first built.
The
suicide for fear because what we
want to do is to say that this
is store expected.
Our history our culture our
heritage as a home wrapped
around for very discussion was
history there there is a
national your call on as far as
a national landmark is because
people go for the coach this for
the history here.
Would like to take that
incorporate.
A the of historical recreational
site where we have hiking and
biking trails and all of the
recreation camping those kind of
various things that cooperatives
are for aspects of the loan
facilities include things
education would be a great the
benefit for us to have a
national of four very national
cemetery is on the side.
And if you ever been there is a
beautiful facility the federal
government has made it absolute
pristine so Terry is a
tremendous facility.
From the Decatur for Sarah to.
The gates at the cemetery is
exactly one mile.
That one was.
Owned and operated by state of
New Mexico until we get to the
gate of the cemetery.
This is a disaster when you when
you cross Services literally our
veterans last mile.
And we each potholes in the
street did trees.
Tier of didn't dismantle
buildings to make a turn and the
only side for the new national
cemetery is a hand made sign as
detects that.
We have to us referrals a week
there is usually fifty to sixty
referral more than half of those
people from from other states
before better is for more
options to get there are better
there.
Lots of love these people come
in the state of the museum's
because already there and locust
walk around.
The comments on with the slide
in on museum we're in one of us
is somebody say this places
places beautiful this is by it's
not really a great way to you
know present or gift for our
veterans in the state.
New Mexico for Sarah is been of
established in eighteen sixty
six.
And is.
Many many years before we became
a state so it's S. co do we have
that New Mexico true I can't
think of anything that's more
towards more qualified to be the
next from through.
One last.
Share with us to this point.
What will Dow.
No doubt you know.
New Mexico leftover city and
remember it for what it was this
beautiful pristine park.
Come back to bury their their
their family members are
grandparents or whatever as I I
mean I've been all these
funerals where we're driving
them down this path the trees
because that I would choose for
us as having the water died.
Four branches in the littlest
roadmap to drive around.
With the national cemetery it's
been absolutely the collective
console the comments in the
limousine while we're driving
are we can't believe what
happened in the last thirty
years so just with that
Mandelstam forces that you have
a thanks for was also on the on
the zoom if that we don't have
to hear from her at this point
she's done a lot of work she
meant of those four percent
secretary but I would like to
let you know that she's there
for questions chair.
Up to a hundred okay.
Will know that she's on the
webcast think madam chair we
will now go to the audience
those in support of the bill
please raise your hands.
Sir please express your.
My name is Jim Marshall I
service more Silvercity for four
terms and I'm currently the
assistant town managers overseas
at the our support of this
project has done nothing but
grow over the last several years
watching the leadership in Santa
Clara prove that they do have
the capacity to address the
needs and for bear and preserve
this not only this part but it
is an amazing economic
development opportunities for
the state that is currently just
falling apart.
And so we sentence from some of
our our thank you we'll go to
the I hop we're hearing comments
in support of that house during
a Mario.
Yes go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is now
than it be this I'm speaking to
you as the executive director of
the on going level Mexico and
does a multi member as a member
of a multi generational Grant
County family the importance of
annexation of fort bared to the
village of funds that go out of
cannot be understated so we
could spend hours discussing the
cultural importance alone I'd
like to bring you into this
moment to our veterans to our
elders to our families and to
our children for more have and
continues to be a cultural and
social gathering place and it is
the resting place four thousand
seven hundred of our veterans it
is also a place of celebration
baby showers weddings birthday
jumping balloons grandparents
sixtieth wedding anniversaries
and yes many funerals for
prepared if the part of our
lives and part of who we are it
is our future and our tradition
the village's water have
consistently shown their
commitment and care to this
building and have worked hard
for all.
New Mexicans and and for its
maintenance I ask that you join
me in publicly thanking and
honoring them by standing in
strong support of H. J. M. eight
because together we can imagine
anything greater.
And even greater future for our
community thank you have a great
day.
The P. S. go ahead.
Currently the president of the
fort Bayard historic
preservation society I'm a
retired history professor
you and a long time resident of
Grant County our organization
was has spent decades doing our
best to preserve and and tell
the story of historic fort Baird
and we stand and wrong support
of this resolution without the
efforts of the mayor and and the
staff at the village of Santa
Clara in our Task there would
have been much more difficult
and
We would have lost even more
than has been lost
yeah I just want to say that one
of the greatest benefits of
allowing the the
village of Santa Clara to annex
this property would be the
provision of patrol and security
for the property which they are
unable to do at this moment
thank you so time thank you very
much.
They're all very go ahead.
Thank.
I just want to agree with
everyone that we're we here at
In Silver City recovery chapel
in Calvary Christian academy of
Silvercity and we've watched
over the years just that to
facility fade away and.
We're in full support of seeing
that annexation and seeing that
improvement made.
Thank you Tara.
Your house and others some hands
up before but down again already
let's go back to the audience
for those who are in opposition
to the bill.
Please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Anna
Ezzell and the director of
facilities management division
for the General Services
Department
I'm here to speak in opposition
in spite of the best efforts of
Santa Clara and of those that
have been and all the speakers
today the state is a strong
opposition we feel that
representative offices in Santa
Clara is using the house during
Joint Memorial process in the
matter Representative H. stand
M. H. J. M. eight is being used
as a tool to force the state
executive department to approve
something that otherwise might
not have the authority to
approve the provision in section
three dash seven dash four NMSA
nineteen seventy eight which
provides that the territory
owned by the state of New Mexico
maybe annexed to municipality
upon the consent of the
authorized agent which is a
facilities management division.
regarding all of the comments
that have been made today the
state of New Mexico facilities
management division has
recognized that the for more has
fallen into disrepair therefore
that facilities management
division is working with the
lieutenant governor they
secretary of tourism department
and economic development
department and we are now
stepping in and we are working
on a of redevelopment plans we
started this at the beginning of
this legislative session we are
in the process of contacting for
the services in spite of his
best efforts and provide a
Department of Health best
efforts we see that the
basically the fort is just
further further falling into
disrepair therefore we strongly
disapprove and we are in
complete opposition this
annexation and despite of what
this committee determines it is
in the process of the annexation
process that consent must be the
state of New Mexico and we are
not consenting to annexation
thank you thank you.
Let's go to the webcast.
Madam official.
House joint memorial see none
committee members.
Representative right up madam
chair can I ask a yes the
question on news.
Chair and to the state can you
tell me what your budget was
last year on this and what it is
this year and is it in House
Bill to madam chair of
Representative right
right now of the budget for the
for the
contract would be for
development is up three to five
thousand once the of once the
redevelopment plan has been
determined and the path forward
we do have a statewide funds to
support the project up to a
million dollars right now
however lieutenant governor is.
Absolutely committed and has.
Has determined that he will
support this initiative in any
way possible.
Heading off what the up
determination is from the
regular redevelopment plan the
funds can then be earmarked
moving forward on September the
needs are for infrastructure by
tourism wise economic
development class.
Madam chair and GST what was
just last year
Madam chair of the
Representative ring because the
state did you see the call
building Santa Clara we the
state did not have the site
because we were given the
responsibility to Santa Clara
for the twelve buildings that
they releasing as department of
health both of whom had not
we've not seen the efforts and
seeing it probably I would be in
the next this next year so I
could not speak about the budget
that the villages Act there had
and the budget the department of
health passed.
Madam chair and GST so in the
past have you been putting money
over there
I mean this sounds like.
The state and anything let's go
back five years or ten years
Madam chair representative ring.
So the way it works is the
facility's Management Division
has seven hundred fifty building
statewide.
We signed an agreement with the
tenant the tenant in this case
is Santa Clara for twelve
buildings and Department of
health four of four beard and
fort Stewart hospital and the
remainder of the buildings
so the the responsibility falls
on Santa Clara for the efforts
and for the areas that they are
leasing and to Department health
of health for the areas that
they're responsible that they're
responsible for in a tentative
agreement it says that they are
responsible for the maintenance
so Department of Health.
Has not lived up to expectations
that we facilities management
division are requiring therefore
we are stepping in in order to
look at the entire area and we
development plans the state
department of the same with
Santa Clara we don't know what
they're about budget is but
through their best efforts over
the last five years we have not
seen it to where where we'd like
to see it so therefore we're
gonna step in and we're going to
up.
Work through this redevelopment
plan and put some money toward
infrastructure and tourism and
economic development and madam
chair it if we don't passes do
we have your commitment that
you're going to bring it up to
the standard for the future that
is going to be is going to be
sign to go visit from the for
tourism Madam chair
representative ring not only do
you have my commitment but
You also have the committee
Tenneco.
Thank you madam chair on on that
madam chairs in Representative I
want to go to the museum what is
in the museum that you can see.
Madam chair representative
process I'm sorry your sentences
if you're.
What I do see is a self is just
it's it's got a lot of relics of
what what they have there it's a
beautiful
it's a beautiful museum I have a
picture of the lady this is that
is done a lot of work there
and then there's other pictures
of what everything was and maybe
I could sit there should be
going to the provisions of.
Yes ma'am.
Bring them before the committee
okay for this meeting so.
Continue yes my heart so madam
chair Representative it has a
lot of potential but imagine I
understand that the state is in
a strong opposition of this
Madam chair representative but
the problem is imagine being at
ten if you go on your you you
release this property with no
utilities.
They won't give you the
children's and won't repair
Water thank you very power is of
your on the water you have to
restore you have no gas so how
do you how do you hello how does
a tenant.
Because you you're you're
renting from the state how when
you ask the state why wouldn't
they give them those those that
infrastructure we would be in
the situation of that was that
was the case and so that's my
point is it's unfortunately
taken this many years of
watching the the entire facility
deteriorate and this is we've
been requesting this I have to
wait three years of work try my
hardest to try to to to bring
this stop this the the duration
of for more chair
representative.
Madam chair representative.
We went to the cemetery.
And what I'm understanding is
from eighteen sixty six who is
buried there so this is so Madam
chair representative there's
actually two cemeteries at this
point there's a state cemetery
that we used very indigent
people out from still uses to
this day and then assistance the
new hospital and then you have
the national cemetery which of
date invested probably twenty to
twenty million dollars in this
in the cemetery and so part of
an exhibition imagine if all
that money if they were able to
action I know that's a federal
of a federal.
A property but it's it's they're
all in between this is is a
state property to get to that so
they can just address that
without going through this that
would have been revenue for this
for this little village that is
trying their best to restore
this not only their child but
but bring economic development
and we talk about it chair
representative we need economic
development we need to diversify
our our our of our county
because we were very good
friends and the.
The college but other than that
really is really aligns with
the.
The economic development and so
we have this gem that is the
only national park.
Status that we could bring that
that we could bring economic
development to.
And and it's just sitting there
running it's it's it's a shame.
Madam chair representative I
guess what I'm getting at it I
look at eighteen sixty six I
would envision that you could
have of Confederate soldiers
there all the waiters current
date veterans some sort of Madam
chair representative you're
absolutely correct there's
actually both oil sold the those
awful soldiers the local
soldiers were there any we have
been very good yes Sir thank you
I'm sorry your.
Bottles to wrestle medal of
honor the people are there sure.
With the soldiers.
Yeah.
Yeah I just I'm sorry.
I'm sorry madam chair that's
correct they were you saw.
All
of our.
Get blue uniforms madam chair
right.
And madam chair I would just
note that the F. A. R. R. I.
arses no fiscal impact.
You know I'm I'm really upset
state with you know what the end
of this month to get to that
point so.
Madam chair that's all my
questions for now for a
committee members.
Representative Chasey co chair.
I guess I wonder about.
The strength of a Joint Memorial
anyway because it's just
expresses.
Away she doesn't have any force
of law.
So
I mean it sort of seems like.
Things are going to play out the
way they're going to help the
card lists of whether we pass.
Thank you madam.
Madam chair and representative I
want to make creative use of the
whole story memorial because it
has no force of law we cannot
force the GSD to to take this
action to allow the annexation
but you have drawn attention to
the problem you have put on
record a commitment from GST to
redevelop the area and pay
attention and commit funds to it
so thinking if.
Been a successful endeavor
whether or not the house
Republican passes
Where we have a commitment on
record for the good things for
me.
And and that committee efforts
to bring that to fruition I'm
getting a little bit Chasey say
what the timeline for the
development please.
Madam chair of of.
I share the ghetto so of the
right now this work has been
completed and we're waiting for
approvals and so hopefully we
should have the contract in
place within two weeks
so of we're hoping like right
after session because right now
sessions up in our number one
priority so after session we're
hoping that the project to be
completed so that's that's from
the timeline but definitely by
the end of the month.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much and that
redevelopment plan is going to
include the infrastructure the
power in the water and such to
the buildings madam chair
representative to get so the
redevelopment plans exactly six
months to complete and the of
the part of that is
infrastructure part of that is
how we're going to support the.
Different stakeholders so it's
multi faceted and it will
include the infrastructure as
well.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for coming and making that
commitment I hope you will also
consider the community of Santa
Clara as partners who invested
heavily in this endeavor already
that's only questions madam
chair thank you vice chair
representative lock thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative for pre forward
to actually had the pleasure of
going and visiting for fair and
sing it in quite this repair
unfortunately not here but I do
think that there's a lot of
character there and I have seen
the hard work that the
individuals of something I have
done to put into it so Mr or
madam chair representative
You know I heard the the
objections from GST I know in
twenty fifteen I believe Madam
chair representative.
The.
The town I believe are the
villages on the cut a requested
this annexation.
What have twenty fifteen
percent.
So Madam chair representative
with the differences I think.
I think senator of before that
had was was was struggling about
ten and twelve years ago they
were struggling with and and and
have big big strides.
The the the more shoes than the
tremendous good hard working
more
the the village up from from the
brink of losing their charter so
there were concerns backed back
before twenty fifty that I think
you've been have been now
resolved and and to to to sample
the difference at the time that
the more which took over it was
about to lose our charter the.
I don't know I should start with
the the people the staff to
bring their own toilet paper to
the to city hall and two were
now they've got and and two were
the only have nineteen million
dollars worth of requests
they've got it on operating
income they've got of the
service the the the repaired and
done a tremendous amount of work
throughout the town to to show
investments so I think that was
a problem then it's it's
unfortunate that it's taken this
long for all of us to come to
the table to really funds off to
to the issue of for more.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so.
That I'm just wondering how with
this annexation.
Into Santa Clara how is this.
Hurt the state that madam chair.
Miss miss madam chair
representative this this is like
there's nothing that you can
hurt the state of the state of
New Mexico the the state of New
Mexico is now coming to the
table to you know remote from
from the O. H. and yes and the
central for all the stuff and I
and I'll be honest with you the
on it's been a wonderful person
and she's issues now in in in
this but new in this new
position to to try to restore
some of that the problem is.
There's no police protection it
is you know our our police state
police and sheriff's offices
officers little staff just like
they are everywhere else this is
allowing Santa Clara to cross
the street and if they see
someone breaking into one of
those buildings destroyed the
Stoppelman and say Hey wait a
minute and able to the to the
point that the that we're all
making as you know what what is
really doing is bringing
attention enlighten us it
although it doesn't have an
enforcement it is a wonderful
way of the Legislature coming
together and saying and and
saying Hey look this is
something agenda the tool that
we want to save and would like
to I would like to to encourage
a partnership with the senator
who is the only entity the only
people that have invested
thousands of hours into the park
everyone else has been absent.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so.
You know I we heard today from
yes the the they said over the
efforts from Santa Clara did not
live up to health department
standards will madam chair
representative I mean it's a
hundred and sixty year old fort
madam chair I mean how possibly
could you live up to some kind
of Corona a standard with a very
over.
Historical area madam chair.
Representative Madam chair
representative.
Again I'm gonna go back can you
imagine the the tenant and they
tell you the fund owned this
building I say Representative
black on lately she might might
building I own all the property
around it you're not gonna have
any utilities anything you want
to do have to go through the and
would be free
V. so for us to think that they
have asked for infrastructure
the water and.
It's it why would do you restore
that so.
By annexing if they annexed this
this property they would just
allow them to get grants to to
bring the infrastructure it
doesn't keep the state from
investing Mr property the
welcome to open their checkbook
I appreciate the help of the
checkbook right now and and do
that thank you madam chair thank
you Representative Rapp that we
have six bills and I think we
have very thorough discussion
thank you thank you madam chair
all except couple more questions
of the thank you madam chair and
representative so.
Please provide I will choose
this Madam so I'm just wondering
why now.
Is the state now committee.
To do this is health and
renovate whatever it is that
they're committing to.
I have not done in the tax
amount
to
Madam chair representative.
Unfortunately for whatever
reason
Maybe the the the people that
were in my seat or or
the other people there didn't
maybe have the same vision that
that I.
Had in in supporting the village
and there are efforts I think
that I think it's nice to
finally come to the table I just
think it's it's kind of what
it's it's a shame that they
wouldn't forget was a force on
that plot that have anything why
would we give them a little
revenues that will come out of
that education would never
struck any in any way shape or
form any of the of the rights of
the state and so the only thing
that the poll is up is them
allowing them to access so they
can get the revenue from it and
reinvest it doesn't it wouldn't
cut the war check the state out
it wouldn't remove their their
their ownership it it doesn't do
anything other than saying I
have a right to police and and
and work with you thank you
madam chair representative and I
think it's interesting because
lieutenant governor it's from
that area.
Now he's committed to it but you
know we this is been a hundred
and sixty year old for their
there's a few years.
Ability to work on this so Madam
chair representative I see here
in the FIR it says that
americorps and the New Mexico
youth conservation corps corps
has helped.
You know painting boarding up in
the how would how would
americorps work with the ability
to try to do this Mr.
All of them I'll defer to to my
experts this.
Please very.
This message.
The votes on
for.
Projects with.
Workers in America.
Senator Hemphill Georgians in
but to come up with the crew of.
Eight or ten sometimes to our
young people we we develop
projects to improve my boarding
up things and then we go off
into the nation's supporters
also see as we know we we have
to run the risk of accidental
nation clause and six.
That restriction on what we can
do.
Well get these projects and and
of course is the project
americorps they basically do the
labor and the work that we do
have donations of of different
organizations because when one
of the question is.
Completed projects and will do
stated primarily done for
securities and stabilizing the
total.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative you know and I
think this is a.
Losing.
I think this is a good.
Opportunity for the legislature
to.
Madam chair representative about
how we we do want this gem of
our state to continue to be in
operation and to be loved and
cherished for generations on top
of what we have now so madam
chair Representative.
For staff I think this is
actually complementary to the
state I think we work hand in
hand with the state to get this
done I making this statement
madam chair representative it is
it's kind of their which I would
not go otherwise so I appreciate
the you bring this forward thank
you yes.
Representative little island
that do pass motion for to pass
a second.
Any opposition.
Please show as a voting in the
affirmative.
You have to pass on house joint
memorial.
Three six.
The.
Senator good morning.
good morning.
This is fairly simple we really
the.
We have session.
PRC of the.
Change the qualifications
for our food banks degrees new
year's experiences and things of
and so.
Our system of windows.
to try to.
In addition to.
Recommended the government to
select the new ask the person at
us.
I was job is how much you pay
the governor said hundred ninety
thousand.
That was based on what the rate
of the PRC commissioners and
other states to follow and
actually she given correct one
eighty two hundred and eighty
one ninety of the metal so they
told the nominating committee
for full to the on the panel so
the governor will have much
channel both of people to choose
from tellement we're gonna pay a
hundred ninety still did that
unfortunately shot statutes.
Session is ninety thousand for
the electors appears
commissioners we try to change
the year ago.
I was on LFC that has failed to
change the salaries of all the
elected people that bill failed
last year so there's really
nothing in statute dictates what
PRC commissioner should R. what
this does it ties into district
judges and says they are seeking
mission will give the same
salaries district judge
currently distributors under.
Six four thousand there there is
a bill coming through on these
over your side now that will
raise salaries up to it's based
on a formula and.
Representative is not in our
nation's upwards with a special
formula tied to the magistrate
federal magistrate judges and I
think so a district to someone
one early one nineties this
would tie it to that stage
roughly the same as what it is
it doesn't passions are passes
in the.
It still does not pass it says
one hundred ninety thousand
dollars for for this issue so
that's what the builders it puts
inspection something.
Could be a problematic if we
don't have something.
We're in such.
Questions okay thank you just go
to the audience those in support
of the bill please raise your
hands.
The audiences in opposition.
To go to the webcast and the
families for support
contribution Coenen
Representative reading of madam
chair and senator the bill I'm
gonna try to understand this if
we're silent on the salary in
the current law why can't we
just do it.
Well that's what the governor
did.
Madam chair representative is.
She has executive before to use
that also she uses for
secretaries secretary I think
it's a salary that the governor
determines some some thank you
for that so she used a variety
of this too is a formula that
can keep the PRC commissioners
current based on whatever the
it's all types of federal money
there so it's we don't have to
come back and do this if you.
Hundred ninety thousand dollars
the next fifteen years now this
will already have been taken
care.
That settlement madam chair and
senator if she has a forty to do
it what she currently paying.
One.
Under one of those well and I
don't know that she has that's
the question this would make
sure or if there is.
And madam chair and senator so
how many days to work I can
honestly tell you that madam
chairs Representative this is a
new body there's three honest
posi O. five years.
Prudential's of these people are
very different than what was.
Traditionally people are very
different that that one of the
guys came from for Washington
DC's New Mexico he moved back to
New Mexico effective job what is
obscenity and national
laboratories the other one is
from.
I a utility spear with the
majority of the second.
So we got very highly qualified
people that probably left jobs
were saying something in the
range what we're doing so this
puts in statute that's all yeah
madam chair and senator I just
remember the.
This PRC they were they were
working three days a week.
Anyway thank you madam chair.
Thank you committee members.
Representative block thank you
madam chair and senator so you
know I I just need to increase
the amount however Madam chair
representative on Senator I'm
seeing other states in Utah
Colorado Arizona there PRC quick
let's there are about one eleven
to one forty five so madam chair
Senator was our is higher than
that and the reason funds to set
those sellers managers
Representative.
The governor give the committee
a range this ties into something
that to.
We'll continue to adjust
automatically.
Address okay thank you madam
chair and senator so number
times just.
So currently what it judges me
church our distributors one
sixty four.
Goes up under this new bill to
about one
to three.
So this this message this is one
nine four the judge of the judge
bill does not just.
Got it our.
Thank you madam chair and
senator proceed the answers in
the.
Thank you.
Representative moving to pass.
The motion for mass I'll second.
Any opposition I think will
Representative on.
Representative off no.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman.
Representative will yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Minimizer Figaro yes.
Yes
you have to pass.
Okay.
These are platforms.
House bill four to four.
I know would have.
Chair members.
I bring you House Bill twenty
four is the prince of princes
should counsel appointed with
already and might have changes
to the authority the bill for
Monday to clean up by the
placing updated tiles.
Hi
temporary ones it also.
The apprenticeship council by
cleaning the secretary of public
education as a mix of the seal
nonvoting member it will as you
mail no we're really hard to
CTE programs and combine them
with the issue.
Of course so it's important we.
The.
The secretary of education is
concerned that following up on.
Ensuring that students are have
that education oversight as well
had also this means that the
buildings intentional
connections between the council
business and public education
and it has a pipeline for
secondary schools and the
workplace.
Here and members of very simple
though to my right is made for
this.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marcos Martinez deputy
secretary for workforce
solutions and we stand for
questions thank you Mexico to
the audiences and supported the
freezing hands.
Those in opposition.
For the webcast.
We're public comment in support
of the bill of the session I
don't see any cancer right
Representative re are on a roll.
Chair representative if when we
go over to page three of the
bottom about.
Is this going to do and other.
Of.
Educators.
You too and and I mean for for
men I would like to see that
going to work with high schools
to get of these types of
programs given high schools so
that kids can
if you know where to look at
Albuquerque I mean C. N. M. as
for example the kids over there
when they graduate they've
already either completed or
nearly completed their education
for some ready that's my only.
Madam chair of the reason we
have the CTE that we will have
the.
thank goodness the secretary of
education on there is simply to
make that connection because all
these programs are usually an
mid school high school and so
called.
And madam chair yeah
Representative by three but if
we put it if we stated in there
then it'll be one of their goals
that's when you see.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Many mentors Representative
little and we do have a second.
Forty five seconds.
CNN please show all those
present voting in the
affirmative.
Representative Mr Martinez if
you have a.
Okay less.
Two three seven four.
HM or.
Madam chair she's on.
Just.
During.
I see.
The.
Our.
Yeah.
The state.
It's.
But they are just.
Representative are you ready.
I
building seventy.
And this is the.
Think
about around.
Have the facilities to the
community and representative
offices.
Industrial park that we are
working well.
This bill.
Thank you very.
Today you can have a question
you all about the policy
implications of how the state
dollars.
Ordered to economic development.
The only be.
there is a provision for
political.
Levels of local governments and
populations of less than sixty
thousand people to apply for
your dollar.
The.
Sure.
Government owned industrial
parks that we're not secured
environments.
What we imagines doing.
is to is to pass a law allows
the agency safeties so this is a
very quickly unless
the fed to also have access to
those dollars.
What's important for us here is
that postal has worked so far
Mauler.
They can have some of the state
resources of because they don't
have the same capacity as large
cities like Albuquerque to
leverage federal dollars or
other mechanisms of securing
that sometimes to invest in
their no velvet that we're
thinking that this is work for
small cities bill the program to
consider letting some of these
meant leading the committee
raised.
This whole and healthy
government potentially have
access the same but today I have
a solution for.
With the rental and I'm sure I
like to turn to him the offer
any additional comments.
Committee members not case
manager for the city Rio Rancho
with economic development state
will cover over the last fifteen
years or so the latter ready
real estate children the site
challenges that we face and
economic development are the the
infrastructure enables the New
Mexico economic development
partnership.
Local communities to address
this challenge by making smart
strategic infrastructure
investments that we have like
pregnancy develop ability of
publicly owned land for economic
development purposes.
As the US sponsored on funds
representative mentioned we've
infrastructure was enacted in
twenty twenty first needs a
lesson sixty thousand an inmate
at the New Mexico economic all
department has assistance seven
communities so far with grants
ranging between two hundred
thousand two million dollars
it's important this is different
than traditional the traditional
is a grant that's all intended
for the job creator also for
statutes offline.
This is a precursor to to help
advance that site right now so
we're in a better position to
help companies grow this is not
this is far from the big fish
but much more so creating a
landing spot Mexico start ups
coming out of the labs or
research institutions or
existing companies here in New
Mexico very few businesses in
much less high growth startups
eighteen to twenty four months
from the development
construction facility up on the
rostrum it's also important this
is a subset of we've got on in
the local communities local
governments tribal tribal
entities to apply for the
economic development market for
this funding with that from
madam chair members of the
committee with our thank you
let's go to the audience those
in support of the bill please
raise your hands okay let's
start with.
Managers to the larger and much
love usable cities Cruz ranch
also New Mexicans within this
tool is a good to open up to
other cities to be utilized it's
it's very specific leader
dollars that are publicly
structure and public property so
city Los crucis of four thousand
eight investors are so this is
the kind of project is is we I
really think this will help us
remove businesses and create
jobs and revenue from out of
the state of New Mexico thank
you madam chair.
In.
Fund manager members of the
committee Jason Espinoza rich
this next area the statewide
economic development
professionals association said
instruction four of the
legislation I think American
helpers usually hear a lot about
incentives and other types of
programs for millions of
families and sight reading this
incitement optimism for what we
do both extracted public state
companies and solutions shocks
for thank you for the last half
we have an comments in support
of bill.
Or opposition let's go back to
the audience any opposing the
bill.
Seeing them representative of
madam chair.
Representative were or more of
our manager.
I.
I think it's really a.
Do we expect you to funds each
year currently or do we carry a
balance I'm just wondering by
the movie new in if there now
there's going to be so much
competition not everybody can
get into having those files.
Madam chair representative on
good question I'm gonna speak a
little bit from my former role
with the cabinet secretary of
economic development as my
understanding of interface.
About the birthday of my my
current role on it's a you know
I think from the one there is
that there is year by year on
how twenty three carried over
from one year to another
obviously economic development
department has the pipeline
companies that they're speaking
with.
National is out of state
companies in the process of open
diversify our economy on
ultimately I think the
expectation of all you know from
the expectation is would be the
the priority towards creating
jobs first and foremost and then
secondarily in this would be on
you know how the reason greatest
need and that's one of the
reasons why we started with
units less than sixty thousand
on this small committees less
capacity internally to be able
to expand that to work with the
state these incremental steps on
by including up that next ring
of a city's and then potentially
on statewide as.
but again it goes back to and
the different rules have a local
economic development state
economic development city
manager many companies have an
interest in growing and staying
in New Mexico this is the lack
of rain real estate we have the
good fortune in in Rio Rancho
good for the state start of the
king of Los Alamos national labs
those looking to grow on in New
Mexico the only place they could
find building network pharmacy
in Rio Rancho well we need to
continue to develop those
opportunities on the to have
those companies to stay here and
not face the competition in the
consideration stage.
Madam chairman at okay thank
you.
The conversation we were able to
have in our first committee in
Congress commerce and economic
development he was pretty
Helpful in figuring out what
actually we wanted to accomplish
with legislation like this one
of the suggestions for the
committee is that potentially
move for funding for we work
with the appropriators needs a
new.
right New Mexico Mexico Mexico.
With the budget so that
appropriators and we as a body
you could specifically towards
of this piece of the because
right now it's just in the same
lied about it as everything else
so depending on the direction of
leadership of the economic
development department we're
trusting that they're using
their staff expertise and know
how to decide to prioritize what
money goes where and how many
applicants the action of how
many applications they actually
approve of towards this purpose
of course they're also using the
dollars in the more traditional
sense that come after need to
qualification go to those doing
economic development and
creating the jobs and that's
that's the budget that we've
always been familiar with the
outcomes are based on how many
positions are created how many
New Mexicans they hire but right
now that's coming out of the
same Lida dollars that we put in
so again there's not recurring
funds that go to Leah it's been
a decision year to year to year
to decide how many dollars get
put in that budget moving
forward and potentially next
session we have a chance or
otherwise we do think it's
important that we separate
tell me where to get those
codes.
Fund so that we can have
dedicated funding for this and
that that wouldn't compromise of
the efforts and intentions of of
those more traditionally dollars
elders also just want to share
in clarify that in the previous
committee some members of the
committee potentially thought
that it was important that we
not have a municipal cap on this
fund for myself and for my co
sponsor Representative Hernandez
is not here yet
we really feel like.
It could compromise the capacity
of our smaller local governments
if we continue to this proposal
forward in a way that allows
everybody to have access there
were questions please like we
should be winners and losers but
in the bigger picture academic
development we've already
prioritize and set aside on the
J. tip side forty percent for
smaller communities of
everything moving this
legislation forward now and and
certainly in future years
that we need to.
It it would look like against
those mid level cities and not
include Albuquerque as
you know in a mix of review
procedure confusion happened and
all and the last committee so we
have brought forward today an
amendment that would go back to
striking Albuquerque up but
mostly because we like to have
the policy discussion about
whether or not we were able to
move forward in the future here
with the separate code if it be
appropriate to all public bodies
or if you would like to continue
with the protection for the
smaller and then mid level is
apologies thank you for the
opportunity to where.
Madam chair and representative
do you know if they increase the
why not in the budget for legal
the shares.
Madam chair members of the
committee on I I do know that
department requests there
funding to provide you know if
they get to seventy million
dollars was their request but
I'm not quite sure that we need
to.
Thank you madam chair.
Chair and I have Representative
for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you for
bringing to build on.
Good expressed some concerns and
you have already identified in a
traditional leader is tremendous
tool for the state but it always
struggles to build out economic
development of our main point.
and.
Our smaller communities do not
have the same resources in their
own budgets to Pratt the lead
issue has had stated you can't
get the lead the money you can
get the entities come if the
land isn't ready and
infrastructure isn't there in a
good condition right so the this
legislation originally was
written to be the precursor of
the.
And was designed to help the
small community specifically who
don't have the budgets that can
swallow the necessary funds to
build to prep the lane to apply
to the regular leading funds and
they don't have a lot of bonding
capacity and they don't have big
departments to that for the
right so they got triple DES.
Disadvantages and this
legislation was specifically
written to help them with that
precursors that and it seems
like what we're proposing here
is undoing that assistance to
small communities who need it
the most.
That would be my concern up not
just with reading out
Albuquerque which I really don't
think should be in.
madam chair but even bringing in
the mid size I think on the the
purpose of the nation
Madam chair representative
respond if you like but that's
my main concern with this piece
of legislation Madam chairman
and vice chair certainly that's
why we're able to take a few
minutes of your time to the
state we know that.
Concept is working and we know
that our mid size cities are
stuff in this hard middle in
which they don't have the same
budget and.
The leverage resources life in
the metro area million people of
want to make sure the
protections for those long
municipalities so myself and
because there was certainly
wanted to have a conversation to
figure out how to get this right
and appreciate hearing the
feedback today.
Especially
Mr chair and madam chair
representative what we're trying
to do this confusing mess of it
honor and be transparent about
with the last committee said
which was they think we should
remove all population half of in
doing so last and there was of
improperly worded which in the
original legislation they office
and moving forward can you fix
past that because what we
realized if you're ten miles
from the center individuality is
like Bernalillo in the N. F. as
it sounds to date availability
of the currently eligible based
on the original I wish they
could go I for these funds so
moving forward we decided to
clean that up but what I'm
saying and I believe it was one
through the fuse here that we
don't see.
To adopt all of the policy
changes brought forward in the
committee but we wanted to have
that conversation with you all
in a transparent way should we
decide to pick this up in the
future session to make sure that
we are gathering insight and
information about a larger.
Of portion of the body.
you madam chair.
Representative Knowles that
confuse so if we adopt this do
we allow Albuquerque N. for if
we don't adopt it we don't.
If madam chair misrepresented
reading if we just adopted one
striking the house commerce and
economic development committee
amendments to a three we would
not allow.
If you all felt like it was
appropriate to keep Albuquerque
and then we would say we also
need the screen of language
during this point to this.
So can I make a motion to adopt
the amendment and its entirety.
If you have a party and
everything cleanup language once
Albuquerque business sport it
would mean we were moving with
the policy of eliminating
population have and we
clarifying language that would
apply to the two big County
Representative and colleagues
may I entertain a gentle table
so that we can continue to work
on this because you know I am I
am not comfortable I I need to
talk to my constituents.
Larger communities have a bigger
tax base and what is the
unintended consequence for these
and I just want to be clear
educated about that so.
I want to I wasn't big important
comment.
I'm from Albuquerque but the the
plan leave the funds were not
designed for our.
They were designed to help the
smaller communities and so yeah
I agree.
If you don't want to.
Back in this.
So.
Yes yes.
Had its only program.
Can
we please move on with our
intent and stacked with tables
thank you and have discussions
and conversations the yes so
then the table the amendment
and.
The steps to do it okay so I
have a motion to table the
amendment.
All second.
Any opposition to doing them and
then.
This.
First part of the amendment
thank you for.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Add that to table we have a
motion to table the bill.
Second and a second by
Representative.
do we have any opposition to the
table and.
Show all present.
And cabling.
Thank.
Okay let's go.
Baca in the.
Representative.
With.
Some false.
So
is.
Do you consider Los crucis.
We have.
That's what
it is a question.
To the thank you.
If.
Hello John this course
was.
We did some good here.
Profit.
House Bill.
thank you madam chairman thank
you committee
the opportunity come before you
and present hi.
For one.
I want to first of have my
experts introduce themselves so
you know we assisted me the guys
just because of questions
question center.
Good morning madam chair and
committee.
I'm hearing on the Public
Education Department city
information officer.
You madam chair by the judge as
we I am Public Education
Department I do the right
education technology.
That'd work yes.
Districts in the country.
And then try to find a little
bit
Interesting because I'm probably
least technically spectacle some
person in this legislature so
fact that this this call your
technology.
So not sure
the whole screen for one is
actually the three gaming of the
of technology for education.
This bill really needs to have
three focuses as we bring this
for what it talks about it
remains the technology which has
been in existence for for some
time.
It provides definitions and
provides
explanation as far as the
technology that is changing.
Second and talks about the
equipment so the language in
various forms of actually the.
Of further fly we're talking
about technologies we some of
the old technologies and is so
members of this committee baby
young but like I was kind of
upset my wonderful that they
didn't have a rural rural floppy
disks that we used to have a
little.
Over the phone about a floppy
disks and you I did it out of
you to get up.
So madam chairman the committee
it talks about the actual
counsel for this.
So talk about for the committee
of the people that will be
making up the committee and will
be
you know kind of serve in this
capacity.
What the
One of the things I want to
start out with was actually.
The required of of of technology
tech of.
The districts and thank as we
know the the.
What are you.
Thank you the frequency.
You know because of technology
education is change technology
the way it was used ten or
fifteen years ago is much
different now
all in one fifty years ago
technology was used as a
resource it was used as a tool
now.
Technologies and all we do.
It's not a resource to bring
into the education all of our
education is actually available
through the technology delivery
in the classroom the game into
information on all of those
things have changed because of
this change now we have to make
sure we update our policies and
practice that requires school
districts to.
A plus technology have their
plan for both utilize it faster.
Also the plan as we know
secretary Economic need changes
so quickly we have to have a
plan as to how the the updated
and refreshed.
So all these a requirement for
the district and this is going
to still have hopes that through
the creation of the council for
clarification of definitions.
That clear as far as the
responsibilities of the district
ultimately ended up in our
classrooms were our students
love axes to this information
and get the most out of their
education.
alternatives mothers who
witnessed this very quickly so
she can make her statement and
then madam chair will stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative podcast I'd like
to take a few minutes to
describe why it's so important
to rename the technology for
Education Act in two months
which.
As representatives I have
mentioned there are three
objectives and I'm going to
compare raised those in a
slightly different way that
their map exactly to what what
was said earlier technologies
changed in thirty years quite a
lot obviously much of the
terminology does need to be
updated we all live in a digital
world technologies integrated
into our daily lives and right
in at this moment we have to
recognize that it's not optional
to leave work for education to
not be in areas that
technologies integrated into.
We've experienced this first
hand with the pandemic all
students now need to be to to
proficiency in the.
At school and at home.
Changing the language and name
of the act will ensure that the
progress that we've made during
these difficult times adjusting
to that.
The pandemic those teams that
progress toward digital equity
for students continues and is
sustainable over time.
We've made a lot of progress in
addressing digital equity for
students school districts were
quick to provision students for
moaning.
Their efforts were literally
corrupt.
Four months after the pandemic
hit.
Approximately seven percent of
students to have dedicated
devices at home that sounds like
a lot but if you're starting
from zero that's progress.
Which equates to about a hundred
and forty four thousand students
without computers in their home
now.
After that you know we to you.
about five percent for sixteen
thousand do not have dedicated
devices at home.
Four months after the pandemic
hit about twenty.
For sixty thousand students do
not have adequate internet
service.
Now about thirteen percent or
forty thousand students did not
have adequate internet service
in our homes.
We still have a lot of work to
do.
We have challenges state and
we're fortunate that we have
partners in the state that we're
working with.
Districts received about eighty
one million dollars federal
funding to make the progress
that I just mention some of that
progress is with the bandaid
this was a temporary.
This new digital landscape now
requires tech support for
students computers
for bridges and that the state
to.
They have small IT shops.
Teachers also need training to
ensure students and families can
effectively use computers and
the internet for learning
purposes.
This year PED is working with
regional education cooperatives
so we have a network of regional
education cooperatives in the
state we work specifically with
the REC nine to coordinate yes
we have I. T. supports for
districts to use for this
purpose.
The REC line with the other REC
I. T. services teacher
scholarships call center device
repair depots starlink satellite
service deployments and other
supports just.
Our partnership with the REC
is a successful model for
support we hope to continue.
The language in the bill
provides new membership yes
Representative I mentioned and
those requirements for that the
council education for the
education technology health
education technology this
membership will actively engage
in addressing long term
sustainable bold digital equity
for students.
Senator will be gone after this
year so we do have a financial
sustainability challenge.
The executive budget
recommendations include
recommendation included forty
two million dollars for this
purpose purpose which includes
that five year device
replacement cycle for twenty
percent of the devices replaced
each year twenty percent
replacement five hundred
Chromebooks five hundred dollar
from books I did LSD chief for
the device five hundred dollar
pro looks for three hundred
thousand students is thirty one
million dollars so the math gets
very very.
Additional costs for internet
services systems such as
starlink subscriptions and I. T.
support assistance processes the
number eleven million dollars.
Well this bill does not include
an appropriation these are
examples of how funds in the
analogy fund would be used or
could be used if that funding
were replenished.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Of the digital equity for
education bill thank you.
Thank you madam chair
I do want to point out the
committee to of page four also
talk about
Aspects of the school district
technology plan hello.
As far as you know we can really
talk briefly about the
how the of.
I will be addressed with
students as well as to how we
will get the most verification
it does pop up replacement
repair process okay as attackers
Committee huge investment into
the technology and technology
school to the school there has
to be a plan as far as repair
because
As far as the the dollar amount
of health district is going to
talk about the refresh because
of the technology are changing
we cannot have computers no more
than four five years because the
technology the operating systems
may change.
The other a big part of a item
number three is actual from the
city gate if we don't have the
the connections in the bill
ability for students access the
internet outside of the school
then it becomes a bookmark or
not able to fully investigate
the full use of their technology
so connectivity is a big part of
my my colleagues from some of
the more remote parts of the
states that that's a big issue
for their community
for their students and their
families so that's part of a.
The other part about is the of
item number five the
professional development the
trade we have to have the four
staff members
we're our own their lobbyists or
those then they they they need
the training support the
learning of their students so we
have to have adequate and
effective training so that those
staff members.
Can support students and
actually what I'm saying
students can teach us and so
that's the the.
Wonderful federal.
And as a some of my colleagues
chair across state on up cyber
security is huge we've seen that
through the cybersecurity
attacks I would actually shut
down so the school districts
that I cross the state because
of a lack of.
The cybersecurity so with that
Madam I want to Senator
questions we think thank you so
much let's go to the audience do
we have members in the audience
who in support of the bills.
Okay I'll start with my right
please.
Chair members Katie my name is
Lovelace on the operations
manager for the office broadband
access expansion here's a
quarter page and four oh one and
we really appreciate a few
continue our partnership working
with Public Education Department
on the critical issues official
equity and things of overlap
such as the state education
network which helped fuel center
security thank you.
There.
Hello hold signs secretive sent
home and we do support this bill
because we're small school.
Are you six to our technology
and she says it changes every
three years of equipment that we
know will be on three years
this.
Comments in support of the bill.
Please hi my name is Bobby do
taxes and I'm the executive
director of the regional
educational cooperative
association we're
administratively attached to PED
and we have the opportunity to
work with John in the area and
the folks at PED on on this
particular initiative this year
and it's been amazing took a
little while to get everything
up and running because of
counseling and all of that but
you have a brochure outlining
all of the initiatives I can't
tell you how important this is
to education
it is it is is really changes
what we can offer students in
rural education and I really
want to point out the call
center has been quite helpful to
parents and grandparents and
families as well as students for
support when they run into
technology issues at home or
things like that if it staff not
only with
lots of folks from our state but
we have specifically a Navajo
speaker just brought on a second
novel the speaker and we'll have
a table with speaker as well as
bilingual speakers so we're
really able time for families
thank thanks for the comments in
support of the bill Sir.
And madam chair members of the
committee good.
Stan rounds with school
superintendents and for the
education leaders in New Mexico
you've already heard will affect
this sponsoring this bill for
its timely it's appropriate it
has the fixes that we need to we
have the staff to do it we have
to deliver mechanisms of regions
Cheryl we simply ask you to move
this along for thank you thank
you let's go to pass.
Supporters of Bill.
Stay on the webcast comments in
opposition let's go back to the
audience any comments opposing
the bill seeing them
Representative right you madam
chair and Representative I'm
sorry I'm probably had a few of
my.
Internet technical.
I I I got a couple questions
here if we go to page two one
eleven.
And reporting of cyber bullying
madam chair probably the experts
are you trying to look at the
communications all your school
network to recognizes or our how
are you doing that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative renewal actually
turned my experts in our.
Thank you here Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
I really appreciate that
question is helping the state
where the students are using the
technology to help them
understand and deal with news
article the following in the
state we are active in your
you're tapping down.
This is really about if building
human capacity to be good
justices.
Thank you madam chair
representative right off as a
school administrator of bullying
is is very different than it was
four years ago forty years ago
we had a playground bullies but
after we went from schools over
now.
The internet through candid
Committee.
One of the unintended
consequences of knowledgeable
you could fall you for through
social media this far three jobs
posted close type things and so
as an administrator our primary
responsibilities of state in
students and staff this will
this help in required districts
to have these mechanisms in
place so that we can identify
fully all of them I the threat
and support those students
So that they can enjoy their
education free of this I
activity.
And madam chair and of experts
on page two the one fifteen I
agree we need to get that
it's more of a COVID I guess or
maybe what you're looking at and
I was trying to do the work with
I've got friends who live in
rural areas they're going to we
on Moss
satellite internet and they're
telling me it is really high
speed and I was just wondering
if we went to his company and
said we're going to go is.
Okay we're gonna give you I
think you said forty thousand of
connections what is the deal you
would give us are we looking at
some point that
The gentleman that's a big
question some for my experts.
Chair representative right.
We John and I have worked with
this company starling which is
you are lost yeah well orbit
satellite service
the services really for economic
help we managed to address areas
that have literally picked
connected to the internet before
it's very expensive.
It's a short term solution.
We have an infrastructure
problem in the state and its
infrastructure will take a while
so we have I think John has the
specific numbers before five
hundred maybe a little bit more
than that connections
it's been.
Time consuming and the in
setting up the connections the
company is a new company and
they're maturing in terms of
their customer service but we
have those that we have
successfully connected it's
great.
It's expensive.
Yes.
Madam chair and that's what I've
heard is that is just really
good at that actually we went
with a large flock we might get
some discount deals.
madam chair me on to page three
line is seven.
So we're.
Is where we need to find all of
for small schools from what they
are currently or just in this
act.
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative re just for the
socks we want to do is we want
to have representation of all
districts different sized
districts because these are sent
home are very different than the
needs of the yes or some of the
district manager.
And so what I want to see this
part of the committee we want to
make sure that as this group
gets together that all of those
issues all of the needs of the
school districts are brought
into one place and that we as a
council they can make
recommendations.
To
Two of those that oversee the
technology is for the solution
because what we can we cannot
forget that each district each
is unique the resources in the
community are need and so that
we want to make sure that we
have of the US legislators and
appropriators here and the the
the policy makers who are in
future legislation we may have
to come back and dressed and
make of policy for all.
Communities.
Of.
And
madam chair members of the
committee I would like to also
mention that I was on the
original technology education
your committee would you
Secretary stop former senators
not house yesterday up at nine
and one of the issues that I saw
was are we had one
Representative from small
district time to Gallup and the
needs of gas.
Committees at home or other
places around the stage and Mr
the ability.
For driver's education larger or
smaller districts and it's just
a fun.
Thank you and madam chair and
Representative when I go over to
for.
Look at twelve ones.
Are we fishing.
Laptops all students.
thank you.
Thank you Representative right I
think it's different for each
district and may be different
upon the all the great deals all
I can speak for my district as
of per se is that for our
special students there issued a
back flow of current apple
district just over nine to
twelve every student every staff
member receives apple back on
the educating through our
calendar and even out in our
original preschool they're using
iPads because as far as the
ability to they can just slide
please the students they may
have you know maybe more user
friendly but also the costs of
these of but difference between
every state I think really
talking about is you know that
they will consistency will walk
one district because of the
support Mr if you want once we
was using a.
Others use Chromebook and so I
think this is really talking
about the plan that will be
submitted as to how the
technology we use throughout the
the disk Madam chair
representative and madam chair I
think you guys are doing great
on that money five requests so
that is really good with this
but I didn't know if we were
issuing to all but madam chair
that's all of thank you I have
Representative Chasey
Representative Y. representative
on in our new house for the past
the second Representative lost.
Mentors couple questions.
So regarding the city council
that is so.
How many members of this council
than madam chair representative
would be.
On the for a family is thirty
four members or from the
district's indigenous individual
districts monitor.
Madam chair representative
block.
This we were gonna be doing
about that we did you know as
far as coming up as far as with
the council so looking starting
to page six
we have of one from the state
government
expertise in all the
of the director of office of
broadband access of two members
with expertise in school
district administration one
large one small district like I
talked about before
We also want to make sure that
we have a limited because as I
said before the needs of the
elementary from the needs of the
of secondary schools
The this is what I really think
and and speaking with my college
sports northwestern western for
the state is that we're gonna
have a native American was
representative of because I know
it's for some of those we are
saying of.
You're talking about technology
and access and some of my folks
my constituents don't have
running water electricity so I
think that's very important to
be included of that group of
individuals to make sure that
they there we address our needs
to this council
and as far as I heard this right
the voice of the parents because
this technology when we had over
the device to the of students of
parents also need to have worse
of the table as to how of what
kind of job you're doing and
what kinds of decisions about
making
The C. two members of large
Of course you know.
I want to make sure that we're
also the geographic and regional
countries including all
different groups so Mr chair
madam chairman and and
Representative block those are
kind of the committees and
really purpose of that is to
make sure that we we have a
voice and that everybody is
Representative thank you madam
chair representative mentioned
aren't where is where parents
listed in.
The council first K..
Eight seven nine fourteen yes
the seven yes okay.
Thank you but if there I think
that's important chair
representative.
Table.
My last question is just like a
facetious question.
Usually when the word comes out
Madam chair representative I
usually back away from that work
is been coopted so much so madam
chair representative regarding
technology.
Does this just mean like access
to the technology and the
ability to use it or does that
have any kind of social
connotation all of the thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative walk I I do agree
that that were equity and has
had different needs in the
purpose of this bill just needs
access you mean the for access
for all peoples to because you
know it's for all students all
communities so that is intent of
this work and this is.
This bill.
And the.
Representative on.
So I.
Okay so we have a motion on the
table we have a second do we
have any opposition seeing and
food show all present voting in
the affirmative Representative
have a due pass and.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
Representative classes will be
one.
Representative.
The.
Representative.
Senator.
Representative.
Representative.
What was your first
Representative.
Etcetera etcetera please always
call senator Wirth.
Yes Representative.
Okay Senator five thirty sorry
you madam.
Members of the committee we are
introducing I.
In the binder I think this is
the committee act.
So
that.
And wealthy.
Well the house out
I was very correct we bring down
this.
Discussion held Mr yes.
That we have a motion.
Two two number that is two two
five eight four nine one.
Motion
For assistance with practical I
three eight.
The
in this bill.
About creating transparency
level playing field and the
government these studies
standards procedure for the
county commissions in the bill
vacancies in the house of
representatives and Senate both
in during the legislative
session and during the off
session.
And senator masses is mine
expert witness include.
The the the the.
All.
So I let him.
Further comment thank you madam
chair members it's great to be
here so this is essentially
codifies what is that ninety
percent of the time it does not
apply to rural counties it only
applies to counties that
enveloped the entire legislative
district police are not I hope
County until couple seconds no
rules whatsoever.
In dealing with the legislative
agencies it was all on written
rules and it was just power
politics at its worst to its
credit of my local county
commission put in a twenty one
day rule.
And then a month later put in
attending school.
And this last month repeal.
And put in a new rule with the
new people actually despite
their attempts kind of makes it
worse because it doesn't allow
for appointments that go to the
governor during the legislative
session and only the vacancy
starts when document is sent
from the secretary of state to
the for FY commission.
Where somebody dies
they don't there's no protocols
for accepting applications
immediately and the chair still
has full discretion in calling
for a meeting up to forty five
days this week for twenty one
days.
Of the requirement on on the
local county commissioners and
if they start accepting
applications needed please.
with that will stand for
questions.
Okay thank you let's go to the
audience public comment and
supportive that.
Committees of the two.
The any opposition.
Let's go to the webcast.
Four of the bill.
Representative right you madam
chair and Representative Senator
I understand exactly what to do
in the that was a mess.
And yours of when we go to page
two one fourteen the old agency
in the house of representatives
in need that were sent.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you very the center
section different sections of
the report that's existing
lawyers and their their things
into the other.
You have the Senate is on page
four.
And
Representative Senator so okay
so we've got twenty one days we
got
going
you know this process started
then we're going to have an
election in another twenty one
days so we've got of of the last
let's focus on the last twenty
one because now we have the the
end of the list.
The quality yes thank you madam
chair thank you that's what this
whole to accomplish that the the
application process begins
immediately the meeting is set
within two days everyone there
were Knowles
and and then everything is
public of the the current rules
in my home county doesn't make
these public till till the last
five.
And madam chair and and and I'm
taking worst case scenario you
got twenty one days yet oh now
they've had a meeting now here's
everybody that's going to be on
the ballot.
Now we go to our county clerk
you say you got a run election.
And you have to run the
elections within three weeks
correct no chair representative
renewal of the county clerk is
just simply out the meeting
oversee the funding the vote
that we're not changing the
constitution the county
commission has full authority to
replace a vacancy in a single
County district and so they
simply have to have that what
with the twenty one.
Okay and madam chair
Representative and Senator I do
not like the range was voted I
mean the the commission to go
ahead and send one or two names
up to the governor and I think
we need to remain with that.
I don't think we want to go
ahead and change that thank you
madam chair Representative
remained that's kind of a wish
list it's not the priority of
the bill yeah
and so if the committee felt
compelled to not do that of.
Of that would be a
good idea members would be would
be considered federal.
Madam chair I would move the
I I'll make a motion and we we
move right choice voting I know
it's page two.
Through the.
I could I could give a stab Gen
funding okay.
Thank you madam chair what I
believe the amended.
The man is is on page two.
Eight twenty and twenty one.
Of.
At the end actually a line
nineteen after appointment put
in this semicolon.
Like twenty as you strike the
words like twenty and you strike
the words up until the semi
colon.
We do the exact same thing on
page four lines nineteen twenty
and twenty one.
And then.
Of.
Also shared for page three.
Of our minds aligned to after
vacancy.
What a.
And you strive for the remainder
of two thousand four.
And then on page five lines.
Continue for that period.
The strike lines the remainder
of line to an lines three and
four is that correct.
Madam chair I think on page four
nineteen you want to send
my full after twenty minutes yes
ma'am and then delete.
Strickland twenty and strict
twenty one up to some excellent
correct correct.
I.
Areas.
The
bill or more hours to get okay.
K. madam chair and senator my
answer the name on the funding
order
of February two thousand for
Montoya since we're talking
about it Senator I wanted
amended so.
To let me ask you how you
visualize that work.
Madam chair of the leader of it
would work the same way it works
today of the majority of the
commission nominates a person to
the governor for.
workforce appoints that person
in this this only deals with
appointments I misspoke it only
deals with appointments I would
work the same way as it does
today they would simply have to
do a within twenty one days and
they would have to start
accepting applications PED and
they would have to set the date
of the meeting with.
What is it is it is adhoc
there's been twelve points in my
hand County in the past eight
years and everyone is completely
different and everyone is Nash
of.
Of
of blank blank and.
Hello the board was going to use
right.
What was your thank you madam
chair so Sir we want thank you
madam chair representative to
see leader so when I wanted to
draft the bill I wanted to just
pick the top five new like the
point total.
But
But the bill doctor I was
struggling with the bill doctor
so he just put in the magic
words ranked choice voting they
would if if eight people were to
apply they would essentially
rank of one eight.
And then the county clerk would
then get wrapped the five
ballots at the mall and the and
the winner of that ranked choice
voting would would would be the
new.
Okay.
Echo.
I I think we really probably
need to play out some scenarios
on that before I.
I think it's the I think it's
the smart way to go it's kind of
deep blue eyes and stuff.
More people involved but it's
that's that's just a wish list
priority is the twenty one days
and the immediacy of the
selection process.
And madam chair on that point if
you remember I was appointed
also and so there were I don't
remember how many people there
were but each commissioner could
name whatever person they want
to but out of the group we all
did a presentation before the
commission and two names came
forward and at the beginning it
was basically a four to one vote
and then it became unanimous
supposed to send my name.
But you know we all know the
fiasco here's so I think it
works all right I I know you
need three commissioners and
you're gonna send a name out
Representative Reese still on
the amendment right right right
I was just trying to understand
okay good Madam chair with two
minutes thank you Representative
do we have any other discussion
on the amendment chair so
Senator Representative this
would only be for the
commissioners to the to the
commissioners on rank.
One of his with Representative
with the amendments there would
be no ranking okay
within but yes this is just for
county commissioners one of the.
At the.
District is.
County thank you madam chair and
and their families I agreed that
I should be replaced with my
opinion right choices very
undemocratic.
In this democratic system we
have a winner take all and I
think.
That would thank you madam.
Thank you Representative any
other discussion on the
amendment we moved to a doctor
we have not opposed to that
there's a motion to adopt the
amendment and the staff is in to
clarify.
This four years had late we're
missing out on page two line
nineteen.
The word.
Striking lines one second twenty
one to this will.
On page three we are strictly a
putting it into after the work
vacancy and striking the rest of
the line two of nine three and
all of line.
On page four.
We're putting full and afterward
for nine nineteen striking line
twenty second line twenty one
to.
And then on page five.
Like to hear it afterward
vacancy and the rest of line to
all of life's three and the all
of money for.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment we have a second is
there any opposition.
Kate the amendment is adopted
we're back on the bill and the
reception of the bill.
second motion for a new best we
have set.
As a matter on.
Jumping.
Committee to appoint I do not
present the benefits.
And
we got a review the committee so
point two version but we will do
it.
That we.
Many says.
Correct version would be so
point two birds right that's
correct.
So if you change your motion.
Yes come on the commotion do not
pass on house bill five thirty
eight but if you pass on the
fourteen point two version of
the house government committee.
Substitute for House Bill five
thirty.
And we have this with me thank
you Representative little is
there any opposition.
You have to pass on the forty
two version of the house several
nations Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill five
three eight.
Thank.
They do order many members we
will here committees of the
house bill two eighty five on
Friday.
But for a very productive
morning insurance.
We lived.
It
