Please call.
Representative on your new.
Representative loft present.
Representative Chasey.
Representative community health
care.
Representative little here.
Representative right here.
Representative Zamora your.
Question.
Here.
Chair Dr.
Here.
For a more
good morning and welcome
everyone so let's go ahead and
begin house two three three
Representative.
During.
And representative that.
Good morning thank you madam
chair of the committee
We're here to present house we
just built thirty three which is
a very Sen bill we have and that
makes it really.
The number is.
Four seven five one page the
second
the man please.
For the session okay so we have
a motion to discuss the second
set
second new positions.
In a statement thank you madam
chair members of the committee
the.
Both of the bill is simply a re
listing with Google addition.
Of of the divisions within our
ability creation are syncing and
the amendment delete section
three.
I was reluctant related to
compliance inspectors peace
officers of for some of the.
Cannabis and every and with that
information from the bill there
is no fiscal impact to the bill
of just a straight.
In the agency.
Discussion on the amendment.
Representative Zamora madam
chair and the presenters I'm
just looking at this right where
I wanted to buy a since
So what that manager presenters
what does.
Takes away the cannabis control
division specters in my correct.
Madam chair went to super.
Thank you madam chair
representative what it does is
it takes away
the addition of because this is
going to be an addition of law
enforcement compliance officers
for cannabis control for that
bridge which is alcohol and
tobacco this amendment does take
that away and the difference is
because it was a little more
complicated than we initially
thought to get that built into
their and the cost of it was was
not contemplated when we added
that language in Madam effort to
try to make sure we get this
done appropriately we decided to
remove that for the time that
there will continue to the non
law enforcement compliance
officers for cannabis.
Okay and then that's that's
exactly what I was going madam
chair and.
Madam said superintendent with
that
is it going to limit our power
of our ability.
Our ability to to control the
cannabis industry I'm hearing of
some issues for.
I guess you could call as a
rumor of facts but that there's
Canada's coming into the state
was being sold through our shops
and stuff and so you start
hearing issues like that and you
wonder we need.
Feet on the ground we need to
force our rules we need to keep
this thing straight.
And us being on the border with
Mexico really really
concerns.
So is this going to limit our
ability to to take hold of the
issues of the cannabis industry
Madam chair representative
that's a really good question no
it's not gonna change anything.
The difference of what it is
right now currently the cannabis
control division works
collaborative for the public
safety what we were trying to.
Our renewable the closer to home
so that the department could
manage that compliance will
continue to work hand in hand
with the department of public
safety.
As on building relationships
with the attorney general's
office.
And madam chair superintendent
If if you were to leave the
building where it is.
And were able to get the
officers what are we talking
about in numbers of officers and
what kind of fudges and as was
that your issues with the bill.
Madam chair representative there
was more issues than just that
there wasn't a reference to us
being a law enforcement entities
so we currently have law
enforcement
Certified law enforcement the
pharmacy board and that they
work hand in hand with the the
DEA we also have a law
enforcement that work hand in
hand but under the securities
division there was a little more
language that needed to
delineate that this is going to
be law enforcement and so we
need some time to read analyze
that and also look at what's the
relationship between the
alcoholic beverage and DPS and
the relationship between
cannabis and DPS how would that
work and we hadn't addressed
those issues the analysis that
our staff did on this bill
suggested that we may need as
many as ten law enforcement the
cost of that was going to be
about half a million dollars and
so even hearing down to say Hey
we're gonna look at just a
couple law enforcement we're not
going to do until twenty twenty
five seems really problematic
and so we need to take some more
time to stand back take a look
at have conversations with GPS
in the AG's office and figure
out what's the right path for us
so that we're not duplicating
efforts.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for superintendent.
Representative.
That's all Michael thank you
Representative little.
Thank you
so that was when my questions
thank you madam chair and that
Representative Matthews the
superintendent of was to is to
ask whether
of the would become a law
enforcement agency that you just
standing out it's going to be a
collaborate.
Continues with the public safety
public safety okay
A couple of peace sign here
serves reviewing this
The.
Definition of a peace officer is
that what you're going to be
madam chair
the superintendent we'll be
refining clarified Madam chair
representative that is correct
we needed to have more language
to define what the peace officer
as and that was when I was one
of the challenges that you're
facing and again decided to pull
back I think this through and
come back to the legislature in
another year the more
comprehensive.
That plan.
Okay thank you.
Right and then the other
questions are answered thank you
thank you.
Representative production we can
have a motion to that amendment
for adoption I have a second do
we have any opposition to the
motion to adopt amendment seeing
none you have to at an amended
bill.
Thank you very much and
Commission and the chair will go
to the other section is being
mended and I asked the
superintendent to explain why
why the council staff.
Madam chair all members
committee so what this bill does
now isn't it the fourteen
commission's division which is
actually been functional and
been funded for over twenty
seven years almost thirty years
now but it's never been an
actual division of the
department was created by
executive order back under the
Tony and I am on the
administration at that time
included for almost all point
included nursing medical
architects years since then
those boards have peeled off and
have become standalone
independent boards but we still
don't have an actual boards and
commissions division this adds
the division's this is this came
up when we were presenting our
sense that those in front of the
LFC of summer and.
Their attention and the
recommendation was wanted to
just please go and add in boards
and commissions as an actual
division since we've been
funding it and so that is why
we're adding the boards and
commissions in the actual
division we also need to have a
ninety division are I. T.
division is not an actual
division does not actuals
separated funding as most of you
probably know we did have a
sector security incident.
Critical it's absolutely
critical that agencies have the
ability to designate deterrent
set aside funds specifically for
IT and what happens right now is
that in order to get I. T.
budgeting we have to go to each
of the divisions top of the
division directors and say we're
going to need this much to cover
the cost of this and it takes it
out of their budgets which
they're planning to use for
personality for for contracts
for expenses this way we would
we would end up having to
dedicated budget specifically
for I. T. and the reorganization
is was just simply the drafters
Nice little touch to put it in.
Thank you.
So with that if you're
finished with the presenting
your bill will go to the
audience.
And here at the office of.
The superintendents Trujillo
again great overview.
Thank you K. so let's go to the
audience do we have the numbers
in the audience who are in
support of the bill please raise
your hand.
Do we have any opposition to the
bill seeing none let's go to the
webcast do we have any closing
comments on the webcast.
Support.
From the webcast.
CNN committee members
Representative Zamora madam
chair and presenters a
superintendent how much money is
are we talking about.
Madam chair representative this
year are not talking about the
for I. T. what will happen is
next year when the budget comes
forward we're probably going to
be looking at holding an open
novis Committee extreme for the
department as much as it will
be.
Actual.
The movie money from me to the
division's under the LFC budget
recommendation and the executive
recommendation to be
specifically designated for T.
right now R. I. T. costs are
somewhere in the neighborhood of
three to four million dollars a
little bit challenging for us to
actually say how much it is
because there is at this time
actual budget for IT but it will
not necessarily need more money
for the department it just means
a re organization of the funds
so that the I. T. division knows
what they have to spend plans as
to how they help to make
alright.
HSD continued option and to keep
it safe is challenging.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you for the.
Researchers little bit depends.
Purdue has.
The second by Representative
little do we have any
opposition.
Opposition to this.
I see none.
You have to pass on house
amended bill two three three.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee.
To Representative McQueen.
House bill one eighty four.
Here are you ready yes we are
ready.
Madam chair members of the
committee
For a long time now the
department.
just sort of I believe it's true
information as for.
So if you're not familiar with
the king Department it is
effectively a stable of agency
in its managed I made the
commission of seven members who
are all appointed by the
governor.
Eight we have a lot of turnover
in the commission of we are
currently down to three members
of the Senate so the we don't
have a quorum
so they can hold.
Of in addition to that because
the service pleasure the
governor the pattern has been
that when you get a new governor
you getting.
So the new government comes in
and wants to make those
appointments themselves and
asked everyone to.
This bill designed to bring.
the instability and professional
as a to the commission so under
this bill the commission states
at seven members three would be
appointed sort of at large by
the governor one for each person
district.
From the county.
More than two from local
authority.
In for would be appointed by the
Legislative Council and
legislative council appointments
or sort of position.
So they're not just people of
course they have to meet certain
requirements on the bill there's
a major farmer conservationist
the hunter or angler in the
sciences and those two have
distribution requirements
someone wants to County more
than to any.
The commissioners reserve for
six years tax returns and they
could only be removed for costs
in the the for cause removal
provisions of something borrowed
from the university of New
Mexico
Things board regions
in to provide stability to that
group of use the same language
in this.
Of madam chair.
Members of the committee
Representative is
a whole different.
Years and the need to serve to
criticism.
One is that.
There with the geographic
diversity.
And if you look at the current
statutes.
The bill the geographic
diversity of this bill would be
comparable or better than the
current geographic diversity
said current statutes as I sort
of areas group by county and
into a large the result is for
kings and the at large teams you
could get six of the seven
members from basically urban
areas.
That that's just the with the.
this would you have you probably
have representation from more
counties is.
The second criticism is that my
bill has only one position.
For a year thank.
On the gamers.
But again if you look at the
current statutes there are zero.
So the one position reserve for
honoring there is a for now the
ceiling.
We would expect other hunters
and other anglers.
Other outdoors people trusted in
this mission.
So with expect there would be
more than one but we want to
call out that that was position
was important.
being these other for the first
perspectives ensure farmer
conservation this scientist that
we want to bring to the table.
So I've heard that criticism
repeated.
It doesn't seem to be because
again we're we're making
improvements to the system the
parents.
and with that chair of the have
the.
Thank you Representative let's
go to the audience for public
comment do we have the comments
in support of the bill please
raise your hand okay to have
comments in opposition of the
bill okay I understand also we
have individuals outside reading
to make public comment so let's
go ahead and begin from my right
and then when we're finished
we'll let the others outside
coming to me Madam says.
We stand.
And the your comments please
make them within one minute
thank you sure madam chair
committee members for the record
and goes right on the head as an
organization we're focused
largely on the health of our
watersheds rivers and fish we
also work based organization
nearly everyone of our members
I.
Lice's is this combination of
conservation and recreational
angling have a the decisions of
the commission so far members in
the things they care about is
here concerns the state of the
current commission but frankly
we had concerns about the
commission for years now I think
this bill.
Nation and direction as chair as
Representative queens stated it
should provide your expertise
greater independence allows for
diversity of perspectives to be
brought to bear to make
decisions about the state's
wildlife so we stand and support
ask for your support as well.
Thank you next.
The river as an advocate percent
base County I would just like to
say that this is long overdue
it's way past six out of it out
of this commission and are you
briefly supported and hope you
all to thank you.
The morning madam chair and
committee members carry Romero
executive director registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
council officers and guys we
also support of this legislation
our organization in town fits
and every week misleading and we
look closely with the department
of game and fish or highlighted
years of the council I've
watched a commission become
increasingly less efficient and
I believe like Representative
McQueen stated that the reason
for this is because the current
statute does not require anyone
to have any familiarity with a
special offer for wildlife
policy currently there is not
one commissioner on the
commission with a background in
again this Department biology or
conservation this can create a
lot of disruption in the
meetings because commissioners
don't understand the importance
of timing rulemaking process and
the frequently funding violate
the open meetings act because
they simply do not understand
the industry additionally it's
been over four years since we've
had a full commission of seven
members and just last week the
current commission chairman
resigns the commission assets it
free members which is not enough
for important finally bank
after.
Next.
Financing Johnson and I'm a
volunteer defenders of wildlife
they spent over ten years as an
executive of a major Susan this
country and
I'm looking I've worked with
miss the Merrill and Division
natural resources and I hope
that are we to than it does with
the fair and balanced
Commission.
That includes
both the needs of the animals.
People.
so they down get kind of left
out this old question thank you.
Madam chair of the committee my
name is Brian bird and the
southwest program director for
wildlife we represent about
eighty thousand members and
supporters here in the state of
New Mexico most of whom are
members because they are non
consumptive uses of our wildlife
in the state in other words we
are here to support not mostly
non game wildlife and we did as
well as myself work with the
efficient issue for many years
and have found it to be again
unprofessional fortunately
highly politicized and for our
wildlife to do after the
representative
In the state we support
Representative McQueen this bill
here and hope you will too thank
you very much.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee on John from
Travis present for the New
Mexico wildlife federation our
predecessors were brought
forward five verification
problems association I
personally through my career and
push Department now that doesn't
years with appropriation I've
been a new projects but are
at in more than two hundred
commission mediation
ministrations thank our learners
and very much tomato lacking
moxie it's just it can be
improved this is a very much
improvement
in strong support of it the
think about the hundred thousand
scare us to death we live why
this is betting that but it is
but together the commission is
one of the most under
appreciated and most critical
boards in this state
the department of education is a
far more complex operation of
most people realize we need it
really goes functioning for with
the continuity and
professionalism slide out
records thank you thank you
next.
Once we're wanting for was
talking.
We have here members of the
committee I can't Salazar I'm a
member of why three board S.
Hispanics enjoyed camping
hunting and the outdoors and we
look at this bill to help
support our hunting heritage
spanning carriage and.
In favor of this bill thank you.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee do you have in
the New Mexico policy director
for the Audubon society which
has thirty thousand members in
New Mexico and we support the
bill for reasons I'm sure my
colleague stated as a safety
thank you madam chair members
jobs and protecting motors in
the second
we also support.
Bill to make the game commission
less politically polisario more
fair and I will repeat.
Thank you thank you okay let's
go to the left pass.
Chris comments in support.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning members of the committee
my name is Chris Smith I'm here
on behalf of WildEarth guardians
and are thousands of members and
supporters across the state
we stand in support of this bill
we believe the game commission
better reading from political
whims and we need further
expertise and perspectives on
this commission in order to have
a commission that is more
responsive to the public and
more responsive to the
challenges that New Mexico
wildlife is destined to face we
urge you to give this bill a do
pass thank you very much thank
you Dan warranty.
Madam chair yes we can hear you.
I'm sorry.
Thank you my name is Dan Warren
and I would like to read three
sentences from the New Mexico
state game commissions nineteen
twenty seven report on wildlife
conservation and management.
These are.
As follows as a matter of fact
in the aggregate huge sums of
money and in less time our
annually consumed in America
merely to see wildlife in its
natural environment our great
Yellowstone park as an example.
That New Mexico does not benefit
more by such attractions is
because she does not provide
them for the interested public
as the New Mexico native and
biologist I support.
The the current bill and I think
it would make improvements to
the not the non hunting
enjoyment of wildlife thank you
thank you phone number ending in
one zero nine five comments and
supported.
Yes hello good morning committee
can you hear me alright.
There of.
Good morning.
Good morning committee can you
hear me alright yes we can.
Thank you very good morning
members of the committee
amerikanischen ray wildlife
chair for the Rio Grande chapter
of the Sierra Club the north
American model of conservation
so often praised by wildlife
managers proclaims that wildlife
belongs to everyone when the
game commission was established
a hundred years ago the focus
was on fishing what people to
interacting with wildlife back
then did but today things have
changed the pursuits of watching
and photographing wildlife have
burgeoned so much so that
they're more than twice the
number of wildlife watchers in
New Mexico today that anglers
and hunters combined according
to a twenty sixteen additional
wildlife service survey
dedicating a commission seat
someone who focuses on
conservation without ties to
hunting is long overdue wild
animals today also basic stream
environmental challenges not
present a hundred years ago and
reserving a seat for someone
with scientific expertise is
crucial to meeting these
challenges this bill will make
the game commission more diverse
more equitable and more informed
urge your support and both.
Thank you.
Okay have any closing comments
on the web.
Seeing them committee members
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam
Representative I was going.
One of our major
analyses here Senator mentions I
think house bill.
One eighty three year as
possible directly before this
house bill from what I can tell
it simply makes the entire
commission.
Optional for an advisory
commission I was wondering if
one if you have anything to do
with that still and to what your
thoughts are on that so as you
can maybe get some contact work
objects on the spell Mitscher's
info from the
the LFC that's a great question
also on if you will
it would make the game
Department games Division Energy
minerals Nash resources along
with forestry or conservation
mining minerals and I shares of
Force
and make that director the
answer to the cabinet secretary
which I believe we've had good
success with with our fortune
Division and parts this incident
which is under under it makes
the game commission advisory
board I think that's sort of the
right fix that bill stalled I I
my committee so sort of in limbo
and and at this point out.
I think thank you very much
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Zamora.
Madam chair of the
Representative.
She it exactly on my question
so.
And I'm not trying to be rude
hearing things but because of
the word on the use of
hypocritical comes up to my so
why are we giving.
More authority to game and fish
here and then if we take it and
put it under energy.
Minerals and natural resources
we place them under secretary
with the.
Restricting them of their.
Powers and authorities.
Madam chair representative so
more a.
I don't entirely follow your
question as I said it's possible
the three a stall air just both
built in in you really can't
move forward with both bills the
cost of.
because I want to have the
discussion about how we could
reorganize or state agencies to
better serve the public interest
insulate them from from all and
I and I think we've had great
success with our state parks are
our state forestry director are
we had a very good or
conservation
Division director until recently
she barely moved on to another
opportunity.
I think that's been a good model
I think having the political
appointees be able to hire and
fire the director of HSD has not
worked well and that's why I
suggested we move the department
because I want to have that
discussion you know falling
short of that I think we should
these diversified and
professionalizing existing
commission structure.
So Madam chair representative.
What what they get moved under
energy minerals and natural
resources is the secretary going
to have authority over.
Where is heading part.
Chair representative the more it
least in this legislative
session they're not getting.
Madam chair representative your
other bill those.
Correct Madam chair
representative whether bills
fall I I in my committee I don't
plan to reconsider.
Madam chair representative you
still have the same intentions.
I think it's something then
chair representative I think
it's something we should
consider there are few other
changes I think we should talk
about two I think I think EMNRD
is actually really pretty big in
the first and we should consider
splitting it into two agencies I
think there are rules that are
part of the part please it would
probably be under energy
minerals and natural resources I
mean it's just work for the
whole mix I think we should
think about how we can do state
government better and that's
also true for our water you can
see that we separate water
quality water supply and and
madam chair representative.
I'm not against better I'm all
for better but I'm I'm
wondering.
With the full intention was.
And why take it to energy
minerals and natural resources
instead of eleven game and fish
be a standalone.
To about getting that
Because everyone in this bill
will give them more authority
and and trying to make it better
and then if if the other bill
would have been successful we
would have put it right back
into the political realm but it
when it where have to answer to.
Energy.
Minerals and natural resources
so I'm just not getting at all
helpful back on my questions
listen to the debate and the
same one or.
sure madam chair give me a
second chance if I knew this
thank thank you for your answers
thank you Mr.
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative for you.
what I was.
Interested in here is
in some of the differences that
are pointed out.
Right now when the governor
appoints then there's a Senate
confirmation process what do you
think.
About that there's some
structural.
Perhaps difficulties with what's
council of the pointing and
would you want to consider
some cut mechanism whereby
require confirmations thanks.
Madam chair.
Representative Chasey a couple
thoughts on that first I think
we're we have
we're asking percent
confirmation on too many
positions and they're having a
hard time with the workload
second the Legislative Council
of course includes you know
bipartisan bicameral
representation so that the
Senate we already have a voice
in those apartments and it
doesn't make sense to have sent
a confirmation after.
It by the second and the third
issue is a sensitive the in on
the house side this is the
Senate the veto power over the
the house members of Legislative
Council and their their input
into this process would still be
subject to Senate confirmation.
madam chair is Representative
McQueen.
What if there's a vacancy with.
That arises when let's council
isn't legally constituted.
well Madam
Representative Chasey we
currently have a seven member
commission with three members so
there are vacancies from time to
time hopefully not that many but
there if there was a big key for
a period of time during during
the session you know it it it
could be still probably fall
session.
So madam chair and
Representative McQueen I guess I
just wonder if
If you see any solution to some
of the.
Logistics that were raised by
the committee to else's FIR.
This is based.
Madam chair representative seats
the.
Under the bill the sort of
they're sure to groups of
commission says the three at
large one from each
congressional district when I
got there aren't stated.
Job requirements for this
so members of the public that
have an interest I would think
likely for hunters anglers maybe
conservation folks here were
the other for positions are all
to Mr job description you know
relatively specific requirements
of background
in that I think the process of.
Legislative Council building
bicameral and bipartisan
with with bring out in the you
know failure to meet those
requirements in the current
statute does have.
Some vague language about farmer
rancher in the federation is it
doesn't really see who that
applies to in the past it's
really been unclear you know
governors at local governors
have made appointments without
doesn't need someone to fill
critical role in you know people
that's what is is this person
the conservationist because the.
L. once for a member of an
organization or not and and it
really hasn't been clear but
because the four position slots
have these these sort job
description I think that would
be brought forth in the
Legislative Council you know for
discussion in.
Population that they meet the
requirements.
Thank you Madam chairman and
Representative McQueen I I I
think doesn't work at all and I
totally support try from.
The bill we're discussing at
this moment doesn't place the
commission inside alright yes
that's correct Madam chair
representative it thank heavens
it's current.
Structure out there but with the
two totally different process
Filling the vacancies and
ensuring representation.
And the other thing I like about
this Madam chair representative
where is that.
You would absolutely decimated
board at with this election.
Of a new executive.
And I I don't I can't that is
all good for the state.
And for our wildlife thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
Rehm thank you madam chair and
Madam chair and representative I
had the same concerns about the
Of the Legislative Council with
appointment
but I want to go over to page
two line eighteen it talked
about Russian.
So if we look at the
congressional the districts.
In essence right now the three
commissioners could come out of
the Albuquerque metropolitan
area.
one from Rio Rancho one from the
City of Albuquerque and if you
go to the smell said it would
Santa Fe County in Torrance
County intersect.
In the current.
The current
Composition is different areas
of the state I think that's
important.
and then on that I think we have
another issue the pending
lawsuit on the contractual
districts I would like to hear
your response to the it's kind
of compound question I'm sorry
but.
Madam is in green this is the
first point you know I I would
just point out that the
groupings of the state's all
include all except for one
include families with major
urban areas so you can get six
of the seven committee under the
current system six of the seven
commissioners from plus crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe or will
south's success.
It doesn't happen because I
think the the the governor and
the past governors you have one
broader representation that the
broader representation I think
it is we carry forward and I
think it's actually in the bill
because of the requirement which
I added
years ago of that no more than
one would be from the will
county so.
The and and as you say this
congressional.
Counties I I would.
I would question whether the
people that's within my district
think they're part of
metropolitan Albuquerque
Department probably resent that
you know so that you know that
there is there is some of that
managers and Remez for that the
lawsuit I would anticipate the
lawsuit would be results fairly
shortly I don't I don't really
expect your even if.
there is success in the lawsuit
I don't expect substantial
changes to the the districts I I
think that could all be
addressed there was managers a
ring if I mean there was there
was a comment from I think
actually the department can fix
that the congressional districts
change over time and that's.
Yes so it's conceivable that in
future redistricting a sitting
commissioner may no longer live
in that congressional district
and yeah you know that's
possible happens only once every
ten years and seen a lot more
churn on the commission then
something like that.
And madam chair Representative I
think you brought up my next
point is you know we kind of put
it in the stone in next ten
years we can have more or we
could have less rational
districts hopefully.
But but anyway we'll move on to
page three one services we just
only have one with you did you
see that there's a provision
that address that.
That if we lose a congressional
district.
Then together with the point
four two from each regain again
hear us on this trip than the
four point four one.
So the address that possibility
that we could pick up or lose a
congressional some thank you for
that.
Madam chair representative was
overdue of page three one
fourteen and I don't see a
sizeable ranch I know that you
know of particularly down
Sandoval County I live in
selling ramjets if you will
there are five acres and so you
know I think you think about you
know a working ranch for.
With animals actually on it you
know as opposed to branch at.
Madam isn't right there there is
the requirement that
if you read on yes this is all
yeah and I know yeah I I have I
have known five acres of not
called the ranch at we get by
wildlife coming through because
of a pre
you know I I again I I think
this is important this is
actually stronger language than
the current statutes
and I think that you could have
that discussion Ellis the
council it is someone if that
someone was nominated to own a
ranch at I think whoever was
paying for that person we get a
lot of grief.
Yeah madam chair and
representative I see a lot of
the ramjets they've got a all
our and one count the reason you
know court for consumption by
the anyway I think you get my
point that you know from
probably needs to be more than
to animals anyway see what's
go to page four one two and
we're talking about the
scientist
Who would be a members.
And I would just note that in
the game department they have a
file with yours over each
species that they manage and of
those are resources for the.
For the commission and testified
frequently there.
I you know your response to that
I I think that you know the the
individual.
biologist who's looking at one
species is very important.
Mijares arena I I totally agree
you know I hope and believe that
our team far has been full and
that the kings Commission this
is the I think sites is Jen
generally source Bacall's
becomes thing language and I
think having a scientist in the
decision making structure of the
game commission of the.
Present even for example in
executive sessions closed
sessions to have that
perspective would be a good
thing.
Thank you madam chair of the I'm
I have some concerns about it
you know why I think that
there's some ripples in the
commission that are recent
and I just can't supported at
this time thank you Jeff thank
you question.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
I'm gonna go to question on page
six and that the commissioners
cannot be removed except for the
blacks around fees include sure
great stability or fed.
That we currently have
And I understand from this
section the Supreme Court has
total jurisdiction.
Session would you madam chair
representative you can clarify
the process who can initiate
that kind of action.
Madam chair of the
Representative it's a great
question and this actually came
up in the last committee and had
some conversations with
Legislative Council Service
about this in like who would who
would have standing to bring
this and I believe the bodies
expanding for anyone who had
suffered harm as a result of
the.
Neglect for malfeasance so it
could be a member of the public
this is the language we've are
this language from get yours in
New Mexico regions I don't think
it's been tested in that context
I think I think this is a the
high bar
in at it's not going to happen
for me in is it would only
happen in the extreme
circumstance and I think that's
sort of what we're looking for
that we we we need to have an
outlet in case someone does need
to be removed but it should be.
A frequent occurrence.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative my second and
last question is about section
L. on page six.
Knowing that she declined state
voters twenty five percent of
registered voters in the state.
and our current system requires
them to change the registration
to the party in order to vote in
the primary your eliminating
that big chunk of civic minded
voters from serving on this
board
is there potential way to change
that language so you can bring
them back in especially since
that group of voters is growing.
So fast really want this
legislation to stand over time.
The madam chair.
That is a really interesting
question this language came from
a draft of the bill their work
on depreciated that process
Is I think
you could probably add a state
notwithstanding.
yeah changes to filiation eight
percent to the section of law
that are.
that that that would fix that
actually
that's a good point and not
considered that that short term
change process okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so you would
consider that a friendly
amendment
the men chair
Representative Figueroa I would
consider the.
I would love the wording and see
how it fit
Madam chair sent Figueroa if
you're interested in moving this
bill forward and working with me
on that for the four hundred
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative absolutely.
Thank you Representative little
yes transaction the past please.
We have a motion for do you.
Little a second by
Representative Chasey.
The full.
Representative on in order yes
Representative well chair of one
of the sections
I have one more question just
sort question.
Okay quickly.
Madam chair representative will
that with the game official have
the authority to control their
funds.
In this bill naturism is some
more of this additional makes no
changing no changes to their
current funding process Madam
yes Madam chair representative
did your other bill changes.
The manager has more that this
the game fish I think you're
losing to gets restricted funds
from.
The stick to the bill please
Representative madam chair has
everything to do with the.
We started to vote so please
finish your question.
More questions thank you Mr.
Representative law.
Yes.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative yes.
Representative right no ma'am.
Representative Zamora no.
Representative block.
Yes and I'd like to explain I've
of.
Visscher federal yes.
Madam Johnson yes by a vote of
seven to
seventy two Representative
McQueen you have to pass on your
bills thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Go to the next.
The thank you madam chair
Representative no I think it's
there is some some problems I
have with this bill but I do
think it's good to take power
away from the chief executive as
possible this what I think is
important so that's a way of a
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair elected over.
Representative or madam chair.
I don't think would be
restricted on our debate as we
learn.
How to serve our constituents
better and another thing I don't
think should be allowed in
committee is for Representative
Chasey to influence your
decisions as to how you run in
the committee.
Madam chair.
We've seen this in committee
census committee started and and
Representative Chasey has.
Habit of.
We're getting input to the
chair.
Now this committees around and
to me that system right.
Senator Laura and I wish to ask
questions about those bills
before we started to vote so you
had an opportunity to ask
questions regarding both bills
and Representative Chasey does
not influence me.
So I did give you an opportunity
to ask your questions I do not
see your hand and I did not
write your name down for the
second time I you mentioned it
but I didn't see you raise your
hand so when I say back to
committee please raise your hand
so that I can see and so we put
your name down call you again
and my apologies for that part
of it I probably wasn't as
discussed in with with the
Representative lock into the he
was on the list to speak I
thought he was and then I was
trying to make the motion and
that that kind of overlapped.
Yes and committee members I am
fair I give you the opportunity
to speak that is why we're
meeting on Saturdays we're
probably going to have to meet
every St Louis but we also have
a time frame we have to be on
the floor we're scheduled out to
February twenty accidents so I'm
I am as fair as I can be so
as respectful as I can be thank
you madam chair thank.
And before we go to the next
bill and like to recognize our
Supreme Court justice Harkins.
This is representative Lente in
rural I don't see him I believe
he's requesting to be.
The staff was so Representative
night for house bill two fifty.
Senator night.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you committee before you
is house bill two fifty which
is.
Seven to the Scribner's error
bill the statutes of originally
The New Mexico.
Land title association of.
Just wanted to do some some
minor touch ups to the bill in
working with Legislative Council
Service
The drafter thought that we
could actually simplify the
statute so this this bill does a
couple things.
Number one is the dresses
issues of the land title
association has proper border
where I can.
Maybe the Scribner's affidavit.
Number two really Senator I have
by flopping all rural properties
instruments of record into one
category statute is broken out
between a lot of these infants
mortgages
there's really no reason to have
the differentiation with respect
to Scribner's error so we
combine those and then we with
left in the the power of
attorney portion of the frankly
as a lawyer I don't understand
health power returnee there were
and while you can just get the.
Will be executed are returning
but it remains intact to my left
is Orlando zero with the
fidelity title for.
The New Mexico association of
two more ride is flurries
around.
The lobbyist for the land title
association.
And we are here we can pull
explained that I'm going to
great telef US workers are
remarks or if the.
If you wish a full explanation I
can provide you with us on this
is what I do every day that I'm
not here around.
The Senate of.
I think we can go to our
audience
in the audience in support of
the bill please raise your hand.
In opposition of the bill.
Okay seeing now let's go to cast
we'd like to hear comments or
bill Representative Trujillo.
madam chair I apologize I I'm
here to speak for H. B. one
ninety eight okay any comments
in opposition courthouse to
fifty.
Saying that committee members
Representative Chasey not sure
Representative what we do this.
Did we not get over the finish
line.
We didn't do this for.
Madam Representative Chasey the
original legislation follow are
here and I worked on the Senator
great several years ago we had a
minor change that we were going
to deal with a couple sessions
ago and Representative we had
discussions on didn't work which
was just yeah that's why I went
to him because we do I want to
get right back to the school.
Thank you madam chair I will be
happy to.
We spent a long time of this in
the future.
Okay thanks a lot.
Representative madam chair I do
pass.
We have a due process
Representative heating and the
second Representative Zamora.
Is there any.
Our position to it has.
I see none you have a do passed
house bill two fifty eight
Your greater lead up to.
Right to build two fifty.
Madam chair health bill two
fifty one good question I the
fourth and it is a.
It's a.
Bill of
I think it's going to be the
precursor through several bills
that that we see in fact
Representative Hochman Vigil
some and we talked about
combining of I also understand
as a bill over the Senate is
working on of those
Representative bill that will be
worth exploring.
We need to get our heads
together.
On some of these bills fifty
four is a pretty simple bill
number one it make sure that the
schematic for security systems
of the
Point.
Whether it be cameras is self of
those that type of information
is not subject to disclosure
under the info office so that
the.
Public and specifically of all
the bad guys can't get access to
the other lines to manage
location and how we.
Hardware software function we
can still request and receive
the information is captured on
camera as well.
Underlined schematics.
With that task on the system
itself what we're trying to.
Exempt from the of public
this accident with.
The.
That's really all of you guys
have.
No.
manager and then six o'clock on
the corporations drug the agency
and we have our statewide
security manager here as well.
Thank you thank you
Representative thank you experts
both for being here in case we
have questions.
Let's go to the public in the
room if you are here to speak in
support of house bill two fifty
one would you raise your hand.
If you are here to speak in
opposition to house bill two
fifty one which Razer any.
I think that we'll go to the
zoom focus on this if you are
here to speak in support of
house bill two fifty one to
previous versions.
Or opposition let's go to a
position.
Possibility I.
State then we go to.
Representative Rehm the thank
you madam chair and
representative of this is
something I thought about over
the and from the we have an
interview states thank I think
it needs to be expanded to all
government buildings and I think
that in the city of surveillance
and the
system
Anything around the security of
the building that should be the
expanded to that we're you know
any SO P. plans or anything like
that could be up to date get out
of we look at.
World today and somebody wants
to because it'll harm you know
they want to get as much
information as I can so.
Madam chair and.
Well if well it was brought
forth by reports if you look on
page three line fifteen sixteen
really fast for all public
publicly accessible facilities
of the state for
the state so I believe we
capture that I believe there is
other legislation that deals
with some some things and I'm
certainly interested in
expanding these representations.
For some other systems as well
this is going to have a security
system that though there's some
other member states and some
other things I think we're
probably gonna find a
comfortable place we can all all
land all right now this is with
brought forth by the courts but
it's broader than just support
it's also pretty system.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and and what and
I've got no problem talking to
the form but you know I think it
needs to go to how many security
guards you have what to.
You know.
It needs to be Y. anyway thank
you madam chair.
This is a war with the press.
In a Representative question
thank you.
Politics there Representative so
real quick was the question yes
drop boxes outside of county
clerks offices is this exempt
them exempt people from getting
video surveillance of those drop
boxes outside those government
buildings mentors
Representative.
If it is a publicly accessible
facility of the state or
political subdivision I believe
that that serve the system
itself would be exempt from
from.
Again the data obtained from
those cameras with footage of
the of the images would not be
this is the underlying system.
On and okay thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and then I know there's another
bill house bill two thirty two
from representative Sarinana and
representative Daniel A. Ivey
Soto does this bill conflicted
all the facts I do not want to
give an option.
What to get out I think this six
of what ten is that correct
madam chair.
Madam chair representative I was
not aware of Senator Ivey Soto
was filled and sealed.
Two days ago and and so
the senator has requested that I
meet with him on that I've had
several conversations with
Representative Hochman Vigil on
some similar legislation to a
and I think will come to a a
comfortable place where we're
all this probably gets rough.
To address it brought generally
in the exemptions that should
exist because we're finding that
technology.
Of.
Technology in particular the
underlying database.
Need to be protected.
Government needs to protect that
information and should not be
released we understand the
public's need for information.
But the underlying systems is
what we're concerned about that
information should not be
released because then it can be
used against the very people
were trying to act.
Totally understand thank you
madam chair that's everything I
have thank you Representative
have a motion for two passed
Representative Zamora the second
by Representative reading.
Have any.
Seeing none Representative Niger
you have to pass this bill to
fifty.
Thank you very much madam chair.
Yes I'm back home.
Eight two five one.
Representative Nibert.
What else I think we just do
that just okay.
You have to get past were to.
Secretary of.
More.
The.
I'm sorry support area
Representative Lynn Taitt.
What
are.
Okay.
The only
ones difference.
Okay Sir thank you
representative Lente.
Thank you I needed to see you.
When.
Yes.
Okay madam chair committee we
are on the house bill one ninety
eight and the floors orders
thank you good morning madam
chair and colleagues house bill
one ninety eight.
Amending the New Mexico career.
K. as project and Fund.
Lose the fear of Indian
education funded secondary
school.
House bill one nine eight would
make technical corrections
career technical education.
So that the nine secondary
schools in New Mexico funded by
the European Union Station and
the seventeen entered native
students they serve are eligible
to apply to participate in this
project.
For the last four years an
average of three point nine.
And the only has been allocated
to eighty seven local
educational agencies for high
quality C. programs.
However this statute does not
allow secondary schools in New
Mexico I.
By the B. I. E. I for funding to
provide CTE programs in their
area pre dominantly native
American students.
One ninety eight is widely
supported by many including the
all of the council of governors
the Santa Fe Indian school board
of trustees the Navajo
preparatory school board of
trustees transaction is
completed education transform in
Mexico and any a New Mexico I am
also pleased to share that the
governor's office has confirmed
that governor Christians our
house.
With that share colleagues for
questions I would like to four
my expert witnesses to introduce
themselves.
Madam chair members of the
committee just because I am the
co founder and director of the
leadership institute but also
serves as the chair of the
tribal education alliance of
working on the revenues to
Martinez.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name's Alan
ward from Santa Clara pueblo
work for the land foundation as
the vice president for pathways
in advocacy I'm also a member
board of trustees for the Santa
Fe.
Thank thank you Representative
we go to the public in the room
is there anyone here to speak in
opposition to a house bill one
ninety eight.
And is there anyone here to
speak in support.
Let's start on my left please
stand state your name and give
your reasoning to support in a
one.
Good morning madam chair this.
My name's Milton.
Government but looks.
We are or anything to help our
in the case we appreciate it
thank you thank you governor.
This morning madam chair on
name is former governor Rick
the.
I encourage the committee to to
pass this bill very.
Our children act some of the
individual posters
institution four the same car
opportunity there so that so
encouraged to pass this bill.
Thank you Mr media.
I
members of the committee just
give you
the executive director of the or
the proposed council this is
considered forced I'm also
former governor to secure portal
and chairman of the council
Education Committee also in the
stands four of house bill one
eighty eight for the reason that
also basically going to give us
our students that are not in the
public school system and that
are in your system that same
opportunity because markets are
also still citizens New Mexico
thank you for that opportunity
thank you thank you Mr via.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr grant
Representative the Santa Fe
Indian school of for many of the
reasons already stated madam
chair members of the committee
we are in support of the
legislation it really provides
an equal playing field to be I
need fund schools and after that
quickly we look forward to
competing for those spots
because we're doing a very good
job in CTE ourselves
representatives corner or
trustees support the legislature
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr rants yes please.
Morning madam chair
The money for us to do this for
the level for school bus for
fugitive estimation of both of
these are.
In support of the one of the the
resources earlier just.
As mentioned the our kids from
level for a resolution they are
percent of New Mexico
we will have this opportunity
but we're additional funding
sources
to help deal with recitation
ages the issues of the war thank
you Sir.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Asher growers and the vice
president for the number of
troops trustees said support
support gives us more
opportunities for all of our
children in the eighties
schools.
That the three levels nations
tribes in Mexico and strong
sense of strong support of this
bill it's important to our
children's future thank you
thank you Mr.
Good morning members of the
committee my name's Charlie
Normie from there from the
public to simply
I am retired.
I thank you.
We we're also.
Governors are also members of
drug costs.
also though this whether there
be calling that I cut.
I just wanted to mention that I
am a product.
Of the.
School in Santa Fe of
specifically for road to school
that I went to of state
Michael's high school.
My parents are paid out of
pocket in order for me to attend
school.
Of and I think it's.
Really.
I need for our children to have
that.
Adversity to go wherever they
feel the.
Succeed of.
And I would like to see more
kids spread out thank you Mr
during that time thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am mark
Mitchell the chairman of the
local council governors
Representative nineteen of those
in the state of New Mexico and
Texas this sort of and we stand
in full support of this
legislation.
Also want to thank
Representative interior walls
that have worked diligently to
get this.
Bill to its presence.
all those
discussions earlier this bill
also help fund the line the I.
A. funded schools to continue to
have their students ready for
success either in college or
career ready
ninety IAD schools cannot you
know they did that night so the
to access to care technical
education pilot projects in CTE
funding schools are sentence
going on over the Tory are
starting to offer multiple C. P.
program to their students act.
Jules dollars I foundation
grants to do this thank you
madam we stand for.
Thank you Sir.
Anymore yes thank you madam
chair and committee members also
met with the city of New Mexico
and we stand in full support of
the State Street one hundred
eight of robberies in the state
thank you thank you.
Will pause for a moment and ask
the additional Sanchez directed
yes we're too nice to say where
we go to do I do not think you
Madam thank you of the soon do
we have folks who are here to
speak in support of the house
bill one ninety eight.
Let's start with low rented
Trujillo.
Still one ninety eight thank
you.
Thank you Sir.
Covet.
C..
The morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Yes Representative about a year
ago.
Officials will support.
October ninth here in.
I have.
That we continue to support the
children.
Mexico with the fact that most
of you know all of the best.
Opportunity profitable I thank
the lord for continued for
fragmented and continue to grow
I probably career reading
minimal
this bill would have to double
program that.
Consumer with the support here
and our students thank you.
Thank you.
Lucy no further he and see soon
what we will go to committee.
Representative.
Madam chair of a second.
And Representative Zamora the
federal funds that help.
All right we have to do pass the
second is there any further
discussion of the committee.
Is there any opposition to it
depends.
Okay.
You have to.
House bill one.
If you.
