Thank you Representative Gail
Armstrong from the largest house
district in the nation.
Please have to of that if people
get sick here that I know.
anyway miss madam chair and
committee members this is Senate
bill two forty five this is the
rule emergency hospital
licensure this is Chris this is
creating a new license for rural
New Mexico this section.
One twenty five of the
consolidated appropriations act
of twenty twenty one
established the rule emergency
hospital as a new Medicare
provider type this designation
will allow struggling rural
hospitals to continue operating
with outpatient and emergency
services only instead of
closing.
Under the act rural emergency
hospitals can receive enhanced
payment upon meeting certain
requirements there's two types
of rural hospitals make converts
to rural emergency hospitals
critical access hospitals rural
hospitals with no more than
fifty budget
of rural emergency hospitals
must abide by the following not
providing acute care inpatient
services are not exceeding
annual average patient link
state of twenty four hours
having a transfer agreement with
a level one or two trauma center
meeting certain licensure and
staffing requirements.
A reimbursement covered
outpatient department services
provided by rural emergency
hospitals receive an additional
five percent payment for each
service beneficiaries will not
be charged.
the additional five percent and
additionally rural emergency
hospitals received a significant
monthly financial payment sent
to the centers for Medicare and
Medicaid services and with that
we will stand for questions
Madam Representative do you have
any experts with you today thank
Nico pine me Madam chair okay.
This is Christina Campos and ari
ari's yes right from the O. H.
and SO yeah.
I.
Wonderful so now we're gonna go
to the audience if you are here
in support of this bill please
raise your hands.
Great and if you are propose.
On the soon please raise your
hand if you're in support.
We will take public comment now
we're gonna limits about ninety
seconds we can get through so if
you'd like to speak in support.
If I may um I'm Christina Campos
noted Mr go to the county
hospital in Santa Rosa New
Mexico this is a new designation
that will create a safety net
for the smallest of the small
hospitals currently there are
sixteen hospitals rural
hospitals that qualify for this
designation it would only apply
to hospitals that were already
opened in December of twenty
twenty so this is not for new
start up pop up ER's but for
rural hospitals that are on the
verge of culture and would allow
for sustainable funding in
return for different Billy
mechanism but it's a win win
situation we have done the math
from my hospital it will keep us
afloat long term and it could be
an option for hospitals in the
future.
Thank you madam chair thank you
anyone else.
Mr weeks madam chair members of
the committee my name is
generally services the New
Mexico hospital association and
the association staff quality on
this bill it's a good
alternative rural hospitals are
having.
Major issues relative to
stability is building really
this designation will allow
better reimbursement mechanisms
allow the small hospitals.
Thank thank you.
Thank you madam chair damage are
with levels health systems we
agree with all the COVID you've
heard when we need help rural
hospitals we are also helping
the Albuquerque hospitals
because when they go under the
application for which
transferred to Albuquerque which
is already overtaxed we strongly
support this bill thank you
anyone else.
Hi a lot of this is the Medicaid
medical director so just here to
speak in support of Human
Services department we support
this bill this wonderful of now
that is soon.
At Matthew Propst.
You'll need to make that I'm
sure.
Yes my name's Matthew probes on
a physician assistant and.
And up in in rural New Mexico
and as you all know our rural
hospitals are vital for for a
healthier future in New Mexico
you know this opportunity is is
I don't have to say it's a no
brainer for us to take advantage
of this to support our rural
hospitals rural hospitals across
the country are are suffering on
the ropes in and at risk of
closure and this really is you
know a up a safety net for us to
insure that we can continue
providing those services to our
most vulnerable populations in
rural New Mexico thank you.
Thank you I think that includes
public comment let's go to the
committee Representative
Sweetser first thank you madam
chair I just have a question up
how can this is restricted to
hospitals that were open before
twenty twenty within.
It seems like it would
incentivize hospitals to move
into those rural communities if
they had access to.
To this.
Thank you madam chair go ahead
Madam chair on members of the
committee this is a restriction
that was imposed by Congress.
So it's not a restriction that's
pull imposed by New Mexico so it
was passed in December of twenty
twenty of this new designation
so they did not make it
retroactive but they do allow
for hospitals throughout the
nation none of which are New
Mexico hospitals fortunately
that closed at anytime between
then and now to reopen under
this notification thank you.
As a representative madam chair
and representative we have
another I have another bill that
would help hospitals existing
hospitals hopefully we'll hear
that Representative Armstrong
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr
So just a couple questions for
clarification on this and and
thank you for reading the bill
for this is report I think we
talked about the third interim
to
compass two things right
I think I'm just focus a little
bit on the inpatient beds with
that said this is just primarily
for emergency
Yes there Mattis madam chair
members of the committee what
we've seen over the last few
years is a big transition from
inpatient care to outpatient
care of where you're more highly
specialized care is given in the
urban areas in rural areas are
not don't have the capacity for
those high end and missions
anymore so in the in my
hospitals circumstance it's not
going to be any type of
transition we feel that we've
been transitioning to this over
the last ten years for admitting
very very few patients but our
outpatient services are becoming
more more robust what this does
allow those for us to keep
patients overnight and possibly
several nights of under the
margins the observation status
we would bill as an outpatient
service and not annual inpatient
service it would require better
documentation to justify keeping
them either because we
anticipated and get ready you
know better much quickly for
cause or not that's available in
the of in hospital there we can
keep the patients that we need
to you can thank you that that's
really important and and I I
chair I just really appreciate
this and this is this is filling
that gap and and it's it's
really hard right now in our
rural communities so and and my
next question is going to go to
staffing and chair what is a
staffing for these types of
services J. O. madam chair
members of the committee the
staffing is identical to
critical access hospitals we
believe in my hospital we have
absolutely no intention of
changing our staffing levels you
can stuff that year with mid
levels which we do already but
we always have a backup position
so we don't anticipate any
changes
we will probably keep some
patients overnight we still have
to feed them so we'll still have
the Terry services we will still
have RN's on the floor so we
don't anticipate any changes but
it would allow for hospitals are
really in a bind to utilize more
telemedicine services for
emerge.
And see physician backup
coverage to move practitioners
in the in your we don't
anticipate doing that okay thank
you so right now.
What was so what are those
numbers and one of the staffing
that you're looking for chair.
Of mention members of the
committee right now the way we
staff is even though we average
less than one patient per day on
the floor in the admissions we
still average with two warrants
per shift and either an LPN or
tech and with the at least a
doctor or nurse practitioner
with a doctor backing her up for
him up.
Thank you that's that's really
important and just the need even
able to have the medical staff
available is.
Amazing for me and that's why
I'm asking just kind of trying
to the the point that we are in
a staffing crisis and so thank
you for that are you so are you
looking to to build out because
of this adding these the
services would that give an
opportunity for us to have more
of health care professionals in
these rural areas Madam I
unfortunately no I think the
workforce challenges is really
really difficult my hospital has
partnered with Luna community
college for many many years for
nursing graduates and to keep
the pipeline going it's has
dried up over the years we have
not had an agency nurse in close
to seventeen years in my
hospital in which is harder for
some coming in in March so it's
it's very challenging because
it's double the rate of our for
nurses we have to see how that
affects the culture and and
You know with our the nurses so
it's we're really sensitive to
that and so madam chair those
federal dollars to go for
operational budget as well.
The manager yes still federal
dollars can use for general
operations of the hospital or to
expand outpatient services
that's wonderful thank you madam
chair I really appreciate that
thank you so much thank you
thank you we have Representative
us us thank you madam chair
Representative great bill
I have just a couple questions
the first one was he the
regional I mean that's in my in
my district the only thing that
I I know they have less than
fifty bets and all the all those
those things the only thing that
that that caught my eye was this
doesn't have an annual average
patient length of stay over
twenty four hours that is the
only thing that this one red
flag okay so what happens to
that's the average so somebody
can say through for five nights
but is that going to restrict
Madam chair representative
anyone you know them saying Hey
you know what we get this one
out to keep our average down can
you explain that for no madam
chair when we do the math at our
facility we see of just to
simplify the numbers we see
about two hundred ER visits and
maybe about twenty of those
would be either observation or
admission and when you do the
average we we went and said what
if each one of those twenty
patients stayed for five days
which is very unlikely we
usually have an average patient
of state of only two nights so
even if those funds state for
five days.
The average combined your ER
visits and your observation
business and is still below
twelve twelve hours yes Sir my
question those are questions
that a lot of this the last
question I have is the the in
hands reimbursement right I know
that they're ninety nine percent
right now what would it be with
this bill passing Madam chair
representative madam chair of
this bill right now allows for a
lump sum payment in monthly
increments that add up to three
point two seven nine million a
year
so about three hundred twenty
four thousand dollars per month
and that offsets the loss in
those emissions and then you can
still bill for your patient
observation stays at the the
regular pay Medicare pay plus a
five percent I don't.
chair representative is in Abu
Mazen Bill thank you very much
we need this back so I obviously
going to support this thank you
thank you thank you
Representative Mason yes madam
chair representative to think
this is a wonderful bill.
You know what we are our rural
hospitals.
Central to the rules.
If anybody I'm sure Gail all of
us have you seen where they.
So.
We have to have some place for
people to go to go to love us
I'm in the in by I've yes I've
also lives with initial care in
care that's okay give but.
Well these funds also be I did
that lacked diagnostic.
The the Quitman you know for in
your facilities can it be used
for I can't remember the names
all the tests that they give you
on the X. rays and see scams or
whatever the those and all that.
You know to diagnose the
critically injured man injuries
is what I really love you know
somebody gets correct the need
to.
I think why are hours to get the
national care.
Yes a madam chair members of the
committee this does allow for of
that five percent out on is for
all diagnostics it would also if
the hospital owns the clinic and
also those for five percent on
procedures non physician fees
those with status according to
the fee schedule but it does
allow in New Hope center
hospitals would expand those
diagnostic services your
laboratory services radiology
services and such and possibly
some hospitals that have the
demand the capacity could expand
prenatal care on in behavior
health and like physical
rehabilitation but not inpatient
physical rehabilitation the the
the and the Madam chair
representative I really don't
have anything but a one of the
you said there's two levels of
hospitals that get this right
one just an emergency type of
care and then the the of all
just wonder you know I don't
know like our hospital in Ortiz
it's probably too big of the.
Yes.
Madam chair representative
there's two there's critical
assets access hospitals that are
already designated that for
fifty budget or less.
It'll have a budget we have
authorities general manager I
believe you are critical access
hospital so you have twenty five
bitterness and I believe that he
also is a critical access
hospital a recent one and have
those hostels including normally
are very successful at being
critical access hospitals that
may not want to use this
designation
thank you Madam chair
representative on the.
I've had to use their services
it's it's nice to be able to.
And that and most of them I
think have a.
Madam chair representative you
said that they have to have
access to the plane or a
helicopter some kind of service
to transport.
Some kind of agreement Madam
chair of return of members of
the committee it requires that
you have transfer agreements
with at least one trauma
certified hospital so in New
Mexico the level one or level
two trauma hospitals are you in
and processing consent and and
someone in Farmington but that
does not to
In any way construed to to only
those or constrain you to only
those hospital you can transfer
to the closest hospital but you
do have to have transfer
payments with the trauma level
the level one and level two
trauma centers Madam chair
representative thank you I'll
put up in it on full support of
this bill I really think it's in
the one place we're going to
spend money that it's I think
it's well worth it madam chair I
made there's no money connected
to this from the state so it's a
good thing no matter
Representative Mason you better
thank you Representative I have
a couple questions as well how
many critical access hospitals
are there in the state.
Madam chair madam chair there
are twelve critical access
hospitals there sixteen
hospitals in New Mexico there
fifty budget and under twelve of
those are critical access
hospitals great and I have
questions around the money that
will come in from the federal
government with my hospital Holy
Cross hospital inTaos I believe
is also collect critical access
facility and they are
constrained by the costs of you
transporting you know for the to
the trauma one trauma to centers
will this money help that
hospital covers some of those
transportation costs madam chair
that money can be used in any
way that the hospital chooses to
use it for general operations
and and the management of the
hospital right so it cannot go
ahead and and madam chair we did
just raise the Medicare
reimbursement rate for emergency
transports and non emergency
fantastic representative
Armstrong and there's also a
bill to cover have just passed
the house floor that to cover
recruitment and retention of
rural health care professionals
so we're really focusing on this
is here in this is a really
important thing are there so it
will cover costs for any admin
issues of around you know that
the paperwork and things like
that that that come with this
kind of designation madam chair
yeah it and for the general
operations of the hospital so
that what they're saying is like
for example my hospital the
COVID dollars that came in over
the last couple years really
mast a lot of problems that
we've already seen with the
declining readmissions which is
good we want to we want for
people to be admitted costs to
hospitals which is great for
patients but not the for
hospitals
but with that decline now that
the COVID dollars are gone we're
seeing very clearly how
hospitals are affected
negatively my own hospital has
been in the black for almost
nineteen years since I've been
CEO and this current fiscal year
since July we're already running
a loss of one million dollars
it's an increase in in labor
force we have had to pay.
A whole lot more for the nurses
that we have and then now for
the agency as we bring them on
the drugs are exponentially more
expensive supplies have been
really hard to find and there's
been competition for the
supplies which has raised the
cost also so we're we're seeing
a lot of pressure is not one
thing it's almost like death by
million paper cuts and this this
funding mechanism is coming
right at the crucial time that
we can take advantage of and we
know will be several months
before the rules are promulgated
after this but we will be fine
until then and then have a
secure funding to ensure that
life saving emergency care
diagnostic care primary care is
still four in my community thank
you and and Representative just
just one another another
question around the designation
of a two disc of discrete
building for nursing is so that
if folks need to stay longer
than the twenty four hours I
just want to kind of I what I
want to just get this cleared my
head.
You can keep patients but more
and is there is there anything
in the federal law that these
are the requirements that me
make it expensive for the
hospital to ensure that there is
a discrete area or designated
area madam chair that that
discrete area for nursing care
is like for long term care yes
of course now for like the
nursing home and currently
critical access hospitals
usually take advantage of their
payment reimbursement or other
mechanisms to build out of the
swing beds and the reason that
the swing that's when I'll be
allowed in the credit in this
ari age is because we mid swing
out from the nursing home into
in patient care at these
hospitals don't have inpatient
care you don't have that swing
potential so what they're
allowing them as if they want to
maintain their patients long
term care patients not
hospitalized patients but.
Skilled nursing care patients
also patients that might be on
on you know more than a month in
patient care
they do have the opportunity to
break it off and then have a
designated it would be very
complex that's one of the
barriers right now to some of
the hospitals that they would
have to create a new skilled
nursing facility with its own
bubble overhead administrator
policies procedures the whole
bit so that is one challenge the
the challenges three forty B.
monies that come into critical
axis and acute care hospitals
will not under the current rules
be afforded to the R. H.
hospitals but there's
anticipation of the program will
be expanded possibly in the next
Congress to allow for three
forty B. and for possibly a
minimum of some in patient care
thank so there's hope madam
chair there's a lot of acronyms
that you may not know
and and you know being I I sat
on health and Human Services or
I will tell you when I used to
call it but
for several years and there is
what they're worth what they're
allowing them to do the
hospitals to do is be very
versatile and and what they
can't how they can spend the
money.
In in it is so so on averages
and things like that so I think
that overall everyone in this
room is feeling the pinch of of
Everything being more expensive
and we we desperately need this
for rural New Mexico and it's
like the one of the gentleman
said that the likes the bill.
We feed the rural New Mexico
feeds the big hospitals in the
in the other areas so this is
desperately needed in rural New
Mexico thank you madam chair
thank you Representative there's
no doubt that this is needed I
think you're not gonna be
surprised by the way we all vote
here I'm grateful that you're
bringing this forward in the
Senate your Senate sponsors have
I have done this it's it's so
it's so critically important.
All right.
Miss madam chair to make a to
pass house bill two forty third
your.
It's a great cause us to the to
the rules.
Representative Lujan yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative in there about
Maria yes Representative
Sanchez.
Representative Osos yes.
Vice chair because they on.
Yes and chair for yes yes
congratulations you have a do
pass on Senate bill two forty
five thank you so much.
Thank you we have another build
next but R. Sanchez taking I
think it's on his way I believe
so let's just take a.
I will maybe he's picking up
but
the.
I I hope I hope he knows that he
needs to.
Do you know how long it's going
to be.
What's that.
I don't want to I think we'll be
okay the.
I mean this you feel.
Without the form we have a
quorum so let's just take a
second to enjoy the smell of our
green Chile candle which is
what you close what was the
camp.
Or.
As more as well as.
Is that the waters.
At this.
Now.
Madam chair.
One of the members of the
committee during a little break
yes.
The seventies.
Fiscal sponsor
We are
excited.
It is.
What's the.
This.
So.
What.
Some.
Jobs
has.
It was.
I.
All.
Two five.
Yeah let me read the bill.
She.
The.
For these yeah.
Is.
Yes that's really wants to vote
on this bill.
All right committee we're going
to we're going to get started.
Again and
We have our very own members
Representative Sweetser
presenting on Senate bill one
eighty eight.
Representative please explain
the bill thank you madam chair
Senate bill one eighty eight yes
this is the official state room
of New Mexico as the smell of
green Chile.
Roasting in the fall this has no
fiscal impact and I know I
already heard some arguments
about the smell of a fall fund
other things possibly minority
but a.
I hope you guys a consider
supporting this green chili is a
staple of our state so ready for
questions if there are any thank
you Mr Representative are there
is there anyone in support of
this bill in the audience.
Fantastic anyone in opposition.
Okay okay and if you are in
support of this bill please
raise your hand if you're if
you're on the zoom.
Matthew press are you still in
support of this bill are you in
support of this bill rather.
All right we're gonna go ahead
and take a public comment would
you like to
Stand up and let us know how you
feel.
I
of the committee my name is
Serra pip on I'm here as a
resident of Santa Fe New Mexico
and I support this bill simply
because that smell wafting
through the air every August is
part of the reason I called
Santa Fe New Mexico my home
thank you.
You're welcome
Matthew procs would you like to
comment.
We have to take his.
Is present in the room yeah
we're we're we're presenting the
bill right now okay.
I need and he did he was from
okay I are there any I think
we're done with public comment
any questions from the
committee.
Quicker than that madam chair.
When I was going to college I
nobody wanted to work outside
because it's hot the Russian
chili.
I will for Albertsons and ice to
roast chilly outside for people.
And there's always one little
chilly left on the basket when
we finish and they would look at
me and then the smile at me and
I had already bought my tortilla
and eight piece of cheese and my
garlic salt and that it was so
you can have that one and they
see my deal I had a lot of green
Chile and so this is a great
bill I I I mean it's just
something that just a show for
New Mexico is that was part of
my district hatch was part of my
district until that removed at
or redistricted and so this is
good but one thing that I'm
gonna say
we do need to protect our chili
farmers.
They are struggling right now
the struggling very very bad
because of the the gas prices
and stuff the the natural gas
prices last year there was a
crisis seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars just to pay for
gas so I we we want to stay at
the top of the food chain that
when it comes to Chile we better
take care of our chili
pharmacists August chair
representative that as
Representative makes.
Madam chair representative
The only thing I see wrong with
this you didn't didn't that is
the night the variety right.
Hello Mr chair a chair we want
to get to that argument the
other all the.
I have a I have madam chair I
have a special chili that smells
better roasted and that so I
think we should.
That might be another bill
that's sorry Sir thank you
thanks Representative
Representative Andrea.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
for.
Initiating and and and doing
this
but I I one hundred percent
agree with this aroma all the
while I do like
you know the smell of rain or
alfalfa or even where you can
find those anywhere this is
unique to New Mexico there's
unless you have will probably
tries to tries to to hone in on
it but that I have my sister
lives in pueblo and we fight all
the time that no they are not
the best chili we are us but
it's it's that's it is this
fragrance that lets me know that
it is now full.
Of when you when you when you
walk out and and and all of a
sudden you smell it because
people are starting to roast it
it's like okay falls here and
that's my favorite time here so
I'm I one hundred percent to
agree with this I would
personally I think New Mexico's
model should be the Chile
capital of the world because
that's what makes us unique for
with with our fifty states but
that is not tolerant of yeah
we've got to get it before they
try to.
any other questions
Representative Lujan.
Yeah thanks for containing today
and chair Mister in
Representative this is a group
this is a fund bill for us to to
celebrate our culture and our
traditions of New Mexico and I
do have of that with some
Colorado Representative.
of the Pueblo of our chili
against there so we'll have to
do
Take this bill and then take it
up to Colorado and due to the
cook off so all those who want
to come let's get a group
together and have a great chili
cook off thank you madam chair
thank you I just want to add
that this is a bill that was
brought by students so this is a
US citizen you know civic Bill I
think that's really important to
to know and this is not about
whether you prefer green chili
to read I want to be also very
clear about that so I love the
small green chili and the and
the help and daisies that come
in the fall I know that that
means it's time for me to buy
new pens and pencils for school
for myself so thank you
Representative songes for
bringing this bill forward and I
am happy to entertain a motion.
Make a motion to do pass on our
H. the first SB one hundred and
seconded I made about million
let's let's go and take those
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mason yes
Representative I'm more of a
million yes Representative
Sweetser yes Representative Russ
this.
Vice chair because they no yes
there are yes yes right you have
a due pass or the Senate has a
do pass on Senate bill one
eighty eight.
All right chair I I'm gonna tell
you if you've ever getting any
of you guys get a chance to go
to Andrea and look at those
chilly Pat plants in the let you
tourism it's amazing it's really
really amazing pictures of the
interim committee meeting that
would be a great this this
meeting is adjourned the.
You members of the committee.
