Madam vice chair Johnson.
Madam chair.
Good morning again everyone we
do have a quorum so we're going
to go ahead and proceed first
with house bill one eighty three
and house joint resolution
fourteen then house bill six
then house bill one eighty one
and then house joint memorial
three so that's the order we're
going in welcome Representative
Sari√±ana we are ready for house
bill one eighty three.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members of committee
I'm I'm here to present house
bill one ninety three school
personnel background checks I do
have an expert witness John
center if we can get him on.
Mr sent away please raise your
hand will promote you to the
panelists great thank you.
And madam chair I do have an
amendment I don't know when you
want me to do that
did you give the amendment to
the committee assistance should
have been sent yesterday okay
great.
I'm a go ahead and talk about in
the bill and then after that we
can move the amendment for
discussion purposes and then go
to the public for comment and
then go back to.
About the amendment thank you
madam chair one ninety three
amends the school personnel act
required PED and the department
of public safety to conduct a
criminal history record check on
all applicants for licensure
volunteers and contractors this
is from
anyway this bill does not change
the way PED conducts background
checks it does not change the
people that they do background
checks on it amended the statute
to comply with F. B. I.
requirements without the
amendment the department would
be unable to conduct background
checks on licensure the I think
the FBI said that PED statutes
lacks specificity about the kind
of license that would be subject
to the background check this
amendment at specificity but
does not change any of the
requirements that madam chair
I'd like to defer to my experts
to expand on the topic thank
you.
Representative good morning
madam chair members of the
committee actually the
Representative sum that up
really well and I'll I'll be
here to staff questions.
Thank you and Representative you
talked a little bit about the
amendment.
Yes.
up would you like me to speak on
it you need a number or I'm
let's go ahead and move that for
discussion purposes.
And then just so that if if
there's anyone in the public
that it changes I don't that's
going to happen is that correct.
That all changed support or
opposition I doubt it now okay
okay let's just go ahead and
wait on that and until we get to
back to the committee.
So we can begin a poll that we
can open up for twenty seconds
or so if you want to raise your
hand in support of house bill.
One ninety three or in
opposition please do so now.
So let's go ahead and first hear
from opposition so please only
raise your hand if you want to
speak in opposition.
We've closed the call we have
seventeen and support and to an
opposition.
So again if you want to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Okay we don't have anyone if you
want to speak in support please
raise your hand.
Last call anyone want to speak
in support.
Okay great we'll go back to the
committee and then now let's go
ahead and move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
I move the amendment.
Thank you Representative Ortez a
second that.
Go ahead and speak about the
amendment and then we can go to
discussion with the committee
thank you madam chair I'm the
amendments on page fourteen nine
sixteen and all it really does
is if an applicant is often
employment in the public schools
will pay for the background
check so it's.
Great thank you I'm on the
amendment Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
Every other license that you
applied for in the state
you the applicant must pay for
why do we want to.
St teachers differently.
I'm.
Madam chair representative
because teachers are really
special and I really I'm gonna
defer to my expert witness thank
you that's that's what I
figured.
Madam chair representative ring
so the the state current statute
actually already required public
schools to pay for
applicants for employment the
for their background checks so
this in in in drafting the the
new language that was
inadvertently struck out and so
the the method that we're
talking about just reinstates
the language that the public
school shall pay for for
background checks for those
folks who are applying for a
job.
Okay thank you madam chair and
Mr set up the that is it's
actually
putting in language from another
statute then that I understand
correct.
Madam chair representative dream
I know it doesn't the building
anything from another statute so
again if you look at the at the
amendment on are the original
bill that Representative
Sarinana was was talking about
you'll see some struck out
language there that said that
the public school shall pay.
And what happened during
drafting is there's two there's
two pieces of of background
checks if you will for for
teachers there's an initial
licensure background check
that's what PED does so we
require anybody who applies for
a teaching license to to get a
background check once that
person has a license and goes to
apply for a job at a school
district they are then required
to do a background check for
employment purposes so in the
drafting there was a conflation
of the fee for licensure which
the applicant still has to pay
on their own at the state level
with the fee that they that is
paid at the local level for
employment and so the public
school pays for that employment
background check not for the
initial licensure the candidate
is still required to pay that on
their own.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair I think
that that answers my questions.
Thank you Representative any
others on the amendment will
drive.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment by Representative
Chasey and also second.
Okay Representative Ely will
second that is there any
objection to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing none of we've adopted the
amendment representative so I
will go back to the bill.
The amended bill.
Committee members.
We have a motion to pass as
amended by Representative Chasey
and a second Representative Eli
Representative Rehm discussion.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so
What should go to page.
Nine into them there we talked
about all the applicants who
must have a background check.
The one that I see missing we
need a new number sixteen are
inserted over here on the beach
to the.
Whining.
Fourteen.
And it needs to say something
like all of this year
contractors or contractor
employee or other person who has
unsupervised contact with
children.
I see that they're not.
Listed in those people who have
to have background checks but
when you go to page fourteen and
fifteen you see that okay
background is required for
volunteers at the contractors to
wrap up why students are or have
unsupervised contact.
With the children.
Madam chair representative if
it's okay thank you so madam
chair Representative Rehm again
that goes back to the issue of
the two different sort of levels
of background checks that are
required.
The statute as were as we're at
that this bill changes has has
to do with the state level
background check for licensure.
So even though those those
individuals that you mentioned
are required to do a background
check at the local level so
let's say your parents you want
to volunteer at your at your
students school you're required
to do a background check there
this list only only applies to
individuals who are applying for
a license with the department so
those folks contractors
contractors employees volunteers
they don't get a license they
just need to do a background
check in order to be in a school
this the list only applies to to
licensure candidates.
Madam chair Mister sent out
what's go ahead and take a
hypothetical so we have an
individual who lived in Arizona.
And he
was a.
He had been dismissed for our
criminal sexual contact of a
minor.
And then moves to Albuquerque
when you do a local back chart
background check in Albuquerque
you're not going to see that.
That's in the NCIC data bank.
So representative madam chair
representative green the the
type of background check that
that that they do at the local
level is the same only for a
different purpose so they're
still required to do a state and
federal background check at the
local level even for volunteers
it's just that they're not going
contained in this list for
licensure so that the type of
background check does not change
even at the local level it's
just that the those local
background checks are not
captured in the in the bill as
were as were amending section.
Madam chair Mister center would
you explain to me the two
different backgrounds that
you're speaking of.
Sure Madam chair representative
ring again it's it's not
different background checks is
this done for two different
reasons the first one is for
licensure at the state level so
PED does a background check in
order to issue the license to a
teacher or one of the other
individuals mentioned here at
the local level that's done for
employment and or for the
purposes of about keeping kids
safe so that volunteers and
contractors who are not
necessarily employees of the
district
are still required to do a
background check so they're not
different they're just done at
two different levels for two
different reasons.
Madam chair Mister Senate but
they.
All are submitted to DPS and the
NCIC are to the Mr for their
results correct.
Madam chair representative yes.
One other question we see what
one of the things that struck me
and this is when reading this we
why we don't our madam chair and
Mr center why we don't require
college professors to have
background checks we have some
kids who are advanced in their
in in New are you know taking
hold school or college courses
at the age of fifteen sixteen
and seventeen and maybe that
would be concerning.
Madam chair representative I I
agree this statute
apply specifically to public
school personnel so that maybe
that may live in a different
part of statute.
Madam chair Mister Senate so I
didn't really see that do our.
Educational license needs to be
reviewed periodically like many
of the state licenses for only
if I go to another location.
Madam chair representative of
licenses do need to be renewed.
Depending on the license their
different periods of time for
for up for renewal.
And madam chair and Mr CENIC can
you give an example of that and
is a background check.
Done at that time as well.
So Madam chair representative so
for instance a
I level one teacher that's a
beginning teacher that their
licenses is valid for three to
five years and then they're
required to
essentially get a level to see
have to do the process in order
to level up to level two so at
that point you have to apply for
a new license level two
by insurers licensees they can
stay at a level to their whole
career but but even that license
has a has an expiration and I'm
I'm gonna forget it because I
should know that by now but they
would have to get it renewed
every so often and I'm I want to
double check we're not changing
that piece of the statue but I
want to get an answer for you I
don't believe right now that we
require background checks upon
renewal of your license.
Mr.
Madam chair chairman and the
Representative I I have my mind
renewed and I did not for level
three and I did not have to get
a background check.
That's.
Madam chair and Representative
to me it's concerning that and
I'll explain something else that
New Mexico actually adults
It
obviously we should be checking
but New Mexico is moving to
what's called Rapp backed with
the NCIC and so it it take take
me for example I've got a
private investigator license so
if I get a rester.
Then the regulation and
licensing division this
automatically notified that I
was arrested where were you know
even for one then this state so
they can look at that
I'm sure that you all are is it
yeah and I mean the teachers to
return that but there should be
a periodic of.
A check of it just to make sure
it doesn't slip through the
cracks but Madam chairman of.
Mr center I want to I ask
your specific question over here
let's go to page fourteen one
twenty five so we're gonna do a
criminal history record check.
In in this person can be denied.
If supported by independent
evidence and that goes to the
top of fifteen what what is it
independent evidence I mean if
he has a conviction for
you know about some child crime
I would I would think yeah that
would stand on its own.
So Representative I'm sorry
madam chair representative we're
not currently amending that
particular statute our piece of
the statute that's that's
existing law.
Madam chair Mr center I I agree
but what is.
If she ported by independent
evidence you then investigate
the finding to make sure that
it's accurate is that it or.
Madam chair representative I'm
gonna I'm gonna follow up I've
got a
a lawyer on on a PED General
council member on on back up I'm
going to refer to him if we can
get back to you with that that.
Yes.
Okay madam chair that's all my
questions thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative
I went through this and and
we're using new nomenclature in
this so with the amendment so
that number quite sure is
criminal history record check.
And yet when I look in the
definitions I don't see a
definition for that word so
could you tell me what a
criminal history record check
is.
And how that may differ from
a background check which is the
current language.
Madam chairman Representative I
I don't know I I I question that
also and I didn't them I don't
know what the differences.
Madam chair I if I could
Representative Representative
Nibert I believe that's
essentially technical clean up
to reflect the the language that
is currently used.
Well the language that's
currently used I think it's
pretty well understood a
background check looks at the
background of the individual to
determine whether there are
things in their background that
would raise issues as to whether
or not they should be are you
employed.
Senator history record check to
me means that you're only
looking up the criminal history
of that individual and so to me
we're going from a broader.
Review of the persons
background which may be evidence
of character to a more narrow
one of looking for criminal
conduct and.
To me.
That's a step in the wrong
direction I would think that
schools would want to have a
complete background check and I
think parents in the state.
Would the more that pair that
their children there and
entrusting to the schools.
Have a background check that is
maybe
of broader than just state
criminal history record check
yes I'm understanding the
parlance correctly so so.
Mr or madam chair and
representative Mr secretary
could you.
Well maybe elaborate why we're
going in that direction.
I'm sure Representative Nibert
so again the changes first I
want to I want to emphasize that
this does not at all change the
current practice this is this is
only only amending the statute
to comply with FBI requirements
so that we can continue to do
exactly what you just mentioned
to make sure that we as a
department are able to cut
conduct or require those
background checks of of of
individuals.
In talking with drafters and and
our general counsel the changes
to the language that you're
referring to are to is to ensure
that there's consistency across
all statutes when it comes to
criminal history background our
record checks the practice
itself is not changing we're
going to continue to do the
exact same thing which is to
submit that information to DPS
and the FBI so that we can get
all the information available
about those individuals we're
not we're not changing the scope
of the check it's it's
specifically to make sure that
we're consistent across across
statutes for these kinds of
checks.
Madam chair and Mr St I would
disagree on top of page
fourteen.
Winds one through three.
Governing authorities I presume
that's the local school boards
shall develop policies and
procedures to require criminal
history record checks.
On the applicant.
So if they have a policies that.
Background check that would look
beyond discriminate history I
think the statute is now only
authorizing those local school
boards to conduct criminal
history record checks and they
will have to delete from their
policies and procedures.
A broader record check and I
think that's a step in the wrong
direction because I think there
are schools of all places ought
to be
relates to school boards local
school boards should have the
ability to to look at other
sources other than just simply
criminal history all the
individual that supplied that
there might be a a prior
employment records of maybe
other things that reflect that
that person.
It should not be on a school.
Even though there's no criminal.
History on that individual and
so I think you're forcing.
A change and I think you're
forcing a change in a more
narrow direction then a broader
the direction that comes with
the word background.
And so I'm concerned about that
also that same section of the
top of page fourteen I presume
that this is where we would get
the authority to do background
checks on state substitute
teachers the PTA president other
people who are the school
dealing with the children as is
it would that be an accurate
statement to Madam chair
representative.
And Mr chair representative
could you tell me that section
again the do it section see at
the top of page fourteen.
This.
The Senate committee pretty of
course Madam chair
representative Nibert yes that's
right.
And so you know the I noticed on
the news the governor had a big.
The deal about trying to get
national guardsmen and in fact
she herself.
Became a substitute teacher at
least four days so did it Bago
undergo those and are we
requiring those folks to to
undergo this process as well.
Madam chair representative yes
we have.
Okay.
Again
I think that's good but I'll
certainly like the broader
language leaving it up to the
local school boards as to the
Representative and scope of of
their their background checks.
Thank you the public would like
that also on on page fifteen
lines eighteen through twenty.
Maybe it's my of the may or I'm
familiarity with this but it
says the department shall not
authorized to receive or
criminal history information by
private entities pursuant to
this section.
And I'm trying to understand
what that sentence means.
The department shall not
authorize the receipt of
criminal history information by
private entities so what.
What.
They are practical terms what
does that do.
So madam chair representative
essentially prohibits the
department from sharing any of
that background information
through for instance at
Action of public records act
request it's it's not public
information.
At a local school board.
Do that.
That only applying to the
Department madam madam chair
representative are your question
whether or not a school board
can share that information.
Well what I mean this sentence
it says the department shall not
authorized can a local school
board authorize.
The Madam chair representative
this recession doesn't speak to
whether or not a school board
but the the the previous
sentence that says criminal
history information received
from the department of our FBI
should be confidential and
should not be considered a
public record would apply to
school boards as well.
You guys might want to take a
look at that sentence that
you're just.
I usually don't have trouble
understanding sentences maybe
it's.
This
spot not grasping.
So anyway again a lot I I have
some concerns are are I don't
know that all not support
legislation but I do have some
serious concerns as to whether
or not
We ought to be going from the
work background check which to
be as much broader than criminal
history record check I think
that that is I more narrowly
focused
of
investigation and probably does
not give our school boards our
baby the breadth and scope of
backroom unity wants and trying
to ensure that their schools of.
Our.
Staffed with people that they
feel comfortable of being around
the children so.
I I I think.
The sponsor may want to look at
that and and vice chair captures
for current.
Madam chair representative I'm
so what specifically would you
want them to capture what else
would you want them to capture.
Well I would hope that the local
school boards.
Would have the the ability to
look beyond a criminal records
check.
To determine whether or not that
person is qualified and if I
read that language correctly
you're telling them that they
have to develop policies.
And procedures to require
criminal history record checks
and you're changing up from
background checks yet so I think
somebody could could argue that
the the so we believe that the
work background.
They now have to do a bit
they're constructed to only do
the criminal history record
check yeah I may have to bet
from their policies.
Checks.
From other sources that are not
criminal in nature.
And at that so that that's my
concern because I think there's
a appropriations that exist out
there that is not criminal in
nature would not be picked up on
criminal databases but it does
reflect on the person's
character reflects on the person
as to their qualifications for
employment and I think that's
what a local school boards it
should be doing and I think
that's what the the whole intent
of this legislation is to do
but again of any building miss
madam chairs Representative can
you give me one example of which
presented of center I believe Mr
that representative Nibert just.
Commenting would you just please
let him comment and if you ask a
question then Representative you
can answer that question thank
you thank you madam chair
again the work background.
Is a much broader net band
criminal history record check.
M. and so.
Representative your cue what if
you want an example one example
would be.
Your.
Personal credit history another
might be your employment history
are you if somebody was
Let go from from their
appointment the four of.
Behavior that would be in
conflict with what you want to
see on school grounds I think
that might be important I think
the the of those things would
not be captured in a criminal
record check but they could be
captured in a broader background
check and I hope today they are
being captured in those broader
background checks so that's
that's my concern it looks like
we're going from my.
But a larger
Yes authorizing a larger stroke
for the local school boards to
maybe a more narrowly tailored
one and if that your intent to
them fine I would disagree with
that but that that that your
intent of wine you can tell me
that that you're and the hi can
I can go to court in late for
the.
I I I was just asking the
question why we're changing the
culture so shares and comments
that's fine madam chair on I am
through with my questions of the
representative wants to respond
but I will say that
Representative read would like
to ask another question.
Madam chair if I if I could.
Briefly please and then we can
go to Representative Rehm
absolutely thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert I just I
just want to confirm.
This is a very narrow portion of
the law and what you're what
you're referring to requires
that school boards have a the
policies around criminal history
background checks it does not
prohibit them from having other
kinds of policies to do the
kinds of things that you're
mentioning I also want to
mention that a lot of this the
the the larger statute was
amended in house bill one twenty
eight last year which actually
strengthen the reporting
requirements for districts to
the department for the kinds of
things you're talking about
whether it's
Behavior that they're saying
that their school district that
requires bomb Forsman
involvement.
Or other kinds of investigations
so again this is just is just
one piece of that larger
statute that ensure student
safety.
Thank you Representative Rehm
for a second time.
Madam chair and.
Representative R. I just was in
contact with the PS and I have
some concerns on how the
background check is listed.
so what I'll do is I'll get with
you on the floor and you in
contact with them so that you
can get it cleared up so it's
done properly.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative we have
a motion
two for the past on house bill
one ninety three as amended and
a second the clerk to call the
roll place.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes and I'd like to explain more
or.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes
Representative Zamora you madam
vice chair dance.
Yes please.
Madam chair it.
Yes you have a do pass
Representative and
representative Nibert to explain
his vote.
Thank you madam chair just
quickly I think it's this I have
concerns with that work I hope
the sponsor will really look at
it before it hits of four
because so I think that that
needs to be specifically
addressed thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative and Mr
Senate we are now moving on to
house joint resolution fourteen
Representative Bunka are there
others okay great.
And if you're an expert please
raise your hand as well.
Okay actually will you please
tell me your experts because I
have a lot of folks raising
their hands.
Sure no wonder I'm nope no
worries madam chair experts
today are Mario minutes from
coming because as well as
Marshall Martinez from each
year.
Okay great we have them both now
and we're ready for house joint
resolution fourteen welcome.
Thank you madam chair and let me
see as the primary sponsor Rep
Brendan wants to introduce.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative bill
got I absolutely what you to
help produce and and present so
madam chair I wanted to make
sure that both of the.
Both of the experts are on board
Okay thank you that they're here
I just don't see that.
So what we're doing with respect
to joint resolution number
number fourteen is we're looking
at making a constitutional
amendment that will allow there
to be a run all in more
elections than those that are
currently occurring and we want
to look at runoff elections in
in positions like and
with respect to school board
races and many of the other
databases but we have lots and
lots of people entering and then
what we end up having is a
person who wins with ten percent
of the vote so what we want to
make sure that is happening is
that people are able to make
sure that they are selecting the
person who works out best for
the individuals and for the
concept but which they are
looking forward to in the state
races so we're just asking for
them to have a run off election
to be allowed in those instances
and so with respect to that
madam chair members of the
committee we do have to experts
we've been looking at this for a
very long time and I would like
to bring them forward and to
have the the committee to hear
from them now.
Sure I'm who's next.
It's so Mario commitments and
this Marshall Martinez our our
two expert witnesses okay go
ahead welcome.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee again
money was met as campaign
director with common cause New
Mexico I'd like to start off by
outlining this why this
resolution is needed a few years
back legislation was passed
creating the local election act
which will all local governing
body elections to a single day
in November of odd numbered
years by doing this we
effectively loves these local
governing bodies and we what's
considered a statewide election
in unintended consequence of
this was the fact that we took
control away from local
governing bodies when it comes
to deciding how their elections
will be conducted sending this
resolution to the voters woke
enable this body to ask future
legislation permitting the use
of runoff elections by local
governing bodies such as school
boards water districts and other
local governing bodies listed on
the local election ballot this
resolution does not mandate the
use of run off elections or
mandate the use of a specific
type of run off election
additionally this resolution has
no effect on municipalities they
are currently permitted utilized
runoff elections under article
seven of the constitution.
Lastly I'd like to note that a
nearly identical piece of
legislation was presented to
this committee why are late
Representative Pratt that
legislation passed the house and
died on the Senate floor after
running out of time madam chair
if appropriate and like to turn
it over to March Martinez.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee I Marshall
Martinez and executive director
of equality New Mexico we are
the statewide LGBTQ liberation
organisation queer and trans
people been fighting for our
liberation for generations in
New Mexico and a quality New
Mexico we've been leading this
fight for twenty nine years we
do this in large part because
the jet generations of queer and
trans youth that are growing up
and coming out right now deserve
better than that so many of us
experience in our history.
House resolution fourteen is a
critical constitutional
amendment will protect students
and young people in every
community in the state it's no
secret that school boards
especially have been having some
of the most dire and
consequential flights in over a
generation in these last couple
of years whether they are
considering and then
reconsidering mask mandates and
vaccination requirements who can
plan which sports teams and even
went students can use the
bathrooms or which ones they can
use.
I know we don't all agree on the
preferred outcome of those
conversations but I do believe
we can all agree that we want
them made by the majority of the
people in the communities these
decisions will affect not a very
small minority this
constitutional amendment is
critical for allowing the
legislature in the future to
enable school boards and other
local governmental bodies to
choose the threshold for winning
an election and how to achieve
it if local school boards are to
be given so much authority over
life and death issues impacting
our young people we should at
least be certain that they are
elected by the most people in
their community not a small
group who happened to be barely
more than the next highest group
thank you so much.
Thank you.
Representative Herndon are you
ready for questions or yes madam
chair members of the committee
we're ready to go to the
audience and the grace of the
committee thanks so we will put
a pull up for about twenty
seconds if you would like to
raise your hand in support of
house joint resolution fourteen
we'll keep it open for about
fifteen seconds now.
Okay let's keep that open but
if you want to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
And we've closed the poll now we
have thirty six individuals and
support and three a post so
let's hear from the opposition
place.
Opposition Cheryl Lang trend you
are muted.
Cheryl you have to and you on
your and.
Sorry that was a mistake on my
part.
I'm not and I'm not in
opposition.
Okay.
So if you're in support of house
joint resolution fourteen please
raise your hand.
And we're giving folks a minute
if they like to speak.
So Mason Graham you are unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
Graham from the New Mexico black
voters collaborative for one of
the only black led voting rights
organizations here in the state
and we are in support of H. J.
R. fourteen organization
strongly supports the belief
that Canada should be elected by
winning the majority vote our
elections especially ones for
school board have serious
impacts on the future of our
communities and the people in
those communities deserve
representation by someone who
are flexible to the majority
when these elections are being
decided by merely a few votes it
is unfair that a candidate may
take office when they have been
elected by anything less than
fifty percent of voters when
only a handful of people become
the deciding factor in election
ultimately what happens is the
silencing of individual voices
our democracy should not operate
by the decisions of the few but
should be governed by the many
and our voters deserve an
opportunity to ensure that their
voices are heard when voting for
the interests of their community
the S. winner take all system
does not favor voters choice
when there are multiple
candidates who receive a
majority of the bill.
Abena Christodoulou you are now
and it.
Chair members of the committee
I'd like to thank you for your
service including my
Representative Representative
Rehm my name's that the
increased to do little I'm with
I want to progressive caucus and
we are for anything that returns
democracy to the people it this
is a government by with and for
the people and this particular
joint resolution will encourage
the community to participate
more as we have learned in
Albuquerque by moving our city
elections to November please
vote to pass thank you.
Thank you Linda Siegel you are
now and muted.
Thank you madam chair I'm
speaking for myself today as a
long time member of the Santa Fe
Community College Board I think
it was my second election where
there were three candidates and
I won by forty three percent but
I truly believe that it would be
much better if we had the
opportunity to hold run off
elections so that we make sure
that the person with with the
majority of the votes becomes
the elected officials thank you.
Barbara calloused you are now
and it.
Good morning chair blue members
of the committee my name is
Barbara Calif I'm speaking for
the league of women voters of
New Mexico the league supports
implementing alternatives to for
all of the voting and we ask you
to support H. J. R. fourteen
thank you.
Thank you.
Lucas Herndon you are now and
it.
Yes hi thank you share my name
is Lucas Herndon I'm here
representing progress now New
Mexico we are in strong support
of H. J. R. fourteen and urged
the committee to pass
personally also I have been
involved in elections here for
over a decade in Los crucis
where I live and have seen the
direct result of in this exact
situation play out in the number
of small actions and would love
to see you know real true fair
democracy at work for every
candidate in every race up and
down about thank you so much.
Thank you Louise Guerrero you
are now and made it.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee was
gonna with the Sierra Club
Yogananda chapter representing
over thirty five thousand
members we also strongly we in
support of this bill and just
like our Lucas just mentioned
previously of what we're
collections before network
campaigns and volunteered of and
campaigns personally and we we
definitely need this kind of
bill you will deserve the right
to go to have their voice heard
and the right candidate always
these two when with the most
votes so we strongly support
this bill thank you very much.
My office to creating now.
Sorry I think.
Mispronounced you are animated.
Miles you'll have to you on your
and can you hear me now yes
great good morning chair members
of the committee my name is
miles Kokonoe deputy director of
the leg and we are grassroots
organization representing and
with members all across the
state we are in full support of
H. J. R. fourteen we understand
that the disenfranchisement of
our communities of color is
complex and complicated
including losing faith in the
integrity of our democracy H. J.
R. fourteen helps then that
historic will our elected
officials at all levels of
government especially on that
local and school board levels
should be elected by a majority
of voters we urge you to pass
thank you.
Thank you next we have someone
by phone.
With the last four digits three
two nine two your unmuted.
You have to and me on here and
great.
That madam chair and members of
the committee chair
representative doesn't anything
extra.
I am from Shiprock New Mexico
I'm calling in from Mexico as
well and I stand strong support
of aids J. are working thank
you.
And that concludes public
comment so we will go to the
committee Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative.
Sure this past the voters.
Put this into our constitution
how much.
How much would it cost to
conduct the special election
particularly for.
I would perceive in cases where
there is.
A solar water conservation
district or one of the other
entities that so are now subject
to the November ballot that that
traditionally has not attracted
much interest in total votes and
you could have three candidates
and I've seen situations where
the total number of people
voting for that election may be
under yes and one person gets
for one person gets story one
person gets the other person
gets three that would force the
special election so how much
would that cost to give that.
Madam chair members of the
committee it looks like the cost
is somewhere between a hundred
twenty five and a hundred and
fifty thousand for those one off
productions I do want to point
out that one of the big issues
that occurs in those down
elections is that there's not
enough information about the
public often but then to thanks
to be both.
Yeah Madam chair representative
I would agree with you but I
would also agree with you people
just don't care get down that
far or or pay attention
You know for whatever reason
don't participate in those
elections and so I know that
we've had some some elections in
Travis county
Where we have very little
participation at the some of
those.
Special government all districts
that the people don't normally
think of.
And so.
I'm I'm concerned if you the
public is not.
Evidencing general interest in
the election.
That the public would then be
Hey that types of money that you
just described for.
Runoff election that basically
you're gonna have maybe even
fewer than ten people about my
example if that run off election
so
it's a little.
It's a little concerning to me
I may understand that more the
Albuquerque or Los crucis
context where you have of lot
more population but a lot of our
state doesn't have much
population and if you have three
people running
in some of these smaller.
What I call smaller they're
they're in the same election but
of down ballot.
Physicians.
You're going to cost the county
in the service of the lot of
money to do a lot off election a
lot of counties were that money
of.
Probably better utilized
elsewhere and.
That's that's my are my real
concern madam chair what this
and it's so it's it's one that I
think of.
Happens more often than that we
we recognize some of those
smaller things because I've I've
seen three or four people of
some of the races.
Literally people get single
digit of of support about
Alexion.
The winner gets so gets chosen
but that's that's my real
concerns across the that would
work group madam chair put
Representative Rehm on the west
out of the appropriate thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam chair thank you very very
much I think thank you
Representative.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and
representative printed and.
I really appreciate this I think
the.
The elections should be won by
major and I know in Albuquerque
we do have that requirement so
they're run off elections for
city council.
Representative night but was
asked we would question about
The cost.
Yes
With.
The constitution if instant run
off could be something that the
legislature adopted later time
because that would take care of
an Action actual cost of a
runoff election and I know that
you're not necessarily.
Advocating for instant run off
with this measure but I'm just
wondering if there aren't a lot
of
varieties of ways to hold on a
run off election that a city or
county or on a governmental
entity could choose.
Madam chair representative Tracy
I'd like to bring forth my my
expert Mario in minutes to
provide some additional
background information that I
think for clarification would be
really helpful.
Mr mark administered to please
speak.
Yes our thank you Mr Mr chair
and Representative Chasey so
specifically in regards to this
specific piece of legislation
before us here today again it
does not determine what type of
run off is going to be utilized
therefore the costs are not
immediately impacted as you know
the the the way representative
Nibert was discussing earlier
however again there are various
types of local elections there's
talk to run off which would be a
type of run off election it is
currently being utilized in the
City of Albuquerque there's
various types of ranked choice
voting elections that can be
used as a run off election as
well I'm so it's really going to
be up to the local governing
bodies who decides to utilize
the type of run off election
that they would prefer and and
I'd like to highlight the fact
that you know since going to a
local election as Representative
Nibert was mentioning about you
know local governing bodies were
now conducting those elections
November we are seeing an
increase in the election turned
out of those elections which
previously saw you know as you
mentioned extremely small
numbers and those numbers are
rising steadily and and as a
direct result you know this is
why a measure like this is
needed but again I'd like to
point out that this specific
measure is not going to
immediately affect any kind of
finances in the state for our
local governing bodies it would
be up to this body to come back
at a later date to adopt
legislation and then permit
local governing bodies to make
that decision on the roll so as
far as exact cost that is
something that is at the moment
no it will not be affected upon
passage of this legislation.
Thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
representative it's one of the
things that I have a question
about is this one we change
broader enough to allow ranked
choice voting.
So thank you madam chair
representative to bring to that
question and there has been
research on that and I'm going
have my experts to come for and
that to provide you with an
answer that I think you would be
pleased with.
Thank you madam chair
Representative ream in fact it
would permit the use of ranked
choice voting if the local
governing body chose to go that
route again this is very
specifically in just permitting
this body to pass legislation in
the future and then those local
governing bodies within decide
what type of run off the shape
and right choice voting is a
type of run off election yes
Sir.
Madam chair and Representative
heard and that's concerning to
me I would like to see something
in this that doesn't allow that
It's good otherwise but
I would like to see some one
which that create that that.
Madam chair representative
heard in on the FIR according to
the sos secretary of state for
the people in the audience this
resolution does not specify what
type of run off election would
be chosen by the lead teacher
but I think we have a fairly
good idea of.
What we're looking at
but it might be something you
need to visit with them.
Are to go ahead and determine
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Committee members.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Madam chair all of the past.
We have a two passed by
Representative Eli and a second
by Representative Chasey
The clerk to call the roll
place.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative very go yes
Representative night part.
No ma'am.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
No ma'am and I'd like to explain
my boat.
Representative Zamora.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair blue.
Yes.
So you do have a due pass
representatives Herndon and Boca
and Representative Rehm to
explain his vote.
Madam chair and Representative
heard and hi I support the cop
and like I said if you can fix
the ranked choice voting.
Issue that it does not allow
that I'm on board.
Anyway thank you madam chair.
Thank you everyone we are going
to move on to house bill four
and welcome Representative small
do you have any experts that you
would like us to remote to
panelists and if so if they
could raise their hands thank
you madam chair I do I'm and Mr
Alex to Golia please okay.
Great we have him.
Excellent.
You are outstanding thank you so
much madam chair I deeply
appreciate the opportunity to be
before you and your committee
madam chair we do have a
committee House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute
it would you like me to make
comment on that or just brief
introductory comments and then
to go from there.
We did have that committee
substitute go out to the public
as well and I think it might
somewhat change public comment
so go ahead and speak to that
okay excellent thank you so much
and I apologize I keep yes I
said house bill this is house
bill six yes thank you now thank
you madam chair here.
You that steer an incredibly
important committee and
incredibly well madam chair
Committee house bill six and our
committee substitute
Representative acknowledges what
both the the challenge and the
opportunity that we face as all
New Mexicans madam chair and
committee the climate crisis and
climate change kids New Mexico
artists across every part of our
state
with everyone in our state madam
chair committee as you know and
as we know these impacts are
very depending upon where we
live but they have a common
source the increased
temperatures longer seasons of
drought
snow pack drawing more quickly
melting more quickly because
cascading effects that frankly
madam chair committee threaten
us as New Mexicans and some very
fundamental sorts of ways and
madam chair committee we're
seeing those Effects now
increase at periods of drought
increase chances for
catastrophic wildfire
In our legislature madam chair
committee is working as people
all across the state are to
respond to these challenges but
the source madam chair and
committee of these challenges
are the.
Greenhouse gas emissions that
have exploded across the world
of course not just here in New
Mexico and so madam chair and
committee what house bill six
does in the committee substitute
improves upon is to ensure that
we set the right standards the
right limits in to unleash
innovation to combat this
catastrophic climate change we
would reduce our emissions by
fifty percent based upon two
thousand and five levels and
then
By twenty fifty be fully net
zero with ninety percent of
those emissions being direct
emission reductions madam chair
committee in our committee
substitute we've clarified what
direct emission reductions are
to encourage early adoption to
ensure that these are
quantifiable we have also madam
chair and committee continued to
do work especially looking with
disproportionately impacted
communities communities
continuing to work with
sovereign tribal nations and
other stakeholders some of the
key things that we've done there
madam chair and changes that are
reflected in the committee
substitute
in addition to the direct
emission reductions pieces
Are the moving up our
environmental improvement board
that rulemaking to twenty twenty
four January one twenty twenty
four since the environmental
improvement board will be the
entity charged with doing this
ensuring madam chair and
committee that the department
shall hold meetings and at least
three distinct regions of the
state or disproportionately
impacted communities are located
and
And also madam chair committee
making sure that we're
soliciting input and helping
develop this petition that will
implement house bill six with
them input from the sustainable
economic task force and through
tribal consultation that will be
in law so madam chair I know
there
At on in terms of the
introduction but those high
points that we face
a certain challenge and in
addressing this challenge madam
chair we want to set.
Strong quantifiable emissions
limits we want to work very
closely with on the Mexican
stakeholders and especially
disproportionately impacted
communities sovereign tribal
nations and other stakeholders.
In implementing house bill six
and I'm to.
Really pleased to get the chance
to put this on today madam chair
if it's okay perhaps Mr to Golia
can make just a very brief
minute or so of COVID and then
we would stand at your pleasure.
Thank you madam chair
representative
My name's Alex Golia as
Representative center
Representative said I am
director of state legislative
regulatory affairs for Marvel
Defense Fund
it has more than thirty thousand
members who call New Mexico home
and I'm grateful to be here to
represent them and answer any
questions.
Our positions that the claim to
track Representative Norma step
forward as New Mexico seeks to
transition to a clean energy
economy and support a stable
climate future
we work across dozens of
countries and states.
And have consistently found that
a critical step maybe the
critical step in kind of the
ship is a pretty straightforward
one not spring from limits on
greenhouse gas pollution and
that's why we're so supportive
of this bill in this bill doing
that we know that those limits
Representative.
Just a first step in meeting of
the promise of the bill and then
empowers rulemaking with input
from stakeholders to design
specific regulations to achieve
those but we think that it's a
critical step over taking.
And as the representative said
we believe that that the current
version it's being review today
is a significant improvement
over others send.
Four to discussion and answering
any questions that enable so
thank you for having.
Great thank you Representative
are you ready for questions
madam chair yes okay so let's go
head and put up the pole if you
would like to raise your hand in
support of house bill six you
can do that now will keep it
open for about
twenty.
Twenty twenty seconds.
Okay.
So I'm.
We did close that ball and we
have a we have a total of a
hundred and thirty one
individuals participating
in ninety seven and support and
thirty four in opposition let me
say
Let's go ahead and take the
opposition first.
And.
Let's see if we can get everyone
public comments we have folks
that can speak for one minute.
Please don't be repetitive
But would like to hear from you
and let's do twenty minutes on
each side.
So again if you would like to
speak an opposition please raise
your hand and we will start with
opposition first.
I am going to.
Go to Howard Hutchinson you are
muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Howard
Hutchinson I am chairman of the
San Francisco soil water
conservation district.
There is there's not enough time
to.
Address the significant problems
with the substitute bill.
In one area of the annual
reports required of agencies.
Will require significant
increases in Agency annual
budgets to comply even if they
were able to I I can't imagine
that our agencies are gonna be
able to collect the data and do
the analysis required.
Thank you madam chair.
Hi Eddie Burks you are muted.
Please send you on your end.
Okay we're moving on to at
Ridgemont you are now in muted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I am at least law
minister lobbyist for the New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative association.
Rural electric coops that were
subject to the two thousand
nineteen energy transition
actually be allowed to reduce
emissions subject to that law
not be subject to house bill six
two thousand nineteen
distribution coops redo targets
are requirements for renewable
energy and zero carbon resources
as a percentage of the
distribution coops total retail
sales in New Mexico requirement
of forty percent renewables in
January first of twenty twenty
five fifty percent by January
first of twenty thirty and then
we had a target in the GTA
overachieving the zero carbon
resource standard by January
first of twenty fifteen
And we have to be technically
feasible legislators are to be
reliable and affordable for
members we just the committee to
oppose this legislation thank
you.
Are being you are muted.
Good morning chairwoman Lewis
and members of the committee Amy
Barrett be registered lobbyists
for the New Mexico oil and gas
association many of our
companies have publicly shared
their NetZero aspirations
however the bill in the aeration
today and all prior to today
does not achieve it's not zero
intent this is an absolute zero
bill a bill that will increase
basic energy costs for all New
Mexicans eliminate jobs across
all sectors have serious
financial repercussions for our
state budget and public schools
the top down command and control
approach of this bill will cycle
The innovation necessary to help
our state truly reduce emissions
New Mexico has shared these
concerns repeatedly with the
sponsors and appreciate their
willingness to collaborate
however that collaboration has
not led to a bill that New
Mexicans support so we strongly
oppose this bill today thank
you.
Senator Johnson you are unmuted.
Good morning madam chair blue
members of the committee my name
is Senica and I'm here
Representative yet that you
connect the climate crisis
action so here today speaking on
behalf of our New Jersey youth
members in their families and we
oppose H. B. six until
additional amendments I made the
extent and strong support of
carbon emissions reductions and
the purpose of this bill and we
greatly appreciate the work
responses in the committee to
address our concerns regarding
timeline in need for tribal
consultation and stronger
protections for inclination with
impacted communities so you know
first thank you so much for
hearing us and for your work to
improve this bill in this
critical ways we are speaking on
the opposition this morning
because we feel necessary to
continue to push for the removal
of offsets in this bill and for
the additional downstream
emissions tracking and reporting
for oil and gas extraction so
the international indigenous
community continuous the calls
for
the end to destructive and
exploitative practices of
offsets and global research has
also shown that these schemes
are harmful and ineffective
given assets can only be ten
percent towards twenty fifty
standard we also with
unnecessary we respectfully
request your lowcost in the bill
streamlined regulatory process
and keep the cost management
communities thank you.
In Winchester you are muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Jim Winchester
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico couple
points first of industry
regulators and others are nearly
at the end of a three year
process which cost tens of
millions of dollars to
development team rolls into this
bill by its defined parameters
essentially allows agencies to
circumvent that entire good
faith process and pile on more
strict emission regulations in
what is already touted as the
strictest methane rules in the
country and we feel that's
unfortunate to say the least
secondly I just like to add that
the ambitious nature of this
bill exceeds parameters even
laid out on the federal level if
this bill does get enacted in
New Mexico we sensually subject
our citizens to economic pain
and suffering in this bill will
pause ahead of the rest of the
country in the world so I do
urged committee members to vote
against the bill don't allow our
state to shoot ourselves in the
foot again in the name of being
more concerned about the
environment the people.
JD Bullington you are muted.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which respectfully
continues to oppose house bill
six for this reason New Mexico
is currently on a clear study
course to strengthen diversified
modernize its energy portfolio
this legislature recently passed
the energy transition act which
the chamber strongly supported
there's another bill this
session dealing with cleaner
fuel standards which is also
strongly supported by the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce companies are
continuously deploying new
technologies on a voluntary
basis to reduce emissions and
many of them are already on
course to achieve the objectives
of this legislation by twenty
fifty so house bill six is a big
contrast to our current approach
and strategy it's important for
New Mexico to become a gross
state like other states in the
west and southwest while
balancing environmental concerns
thank you.
Hello hundred alliance you are
muted.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee and really
appreciate you allowing me to
speak today I speak one is a
constituent in two of the
environmental justice organizer
for the southwest organizing
project so thank you all for the
committee substitutes although
and Seneca mentioned we are
still concerned about offsets
we're concerned because through
this bill we would be codifying
offsets and carbon marketing
trading schemes we're concerned
with this because we already
have sixty five thousand oil
wells and only for folks who are
watching these right now only
three inspectors and we just
don't feel that New Mexico has
the capacity to over to watch
this and further more carbon
offsetting schemes have not been
shown to help lower emissions
rather increase the house gas
emissions so respectfully we
oppose this bill we know that
this is more for the ETA and not
for community thank you.
Cristo curly you are muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee yeah
that's a vote and my name is
crystal curly you share can on
initially can that you wish to
change the credit this which are
a hundred feet externality.
I'm here as a mother as thank
also a constituent of New Mexico
but more importantly I'm the
executive director of a
nonprofit called indigenous
lifeways and we serve McKinley
County communities and what we
have notice for.
Since colonisation is that are
indigenous voices are
continuously left out of these
decision making
we believe that.
Because of the misuse of our
land and our indigenous rates
it.
It doesn't align with our way of
life our Dennis fundamental
rights this bill excludes are.
Turley Marquez you are muted.
Yes thank you madam chair log
Charley market is here on behalf
of New Mexico business coalition
members of the committee the New
Mexico business coalition
represents hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans.
They focus on making New Mexico
a better place to live and work
and I'm B. C. otherwise New
Mexico business coalition
respectfully stands in
opposition to HB six.
Well our members support a claim
by bringing government they want
to balance and how this is
accomplished while still
allowing economic development
and job creation this bill in
our opinion does not do that the
legislation proposes the most
stringent requirements in the
nation and even exceeds the
requirements of the person
Grumman that many countries
including the U. S. have signed
on to the V. six significantly
the expands.
UBS Authority and I'll just say
we stand in opposition.
At the neck Christodoulou you
are unmuted.
Good morning chair and committee
members my name's up in a
Christodoulou I'm retired naval
engineer at in energy and
environment and the president of
Cecil power LLC I'm speaking to
you as an engineer kudos to the
H. P. six it is a radical
acceptance to transition to
clean energy which needs to
happen and will happen however
it sets a waffles on a few items
mainly the carbon cap and trade
and the fact that it includes
carbon capture in its direct
emissions definition.
So well I accepted the state
entities are will enacted now
and the rest of twenty twenty
four we need to go cold Turkey
and include New Mexico tech help
passed H. J. R. to environmental
right so that the people have a
voice I can find government with
the incentives to act as
trustees and to the electric
companies no new guests no coal
divest from fossil fuels you
can't serve two masters we
propose it as it stands.
I do.
If any Rivera you are unmuted.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment Tiffany
Rivera registered lobbyists for
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau although we appreciate
the work Representative small
has done on this piece of
legislation we respectfully
stand in opposition if there is
an easy way to significantly
reduce emissions that would be
clearly spelled on this
legislation and unfortunately is
not we do not currently have the
technology or the capacity to
meet the ambitious goal outlined
in the bill for example the bill
requires each state agency to
submit data on the qualitative
and quantitative impacts of
climate change on their program
while also reporting the current
and projected future direct
emission of greenhouse gases
from sources are sectors within
the regulatory jurisdiction the
department of ag administers
more than thirty five statutes
and collecting this data would
be a monumental task and is
currently in funded additionally
this bill invite given the
environmental improvement board
a massive amount of regulatory
power which we propose please
oppose this bill.
Carlos on thank you you are
muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Carless on tech
with the New Mexico business
coalition
we respectfully oppose house
bill six.
This bill conflicts in overrides
with measures that were recently
put into place.
And we think that's very
unfortunate and inappropriate to
do at this time New Mexico has
been a leader in quality clean
air initiatives but this bill
goes further without giving
recognition to the work already
done and already in process the
other thing is that it's
strictly environmentally focused
and it ignores the fact that New
Mexico is a poverty stricken
state that needs to find new
ways of encouraging job creation
not inhibiting at the bill did
not get interim review and I
don't feel that the stakeholders
are really being listened to
with the concerns of this bill
we oppose the bill and we urge
you to vote no as well thank
you.
Mary L. then I see you are
muted.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members I am the
executive director of new energy
economy and on behalf of our
thirty five hundred members I'm
asking you to vote no on H. B.
six unless it is amended to
include a calculation of
downstream emissions we
appreciate the goals of the bill
but a recent federal court
decision on January twenty
seventh twenty twenty two last
month throughout the US
department of the interior's
decision to offer up more than
eighty million acres of the Gulf
to the in oil industry the
largest oil and gas lease sale
in history the court held the
HSD fail to adequately disclose
and consider the greenhouse gas
emissions that would result from
the sale the friends of the
earth verses Haaland decision
held that the government should
have provided a quantitative
estimate of the downstream
greenhouse gas emissions that
will result from the development
of oil and gas the court held
that these reasonably
foreseeable significant adverse
impact.
Matthew Hermio you are muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee Matthew
how to meal with the public
service company of New Mexico as
you know energy companies
already operate under
environmental guidelines the
energy transition act and
regulatory oversight but the
public regulation commission
although we have tried to work
with Representative small on
this legislation we feel the new
committee substitute creates
some unnecessary overlapping and
uncoordinated regulation in an
industry as many of you know
that needs regulatory certainty
reliability and resilience and.
We are ready subject to New
Mexico is a hundred percent
coverage for the electricity by
twenty forty five including both
fifty percent renewables by
twenty thirty and eighty percent
by twenty forty five and we feel
clarity is necessary and asked
that the energy transition at
the incorporated as a
requirement instead of a shock
consider as in section six D.
two and D. three B. state for
this reason we respectfully
oppose house bill six thank you
and have a great day.
Michael d'antonio you are muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my Cantoni with
Xcel energy we serve the
committee to the eastern part of
the state as I just mentioned by
PNM we are covered by the Energy
transitioned Act we appreciate
the sponsor bringing this
legislation for and appreciate
says in the amendment cities
that it recently but we still
are and respectful opposition up
based on we feel like the EPA's
the governing piece of
legislation for utilities and in
getting to greenhouse gas
reduction we excel energy
already seated are twenty twenty
the thirty goal or bite at R.
twenty thirty call close to it.
And so with new new renewables
and ETA.
We're achieving the great
amounts of the masseduction
already so thank you.
Thanks Martinez you are muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee good morning
bill sponsors events Martinez of
tri state generation and
transmission association.
we rise a respectful concern
with house bill six concerns we
provided during the COVID period
we believe that the state of New
Mexico lacks jurisdiction to
legislate a regulated mission
associated with electric
generation located in other
states just three years ago and
the ETA we we agree to a twenty
fifty target for net zero
provided that the energy we
could produces reliable
affordable and technologically
feasible.
We are concerned there exists a
lack of up at the appetite for
new clean technologies such as
hydrogen which will hinder our
ability to get to that net zero.
Tri state will meet its twenty
thirty R. PS by twenty twenty
four our slide into the ETA was
based on the ETA have been our
road map to the future.
We respectfully request you to
vote no on house bill six thank
you.
Julia Burnell you are muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Julia burden on from Sandia
purple and I'm the director of
public action alliance
respectfully we have stood firm
against what we in the global
indigenous struggle call full
solution well solutions and acts
of commodified the sacred we
also want to thank you for
considering some of the
amendments from the original
bill but we just can't support
codifying offsetting schemes
that achievement zero which is
not real zero we simply know the
offsetting has another form of
cap and trade which is proven
that those types of the mission
programs don't work and actually
continue impacting our
communities of color HB six will
open New Mexico to a whole new
global carbon trading market
allowing more private industry
to continue to take advantage of
our cultural resources
We just arms simply can't
support the bill as it stands
respectfully thank you.
David yes you are muted.
Thank you madam chair awful
committee members so I'm a
speaking as a citizen or
resident Albuquerque have better
since nineteen ninety three in
my concern with this bill as
with many of the other
environmental regulations that
come down from the federal
government and state government.
Is the the financial impact on
the average citizen.
As a specific example I looked
at my natural gas bill going
back to here and I'm paying
twice the rate per firm that is
yes your ago that's right double
and I think that is top
regulations well you know they
have good intent to a clean
environment can have an adverse
impact on the surface and so I
think that is something that
should be close to look at and
also I would like to mention
that the New Mexicos nonviolent
and any thing we do here doesn't
change what happens outside the
borders of New Mexico as far as
the apartment thank you.
Thank you record your animated.
Yes good morning members of the
committee madam chair my name is
a care Cordova okay we okay when
James Cunningham also.
The staff member at yucca you
euthanize compress section and
I'm in opposition of house bill
six until more amendments are
made we support the proposed
emissions reductions
requirements and we thank you
for listening to our voices to
put science based standards in
place and to approve the bill
especially tribal consultations
and further consultations
impacted communities another
thank you for moving up the
timeline well these are
incredibly need amendments and
great proponents to HB six we
are still concerned about carbon
offsets and carbon capture and
bill the push for removal of
Constance dire because ten
percent is significant and
encourages modifications of our
lands waters and care as well as
our animal plant relatives is
present president for market
mechanisms that are ineffective
great dependency on on carbon
pollution and for our
communities communities are
tired of facing harmful effects
of carbon emissions thank you.
Thank you that concludes the
twenty minutes for opposition so
if everyone can please lower
their hands that was wanting to
speak for opposition and we're
gonna take twenty minutes for
support.
Please raise your hand and we
will get everyone going and the
clock as well.
So Nancy says you are muted.
Thank you very much good morning
chair members of the committee
my name is Nancy says that
climate justice organize Roday
we stand in favor of HB six of
you as a racial justice issue
climate change is proportionally
effects I thought in the should
be at the table when decisions
are being made for them
and Clemente legislation should
prioritize budget for the most
impacted this legislation does
many things in that direction
including requiring consultation
with over for communities in
order to develop these kind of
policies that address
disproportionate impacts improve
our understanding of how climate
change affects these communities
it also requires that
communities are prioritized and
rulemaking for direct reductions
this is important because so
much local pollution comes with
emissions of greenhouse gases
the potential environmental
health and quality of permits to
our communities.
We had urged committee members
to vote in favor of house bill
six thank you very much.
Camilla fever then you are
unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and especially to
the bill Sanchez Representative
has fallen speaker Egolf and
Camilla I am and director of the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club representing thirty five
thousand members and supporters
we're so appreciative of all of
those who have worked to move
this bill forward and to improve
it moving the rulemaking data
naming the sustainable economy
task force and tribal
consultation in establishing
reporting and rulemaking to
benefit impacted communities
thank you and please support the
legislation.
Joan brown you are unmuted.
Good morning madam chair
committee and Sanchez thank you
so much for V. six and also
special my name is John Brown
I'm the director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with faith communities all
of the state I want to thank you
for your work on the amendments
to this bill to make it better
well no bill is perfect we are
in support of this bill and
certainly would support for the
amendments
this would represent this bill
would help Representative a
sixty four reduction of current
levels of climate pollution by
twenty thirty and this is very
important in terms of ethical
and moral perspectives that we
have to hold as and organization
one of a quote that continues to
ring in my ears as of one of our
young people who said I don't
know if I'm going to be strong
enough to face all of the
suffering that's going to be
coming from climate change in
the future these are the voices
that we need to listen to as
well so that we might have life
thank you.
And Shelton you are animated.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Ben Shelton on the political
policy director for conservation
voters New Mexico.
This bill represents the
opportunity the largest
important climate change that
this legislators legislatures of
the opportunity to consider
since two thousand nineteen hi
has gotten better at every
single committee stop including
this up to date is a strong
changes that you have in front
of you I'm definitely I think
the people who flag areas where
this bill can still improve so
improve I I don't disagree a lot
of the points race the
difference for us is that we
still urge a yes vote on the
bill.
To work towards the goals in
this bill is under way today
thanks to community standards in
our elector secretary and
methane emissions rules for oil
and gas but we still need this
first step will be more details
and planning as we get into the
months and years to come to
tailor our climate change
approach toward different
communities this bill is not a
self contained solution but we
must start with this very first
commitment thank you for your
time please vote yes on this
bill.
Along.
You are muted.
Thank you madam chair my name is
no longer with the natural
resources defense council I'd
like to thank the sponsors
Representative smallest degree
often others as well as all of
those who have helped
collaborate and improve support
the drafting of the super
important piece of legislation
New Mexico is in a position to
lead the energy transition to
support New Mexico families and
benefiting and participating in
that transition towards clean
energy improve our quality of
life and improve public health
we can do that without raising
energy bills and we can do it
consistent with what demands of
science to stop the worst
effects of climate change with
all those considerations I urge
you to vote yes on the bill.
Erik Schlenker Goodrich you are
muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erik Schlenker Goodrich I
are inTaos and I'm the executive
director of the western
environmental law center we
stand in strong support of HB
six the claim future act V. six
as well crafted bill that will
open new doors to a thriving
climate resilient future for all
New Mexicans what we strongly
support H. B. six we do want to
uplift and center the concerns
raised by frontline community
groups regarding issues such as
offsets and carbon capture and
storage our hope is that state
agencies will count for these
concerns in the course of the
public rulemaking provided for
by the bill before the
environmental improvement board
thank you please vote yes on
eighty six.
And the pain you are unmuted.
I thank you madam chair I mean
the pain and I support this bill
each project as many good
features and should advance to
the Senate however it can still
be improved we need really
mission reductions in New Mexico
now not just off grid offsets I
have to suggest improvements for
the bill one remove the reliance
on to per sequestration
technologies that have been
proven to work it to remove
offsets and credits from the
bill.
This will only have a small
impact.
On the required reductions but
vastly improved the bill by
eliminating the complicated
bureaucratic process of
accounting for in supervising
offsets and credits.
Your need to make these changes
before dancing this bill but if
you do not I still support the
bill thank you
Tom Solomon you are unlimited.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Tom Solomon with three fifty New
Mexico with eight thousand
supporters around the state this
bill will finally aligned New
Mexico state law on greenhouse
gas emissions with the Paris
climate accords it's the most
important climate bill since the
energy transition act twenty
nineteen it grew out of last
October speakers climate summit
and it's been work since then
making every version stronger
than the last will require is to
accelerate the move to electric
vehicles cap leaking gas wells
in generally require less direct
pollution by the oil and gas
industry which is why they're
running scary ads against it
this bill would mark New Mexico
is a national climate leader and
pull even more jobs into the
state for the many businesses
who want to operate in the state
solving the climate crisis and
three fifty New Mexico's bands
and strong strong support of
this bill and we think the
sponsor thank you.
And what can see you are muted.
Go ahead and.
My name is David Watkins and.
Appreciate that the Sanchez move
the timeline in response to our
comments previously we still
need penalties for violations
included in this bill because
there are none we also need an
accounting for downstream
greenhouse gas emissions over
seventy percent of New
extraction will come from wells
that have not yet been drilled
undeveloped oil and gas by
twenty thirty eighty six percent
of projected emissions
associated with oil and gas
activity in the state will come
from burning currently
undeveloped gas we support I
would like to say I support this
bill but I would like for you to
acquire amendments to include
the impacts of downstream
emissions and the other things
one of which I just come in.
Thank you.
Barbara Calif you are muted.
Good morning madam chair
committee members I'm Barbara
Calif speaking for the league of
women voters of New Mexico eight
supports HB six we endorsed the
goal of reducing greenhouse gas
emissions to fifty percent of
the two thousand five level by
twenty thirty to ninety percent
of that level by twenty fifty
we're pleased with the many
changes in the new substitute
bill for H. B. six we see that
the deadline for beginning the
rulemaking has been moved up to
January first twenty twenty four
but we would like to know why it
can't be even earlier we are
pleased with the reference to
direct emissions has been
expanded to include emissions
from all sectors we're pleased
that the requirement for direct
emissions reduction must now be
enforceable we hope the
environmental improvement board
will devise a mechanism for
enforcement please vote to pass
on this bill thank you.
Eight nine eight.
You are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Paige
right with New Mexico voices for
children.
Right of house bill six we want
to thank the sponsors advocates
for other work in developing
this dell but we still have
concerns about the company's
offsets and allowance for carbon
capture sequestration this bill
is still incredibly important to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
It's an opportunity to lead the
nation by example and it puts us
on a path towards a healthier
cleaner future for our children
and future generations we urge
your support for the stuff thank
you.
Joseph Hernandez.
You are animated.
Yeah.
Madam chair and members of this
committee I am representing NM
native vote I live in Shiprock
New Mexico the largest.
Community on the Navajo Nation I
work in the now will communities
here in New Mexico and I'm
advocating for this committee to
pass house bill six in the year
twenty thirty my daughter meadow
will be fourteen years old I
want her to have a future where
she does not have to worry about
the effects of climate change in
the year twenty thirty
scientists all over the world
have set a twenty thirty as a
deadline to reduce heat trapping
emissions to board you're you're
of first of all and destructive
climate change the year twenty
thirty I'm I'm I'm not ready for
adolescents and I want to make
sure that we are doing
everything we can to make sure
that we have a generational
impact it and and forced mandate
to eliminate Mr special on that
please vote yes.
Lucas Herndon.
You are omitted.
Thank you madam chair thank you
the committee and thank you to
the bill Sanchez Representative
small and and speaker Egolf for
bringing this bill back this is
something that New Mexico
communities up and down the
state are advocating for and
fighting hard force we
appreciate you bringing it back
I'm here representing progress
now New Mexico we see we do
stand in support of this bill we
also want to recognize the
voices from communities calling
for further amendments to this
bill to make it even stronger
and protect those communities
and I also want to echo my
friend Joseph's comments I have
a team daughter myself
initiators her adulthood having
to fight these battles it's
something I don't want her to
have to do so let's take this
first step now thank you.
Deborah Condit you are muted.
Hi my name is Deborah Condit and
the registered lobbyists for
debt western resource advocates
and I like to thank the sponsors
of this bill for bringing it
forward we stand in strong
support of this legislation
please vote yes on this but
thank you.
Charles good marker you are
unmuted.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee thank
you to the Sanchez I'm speaking
today on behalf of New Mexico
Public Health Association for
whom I am a registered lobbyist.
This bill is titled the crude
futures act it could just as
easily have been titled the
claim healthy futures act there
is no doubt whatsoever that
climate change in general
worldwide is having an enormous
impact on public health
including here in New Mexico and
specifically in New Mexico we
will have a healthier future for
our children if we pass this act
thank you very much.
Jessica keep so you are unmuted.
Good morning chair and committee
members my name is Jessica keep
so I'm a member of the Navajo
Nation and work for the
organization twenty John and it
we work and live with the
communities who we represent and
are advocates for a just and
equitable transition for the
Navajo Nation we support H. B.
six for what it could be and not
entirely for what it is now one
of the many concerns are offsets
strong limit should be added in
the protocol review of offsets
so it mentors know that they
can't use offsets indefinitely
use of offsets or offset markets
shouldn't be a distraction from
the real goal of the bill which
is establish establishing
greenhouse gas limits and
hopefully this means taking real
greenhouse gases out of the
atmosphere as well as preventing
greenhouse gases from ever being
admitted in the first place if
this bill doesn't do this then
it will do more harm to our
collective climate than good
thank you.
Carl Peterson you are muted.
Carl will you and you on your
end.
Sorry.
Madam chair members
appropriation I A. B. Q. I am a
reluctant supporter of H. B. six
sections two and six covering
office credits and enforcement
for this bill are insufficient.
However the redeeming quality of
HB six is found in section three
paragraphs a and B. which define
specific emissions levels and
the required roll backs for
twenty thirty twenty fifty I
suggest to pass without
recommendation thank you Jeff.
Well gives you are muted.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy well we appreciate
the amendments made and feel
that they we feel that they did
not go far not but have decided
to support HD six substitute
bill also calling for the
following changes most
importantly remove all language
related to sequestration offsets
from the bill together they
allow the state and the fossil
fuel industry to misrepresent
the mission progress with what
we've you just a fanciful
accounting trick that assumes
that carbon sequestration
technology will work which is
not been debt demonstrated
anywhere in the world Tim Baxter
senior researcher with the
Austrian climb accounts reported
that he was not aware of a
single large carbon capture and
storage project also fuels to
world literature on time on
budget and captured the agreed
amount of carbon in this context
taking New Mexico's emissions
rules on assumption that carbon
capture can work seems foolish
and disingenuous worse.
Representative wrong you are
muted.
Good morning.
Sure chair blue and members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity committee to comment
my name is Ralph Franz and I'm
speaking on behalf of myself.
Representative I'm a resident of
house district twenty four in
Albuquerque.
I also support H. B. six but I
have my reservations as have
been expressed by numerous
commenters before me on the data
that we'll making and also this
role provides this bill on
carbon capture and sequestration
I'm also remembering H. B. line
climbed solutions that was
introduced in the twenty twenty
one session by now CD one
Representative Melanie Stansbury
and this committee unfortunately
did not have the courage to to
it here that bills so now we're
one year later than we should
have been and that's why that
will making needs to be moved up
to anymore July first twenty
twenty three still I do support
H. B. six thank you.
C. A. V. you you are admitted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is really
active you
I and I represent cover COVID
advocate they need to we stand
and support of HB thank you
tracked
we thank the sponsors are
working strength in the bill and
we do can we do continue to
share up with the concern of
frontline communities are
guarding off that that they are
out and carbon because the
prostration we encourage you
know additional work on that and
we hope that the committee will
pass the bill thank you so much.
June part since you are muted.
Honorable chair lady and
representatives my name is Jim
Parsons from Rio Rancho I am
standing in strong support of HB
clean futures that green
amendment for New Mexico's
environmental and economic
future even though carbon
offsets don't help people and
they do exacerbate the climate
Crisis still HB sex is a great
step for our people's health in
future as it sits real limits
and requirements that will
reduce emissions of devastating
greenhouse gases including
methane for all of us please
vote yes on H. B. six thank you.
Yes you are muted.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is man
up and to be this I'm a
community organizer on behalf
The New Mexico cafe in requests
in Hidalgo county I stand in
support of H. B. six however I
do have reservations and would
like to see further amendments I
also stand with the young voices
from yucca in saying that we do
need stronger language in
regards to climate equity in a
with this bill so I do support
but would would be I definitely
open to amendments thank you
have a wonderful day.
On tribal you are muted.
Thank you madam chair.
And members and sponsors with a
hundred twenty two gas wells on
our Rio Arriba county ranch the
clean future act represents a
unique opportunity to bring
environmental and health
protections under law for all
those living daily with the many
impacts of oil and gas
production I am proud to join my
brothers and sisters in the
disadvantaged in indigenous
communities in strong support of
a clean future for New Mexico
yes on H. B. six.
L. star you are unmuted.
Hi.
I am in support of H. B. six
clean future up because I
believe that we need to head
toward a net zero
carbon footprint and I think
reduction so I I think we need
to do that as fast as we can I
am concerned about carbon
sequestration and that needs to
be spelled out more clearly I
think that we need to be aware
of the changes that affect all
communities of need especially
tribal communities and and I I
want to speak to global warming
expressed they are this is a
climate emergency.
so we need to act soon thank
you.
And that concludes our twenty
minutes of support and sorry
that we couldn't get everyone on
for both opposition and support
but we're just trying to get
some things done with that we
will go back to the committee
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair it took me
a minute to get myself all
squared away here.
I wanted to ask madam chair and
representative small there was a
The question about the.
Actual ability of the
departments to meet the
deadlines on the reporting and
I'm just wondering if as a
member of as vice chair of the
house Appropriations if you can
indicate whether there is
adequate support for the
agencies to do that without
Do under stress.
Thank you madam chair and and
and chair Representative Chasey
this house can be proud of the
fact that we're we sent over a
twelve percent increase to NMED
and its budget let's uh sixteen
percent increase to NMED's
budget.
While we're we don't know what
will come back from our
colleagues in the other chamber
we also know that there are
substantial increases within the
recurring portion of house bill
two junior.
Areas and so those increases
specifically to the climate
bureau with read NMED and to the
energy conservation management
office at EMNRD give me
confidence madam chair that this
timeline is mutable as we
continue to prioritize as this
body did in our passage of HB
two.
I'm sure that was actually my
only question thank you.
Thank you Representative or yes.
Thank you madam chair
Representative the other madam
chair actually passed one of my
question Sir so thank you for
that
Madam chair representative
tional can you tell me a little
bit about how you took in the
input
that you heard from
from the public between these
two committees between energy
and and that's one absolutely
madam chair representative
worked as thank you so much for
the question and just a very big
thank you to all of those who
commented and are tuning in
today in support and opposition
Madam chair representative arts
as
the some of the key things
especially that were expressed
and house energy is to
integrate more clearly and as
often as we can into New Mexico
statute
clear statutory consideration
and support for
disproportionately impacted
communities.
And and so starting in that area
Madam chair representative works
as we go down to the pot and
bottom of page four
this is the reporting
requirements that we've
discussed as briefly and we
wanted to make sure that
actually the first one of the
first requirements that's
included explicitly here the
qualitative and quantitative
impacts of climate change on the
states and sees programs and
operations and the extent known
on disproportionately impacted
communities we wanted to make
sure that that was in there
Swiss scroll down Madam chair
representative of Ortez on page
six.
Some of the most explicit I
think important language that
was included this prioritises
coordination
Within consideration of
environmental and economic
progress for disproportionately
impacted communities and also
Madam chair representative works
as specifically to identify
issues and opportunities raise
through tribal consultation the
tribal consultation
demands and guy and and
requirements are throughout what
our state it should do the
responsibility that we should
live up to and we wanted to make
sure that that was explicitly
included here in HB six we've
identified here on page seven
focused specifically on
including opportunities for low
income households with energy
efficient energy efficiency
investments Madam chair of some
arts as something that you've
been an exceptional leader on
within this body and then madam
chair that sorry for the long
answer but on page starting on
page nine to the top of Page ten
in our committee substitute we
wanted to really think of a way
to ensure that the
there are there is on the ground
explicit consultation with an
discussion and engagement in
conversation with
disproportionately impacted
communities around our state
And also to with when the the
ideas promulgating these rules
not only with disproportionately
impacted communities but also
specifically working with the
sustainable economy task force
in through tribal consultation
in finally madam chair
as we go down the page eleven
and twelve
The
Focusing again on
the the rules so that it.
In setting standards the prior
taste prioritization and
benefits of emission reductions
in avoidance increase impacts on
disproportionately impacted
communities and then we wanted
to rip we've heard in and really
respect the strong conversation
around offsets.
In Paris in the worldwide
response to climate change well
there's very important
conversation around offset we do
have to in you know as I look at
this piece legislation proud to
bring it forward offsets are ace
very small yet none the less
important component and
as we consider that component
which is really at the very end
of this year between twenty
thirty and twenty fifty.
And really hearing and beginning
to work to find ways to
specifically address the
concerns in engagement around
offsets we wanted to note that
the impact of offsets on
disproportionately impacted
communities or environmental
justice communities as part of
the statutory construction so
that that's will always live in
the law as we go through this
bill so that's a lot madam chair
but we received a great deal of
them but and we wanted to
respond as comprehensively as we
could.
Thank you madam chair
Representative small I I'd like
to know how this bill compares
with what other states are doing
or have already done.
To reduce emissions.
Thank you madam chair this sets
us as a national leader
especially with the improvements
that we're making.
Madam chair committee I would
all I would turn to Mr to Golia
if you wants to find a quick
summary but I would just specify
that madam chair you know we are
uniquely New Mexico again with
incredible opportunities that
are uniquely new Mexican and as
we talked about at the
beginning.
In Norma's challenges were
perhaps
At the in the crosshairs of
climate change to a degree that
that few other states are.
so.
This is this is a uniquely New
Mexico solution.
We do think it can be one of the
boldest in the country Mr to go
ahead you want to add any
technical information.
I just point
to the north in Colorado as one
example in twenty nineteen
passed a law on the claim
actually Lucien.
Sanders pollution that sits in
place similar targets fifty
percent reduction by twenty
thirty relative to their two
thousand five baseline and
ninety percent reduction target
by twenty fifty relative to
their baseline and since then
have been very active in a range
of of will make gains to reduce
greenhouse gas pollution from
across many sectors in a number
of ways that.
HB six is set up similarly to
that which is to say that puts
in place.
Yes yes pollution limits and
then directs regulators to
identify the specific policies
necessary in order to achieve
their the reductions associated
with those moments.
Happy to provide additional
examples if if that would be
helpful.
Madam chair representative on Mr
Dooley at that that's that is
that's very helpful thank you
for that I I I heard from the
the folks both in opposition and
in support about your the
process of community engagement
and I think that's really
critical you know it's it's I
know that the bill has changed
to incorporate some of that how
can we how do you see the rule
making process in the process
for gathering input public input
to you to address some of the
concerns regarding offsets and.
All all all of that engagement
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Ortez the
rulemaking in the way that it's
guided in this really speaks to
one unleashing innovation and
bringing investment to New
Mexico to achieve the direct
emissions reductions and also
madam chair representative that
list that we went through which
not only directs the rulemaking
to consider
but actually requires them to
engage in conversation at least
three different meetings around
the state disproportionately
impacted communities to
explicitly seek work with in use
in an informed way tribal
consultation to guide the
rulemaking and all future
rulemakings so we're setting I
think madam chair representative
of strong rules of the road that
really reflects New Mexico's
values again for you know
welcoming innovation and
investment making sure that
begin beginning and continuing
the strong work that's been led
by so many in this building many
across our state to focus on
disproportionately impacted
communities to elevate tribal
consultation into integrate both
components into an on going way
of how we do business the state.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Mr W. I I
really appreciate the the
answers to those questions and I
think I think I'm done thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative small let's go to
page two.
One twenty two and so we're
talking about emitting sector in
both imported and produced in
state.
So what are you talking about is
important.
Mr to go yes.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question that is
referring to at imported
electricity specifically said
that is sold to customers in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair
representative small are would
it include.
State emissions from vehicles on
the interstate.
Madam chair representative I'm.
My understanding of the way that
that that.
Fuel emissions for something
like transportation would be
regulated would be our court in
court at the rack so by way of
fuel distributors within the
state.
So madam chair and the chair
expert.
Is the.
Miss the semi truck is
purchasing fuel in the state The
New.
That.
It is somehow determined.
As part of this so carbon
emissions.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair representative Rehm really
excellent questions one madam
chair representative.
Think it's important to point
out that we already regulate
vehicle emissions
and to Madam chair
representative the.
The direction for the rule
making would be to take stock of
What Mr to go you have pointed
out so it's if this electricity
that just is without any offtake
in New Mexico that's not
something that would be account
accounted for nor somebody.
who passes through without you
know either filling up for
charging up or however they're
they're powering their vehicles.
Madam chair and Representative
small if we take.
I forty basically.
From Amarillo to Gallup.
There's not very many vehicles
that can travel through the
state without getting some
amount of fuel.
So how we gonna measure.
Those vehicles in the amount of
emissions that there there are
the minute.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm that the at
the specific vehicle level of or
at the specific household level
that's not contemplated in this
that's not the Madam chair
representative the
emissions calculations that are
that are being it can will be
taken really go by sector in so
it's in that point of the
individual entity is really not
it's not contemplated in this
legislation is not subject to
the legislation it's overall
sectors.
Madam chair representative small
so you're gonna look at the
missions by a secretary.
And and then.
How do we determine what came
from the if you will vehicles on
the interstate.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm that that is
the one of the key charges for
our state agencies working
income conjunction with
You have for the an NDA right
Madam chair representative just
to go deep into it and M. D. A.
certifies all
gas pumps gas and diesel pumps
as we go forward and as we see
the different as we see an
evolution and move towards
electric charging for instance.
Within the ETA structure Madam
chair representative that's how
these sectors can be
assessed
by admittedly much smarter folks
than I am but but that it's very
much it's already part of how
the state does business in terms
of
contemplating an accounting for
all fuel that sold in the state
eccentric etcetera this takes us
a step further madam chair
representative in apportioning
and then making sure that we're
reducing emissions from those
areas and will be able to do
that because of the structures
that already set up.
Sure thank you Sir.
What amount of.
Electricity do you think you
need.
R. or or do we have so you're
you're speaking about the
increase of electric vehicles on
the road do we with the state
produce enough electricity to
Currently to go ahead and take
care of this future low.
At Madam chair representative
ring great question I I would
turn to Mr to Golia for
additional technical information
but.
Madam chair representative Rehm
you're really point to such an
important component of reducing
emissions while actually
increasing the amount of energy
that we consume and madam chair
representative Rehm were
uniquely positioned to to
kind when that future because
Madam chair representative Rehm
we have so much potential for
renewable and carbon free energy
in our state so we've thank you
madam chair of it it is a core
question Madam chair
representative.
We absolutely have the capacity
to support far more electricity
production and usage in state
and that's one of the reasons
that we think more investment
will come to our state in this
lower emissions future.
Mr to go yeah do you want to add
anything to that.
Thank you madam chair
representative the only thing
that I would add.
Is that from our perspective the
interaction between these these
things is a is a great reason
why we need to be thinking about
overall statewide emission
reductions because they'll be
they'll be interacting with one
another and that will have an
impact on sector by sector
missions thank you.
You
madam chair and Representative
small I I agree that you know we
need to reduce emissions so
please don't take all this is
you know we we don't need to do
that.
You know I'm looking at vehicles
or are you know become an of all
vehicles are becoming better at.
Emission reduction.
But the articles I read on the
power grid and
electric vehicles that are
powered particularly when you
start going to residential areas
if I remember correctly I think
you could not have more than
four electric cars are blocked
if I remember correctly with the
current infrastructure so I'm
worried about that.
And I don't know how you plan to
address that if we're going to
have many more collect cars.
Madam chair representative it at
both thank you I think your of
your just first thank you is a
really important questions
number two
Madam chair representative the
additional investments within
the electric grid
in addition to development of
carbon free and renewable energy
is needed in New Mexico madam
chair representative is well
suited to welcome that
investment and
I will go to Mr
You.
To your point and I think it
speaks to both again new
renewable energy development
which we're seeing kind of
rapidly increase in our state as
well as the kind of grid
investments and supports
yes there's a fifteen to twenty
five percent low growth I'm told
that that will just even just in
a few of these sectors within
our homes and especially within
the transportation sector these
are all madam chair
representative are ways of
bringing investment and bringing
jobs are providing jobs rather
in New Mexico.
Mr go ahead you want to add
anything to that.
Madam chair representative.
I don't think I have much to add
other than I know from personal
experience I serve on the board
of my role after cooperative
that utilities are are no doubt
thinking about these things and
I think thinking about them has
providing opportunities.
And in New Mexico that means
opportunities for significant.
Continue renewable energy
development that can bring jobs
associated with your current
interest of the thank you.
Madam chair and representative.
So.
On page two this we million
sector that we're going to look
at outside the state how are we
going to control.
The missions.
That the power plant in another
state the Mets.
Madam chair and representative.
That will be a question for
for the environment department
any ID to to determine
certainly with support from the
PRC and I want to get crosswise
on on on that but there are a
number of ways that
that states and other
jurisdictions with borders
account for imported electricity
in order to
to assure that.
That that they're able to meet
their.
Emission goals for example and
madam chair representative I
would just add to that we you
know we're not going to be
regulating
you know I a power generation
source and another in another
state Madam chair representative
the energy transition act does
have.
they they set forward madam
chair representative the
portfolio
that requirements and so that
you know that's guided how for
some of these utilities
weather's coops are investor
owned utilities who operate
across multiple jurisdictions
account for which power comes
into the state of New Mexico so
we don't want to regulate that
other power plant but there is a
structure in place with the
energy transition act to guide
the portfolio.
We all agree madam chair
representative that that
portfolio that hi as it were of
energy usage is it is going to
grow very significantly in New
Mexico.
Madam chair representative small
one thing that I'm concerned
about with EDTA that we've
passed.
PNM has so.
Been very vocal that this summer
there's probably gonna be
rolling blackouts and they've
looked at other states or other
producers to try to buy some
access and there's not any
excess excess right now and that
is concerning I mean you know
when we look at the GA we were.
Trying to go ahead and make it
sustainable and reduce the
missions are so.
I don't understand how we're
going to as a state go to
another state.
Figure out what the missions are
from whatever our coal fired
plant gas fired whatever you
want to call it and are either
say you have to reduce that or
do we go ahead and say oh you
can of PNM you cannot purchase
any
power from this for that.
How we gonna treat that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
We need to work to make it
easier to build you know to to
get more power in.
Available for New Mexicans in
state madam chair representative
the
Specifically when it comes to
public service company of New
Mexico the other supply chain
disruptions as well as frankly
challenges not in the
legislature but but
In the other in another
regulatory body have contributed
to kind of it.
Alongside the decision to leave
the carbon free energy as I
understand that that was
generated from nuclear power
have it medically put us in a
challenging situation Madam
chair representative.
This is a situation that is
Common to other states red and
blue like and why we think madam
chair representative I guess
best answer I would give to your
question is we want to support
and make it easier to build the
low cost reliable
carbon free renewable power that
the ETA considers.
And there are some ways briefly
off topic and and I'm sorry but
it just these are important
questions
we did madam chair
representative Rehm we
substantially increase the
budget for the public regulation
commission this year providing
them more technical staff and
other things which is a probably
a very important component to
help them probably more quickly
efficiently and effectively move
through the sorts of
Basis that will lead to the
rapid construction of more
renewable power and state.
Madam chair and
Representative you mentioned
nuclear do you support nuclear
power I mean when we look at
emissions from nuclear plants of
it's really close to zero.
In on the four corners would
probably be one of the best
places to do that because they
don't have any earthquakes
tornadoes or.
in all the infrastructure power
lines right there.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Representative
The.
Carbon free energy is very
important I think that.
In other bills.
We're that's not nuclear power
we're we're really making a lot
of headway towards more carbon
free dispatchable energy
but if it in turn the so so I
think there are other ways madam
chair representative in other
technologies to get the sort of
dispatchable carbon free power
that
currently that really nuclear is
one of the few ways to do that
there are other technologies
madam chair representative Rehm
I think that our worry that
we're that are better for New
Mexico.
Or that our nuclear to provide
that power.
Madam chair in Representative
small what would be those
resources or or power producing.
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think that
there are there's the the short
term battery storage Madam chair
representative
there is
power clean power produced from
hydrogen when that hydrogen is
created with the low carbon
input our zero carbon input
those are some of the ones that
I think are the most promising.
Madam chair representative small
well.
What.
I've been reading about the
hydrogen production is is that
it is not as green as it appears
how are we gonna make it green
in New Mexico that's different
from other locations that have
tried to and they're not.
Coming up with the results that
they thought it was taking more
energy to produce at.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I'm
excited to talk on the floor
offline about that because we we
have some ideas but Madam chair
representative coming back to
you just with renewable energy
here in our state take for
instance electric vehicles Madam
chair representative electric
vehicles are well suited to
charge during off peak hours
that can be supplied from short
term things like battery storage
or connected to a clean power
grid and other ways that
wouldn't even need what we're
talking about in terms of the
some of the other dispatchable
power sources so madam chair
representative
We're only at number eleven now
as far as I know when it comes
to installation or deployment of
renewable energy we have we're
either number one or number two
in terms of
potential capacity there and so
we have so much that we can add.
And when we add that madam chair
representative that's.
Local jobs in New Mexico for
folks who are
the developing the renewable
energy developing the
transmission developing the
infrastructure building the
infrastructure to connect that
in so to summarize chair
representative.
We just need to keep building
some of these clean renewable
sources make it easier and
quicker to do so with some of
our investments and supports
including at the PRC will do
that is going to help us
immensely as we look at this
twenty third day time frame with
an H. B. six where we need to
have the end emissions
statewide.
Madam chair in Representative
small you bring up a good point
about the renewable energy but
if we look at.
Southwest New Mexico we have.
Renewable there are that is
destined for California now
is there a carbon foot print
from that.
Our production of that
electricity.
Madam chair representative
the.
The H. three six only concerns
yo
What is inside of our state
Madam chair representative
I would go to Mr to go the if
you have there may be ways in
which the production and usage
of more renewable energy that
replaces
Carbon intensive energy.
Will young could count towards
the long term or even the short
term in terms of emissions
reductions this is a way for
instance madam chair
representative if someone is has
a heavy.
It's very energy intensive
manufacturing whatever that may
be if that maybe they can power
that through
The solar array with battery
storage that's the part where we
want to encourage that madam
chair representative so that
their investing in new investing
in that technology that
deployment in New Mexico they're
able to run that same
manufacturing operation that
same energy intensive operation
but instead of doing it with
carbon intensive power they're
now doing it with your lower
zero carbon in so there.
Their direct emissions
reductions will be credited
while they're probably also
saving money perhaps through
through powering it with clean
energy.
Mr to go yet do you want to add
anything to that because the
again it's another great
question.
Madam chair representative I
don't have any thank you.
Madam chair representative but
my point is is we're producing
electricity that has to have
some foot print and it is being
sent out of state and that's
going to be if you will a
negative of on on this reduction
and I think that's problematic
of have you had any
Conversations with those
producers I think stripes State
but to keep that what Tricity in
New Mexico.
I'm.
Madam chair representative.
To the extent that that were
encouraging more investment in
both production of and use of
electricity in New Mexico we
definitely have those
conversations and we've seen you
know more investment in
renewable energy more investment
in transmission the serve New
Mexicans as well as Madam chair
representative the investment
and jobs that come with
transmission for a lecture city
that's destined out of state.
To.
And madam chair representative
you know it to the point at the
end of the day we are a very
large state geographically with
richer renewable resources a
very small state Madam chair
representative when it comes to
population we export energy
We want to try to gain as much
for our new for our citizens and
our state from that export.
Madam chair and representative
from.
In the renewable production and
we utilize.
Water copper we copper wire all
that stuff do we have enough
reserves in New Mexico to take
care of that.
Madam chair representative Rehm
I don't know.
I don't know the specific answer
to your question I appreciate
madam chair representative your
question and the just the
reality that the energy
transmission.
Requires a number of New a
number of of components to make
it work in your absolutely right
copper is absolutely one you
know we see lithium and other
things madam chair
representative as part of that.
Probably all of those including
frankly madam chair
representative you know the
harden plastic that makes up a
greater share of electric
vehicles that source from
petroleum those are all derived
from a worldwide commodities
market so it's not solely
sourced in state for sure madam
chair representative but I think
it's important it.
As we know that those the needed
materials to successfully
decarbonize our economy while
supplying meeting the increased
energy demands
again we look for ways Madam
chair representative to kind of
come back to the bill to
maximize the benefits of that
both in terms of bringing
economic opportunity to New
Mexicans to disproportionately
impacted communities while madam
chair representative also
explicitly putting in to HB six
the guidelines to avoid
disproportionate harms you know
if we can recycle batteries
Madam chair representative kind
that or or
upcycle copper in economically
valuable and commercially
valuable sorts of ways that's
great but we want to make sure
madam chair representative and
I'm so proud of the the input to
and the work on H. B. six to
ensure that if there is an
industry that's doing that which
is probably going to be
necessary we can just.
Money our way out of this for
Prague after up cycle other that
circular economy is secretary
Kenny and others refer to it
that we cite those industries in
ways and we.
Encourage those industries in
ways that they don't they bring
economic benefits in that we
avoid some of the past pollution
problems that have come from
some of that sort of heavy
industry.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative small I really
for see that we're probably
gonna have to
open up some copper mines in New
Mexico
and I'm wondering how that's
going to affect this so.
The.
this proposal do you have any
idea on that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
I would I would slightly
disagree or at least come to a
different conclusion madam chair
representative ethnology in that
we absolutely the copper is one
of the most needed
commodities and materials for a
lower carbon energy intensive
future but madam chair
representative because that
source on a worldwide market
I see I I don't see that it
directly links madam chair
representative two new money new
mines in New Mexico I I
absolutely appreciate though and
and think it's important that we
acknowledge the increased need
for materials different sorts of
commodities and that again
coming back to to HB six we
begin to set a system in place
that maximizes the Economic that
considers.
Both the economic need an and
investment.
Also acknowledges past
environmental harms and seeks to
balance this in a way that
explicitly kind of puts forward
sovereign tribal nations
disproportionately impacted
communities really many
different parts of New Mexico so
that in a more energy intensive
future that is also at a low
carbon net zero future that were
essentially learning from
mistakes of the past
Yes this with that.
Madam chair and Representative
small I want to I want to go
back to the vehicles on the
interstate and just vehicles in
general in New Mexico do you
foresee that.
This legislation would force us
to go to the our California
emissions standards.
Madam chair representative Rehm
no I think this this just sets a
structure in place for twenty
thirty and then twenty fifty to
reduce overall emissions
statewide so I don't think madam
chair representative that this
I don't think this commences to
anyone Path and certainly it
doesn't focus on just one sector
like transportation of the
economy to so I don't think so.
Yeah.
Here in in Representative small
another one that came to mind is
When you look at like to you
know trains going through New
Mexico they're burning diesel
fuel and
And you know.
What we're dealing with this is
vehicles on the other state this
case there on the tracks and
traveling through New Mexico and
how we gonna regulate.
That that quantity of carbon
foot print I I see that it's
problematic.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Again I think we're looking this
H. B. six sets the structure
that sector of the economy wide
that gives the ability in the
rulemaking you know that again
as folks we've talked about
we've moved up to twenty twenty
no later than January one twenty
twenty four.
To
To to work on this statewide
there are a number of places
clean air act and others where
specific
Air emissions from multiple
sectors including transportation
are there Madam chair
representative this just really
focuses on the carbon intensity.
And then the carbon emissions.
So it's I think madam chair
representative the best at what
I would try to share it as is it
builds upon existing structures
that that.
The folks work in that with
every day
it goes to the next step which
is to make sure that the carbon
emissions are accounted for
And it's not you know it's it's
not regulating certainly at at
at the
You know for for every car or
what have you said that
secretary
in just it's going to encourage
madam chair representative than
what we're seeing already is a
move towards lower emissions
energy sources this should.
Both encourage that but also
madam chair representative
because of the just the clear
and pressing.
Crisis that climate change
presents particularly for New
Mexico to set some very strong
carbon emissions limits there in
statute.
Madam chair representative
Smalley keeps talking about the
under privileged in New Mexico
is certainly we need to be
considered them
when I look at vehicles
But should we be pools that they
drive their older vehicles they
don't have the resources so if
you will fifty to a hundred
thousand the way it.
Purchase a newer vehicle
typically electric vehicle how
are we gonna take care of them
if we make restrictions
more onerous on on vehicle
emissions.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm
we so this legislature's taken
some strong steps there and we
have other pieces including
madam chair representative.
Refundable tax credits for Evey
for electric vehicles we're
saying Madam chair
representative the prices plans
for electric vehicles in fact
the largest automakers commit to
producing.
Really phasing out
internal combustion engine
vehicles GM and others the Ford
light it and madam chair
representative at the lower cost
of maintaining these vehicles so
a lower price point overall
that's being driven
at many levels young worldwide
commitments Federal supports
including those that have been
passed in the bipartisan
infrastructure law the increased
U. S. investments
probably at this point scores of
billions of dollars a new
battery factories for instance
for the big automakers those are
driving the price of Evey of
electric vehicles down Madam
chair representative as New
Mexico and in here within the
legislature we can provide
specific supports around things
like the electric vehicle tax
credit making that refundable
targeting that to middle and low
income New Mexicans so that they
have that additional support
needed to to purchase a lower
cost electric vehicle and then
madam chair representative the
benefits of getting a more
efficient easier to maintain
motive of transportation are
immense you know I I Madam chair
representative
I've had a couple of vehicles
over two hundred thousand miles
one that
but got to over three hundred
thousand of the the odometer
stopped at two ninety nine nine
nine it never got us the three
hundred Madam chair
representative.
I think we are.
The less efficient the older
actually the higher costs for us
to maintain those the more that
vehicle breaks down the more
that goes into maintenance maybe
it's out of service and so.
It's really good that while the
price of.
Those electric vehicles for
instance in this case are being
driven down.
Nationally we have some ways as
the Legislature that we can help
support New Mexicans to get what
will then become a lower cost
easier to maintain way of of
getting around our beautiful
state.
Madam chair representative on
that point are you suggesting
that we give our certain
individuals in the state the
start button to go ahead and
purchase a
of newer vehicle.
Madam chair representative while
that's not part of of house bill
six of course house bill six is
is focused on the economy wide
emission targets that are needed
to avoid the worst impacts of
climate change and I I don't
want to step on any toes with
colleagues in this body who are
working on tax policy but
specifically the refundable Evey
tax credit the investments that
this body is making and
supporting energy efficiency
upgrades for middle and low
income New Mexicans those are
all ways that are going to
translate to make it easier to
own an upkeep right and electric
vehicle for instance.
Madam chair and Representative
small the another energy
producing.
Is we're number two in the
nation for oil production.
And we're we're showing a lot of
that out of state in the end I
would come prices almost fifty
percent of our budget and I'm
concerned if we get too
restrictive we're really going
to
of financially of the state's
going to be a problem.
My problem is so we look at that
oil production.
And it's foot print are we gonna
sub direct sub tract.
The amount of energy that's
being sent out of state from
that foot print that ought to be
on another state if you will not
on New Mexico you understand
that.
Madam chair representative I do
yep.
And in that in the your
regulating the
the.
That that is not part
Representative Madam chair
representative Rehm
Just like it's we we're not.
Regulating a power plant just
outside in New Mexico nor are we
regulating the Energy outside
once it leaves New Mexico.
Madam chair and Representative
small take you back to page two
is one twenty two we're we're
talking about you know in state
and the end imported and so I
think that we are trying to
regulate something out of state
we're at least trying to
restrict how they operate.
And I think that's problematic.
You know one of the things when
we look at we're trying to
regulate that power plant.
And
We're trying to regulate.
The Cold Center traveling
through New Mexico but now we're
trying to stay the state is
trying to interject itself and
the Interstate Commerce and the
federal government is been very
clear that.
That stays with them that the
that the state cannot so how are
we going to get around that
problem.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative like with the
energy transition act
this is this is in state and so
madam chair representative
I'm confident that that approach
just looking at carbon emissions
and setting the strong target
fifty percent reduction.
Direct emissions reductions
below two thousand five levels
in state getting to full net
zero with ninety percent direct
emission reductions by twenty
fifty that is just that's all in
the state Madam chair
representative so in my
understanding.
Like with the energy transition
act this doesn't run afoul of of
what you just noted.
Madam chair in Representative
spalling I think we might have
to.
Just agree to disagree on that
whether it we.
In the past that the legislature
seeing stuff where we tried to
intervene and interstate
It it didn't work out well for
state that was the page three
and wanting twenty you're
talking about a state and that
the and that's going to be a
cabinet department of the
executive branch of the state
government.
So do we have an appropriation
in this bill for that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm that there
is no appropriation within H. B.
six Madam chair representative
there were
strong supports included in this
year's budget for some of the
areas including the energy
conservation office that's part
of energy and minerals and the
New Mexico environment
Department that are.
That will be really responsible
in
the area that you know.
Madam chair and representative
but are those current ones in
the budget to address of the TAT
and a as our current efforts to
go ahead and restrict job of
like sharing at the wells and
stuff like that.
Madam chair representative thank
it's a great question Madam
chair representative I think to
me that's one of the ways that
H. B. six is quite solid it's
actually built upon a firm
foundation because it takes
ongoing work madam chair and
representative that happening in
state both legislative and by
rule and the sorts of things and
the people and the processes
that are needed and we can kind
of go down here with the
regulation and licensing State
Land Office public regulation
commission which I I you know I
think that probably.
One of the biggest percentage
increases well over twenty
percent increase in funding this
year as I recall
They're doing this work we're
we're focusing more and more
madam chair representative as a
state on decreasing carbon
emissions while growing our
economy with a you know growing
and very important clear
consideration and need to
integrate into our legal
framework the support for
disproportionally impacted
communities and the absolute
need for ongoing consultation
with sovereign tribal nations.
We're trying to you know we're
we're three four years into that
madam chair and representative
so the increases you know
supporting that past work really
absolutely does support the next
steps as in addition to H. B.
six.
You madam chair and
Representative small yeah I see
the increases in our current
budget going to you know we're.
The different agencies to help
with the current rulemaking and
current ETA but I don't see if
you will access money and there
and in particular for a our
cabinet department.
Do you agree.
Madam chair representative I
respectfully I think we agree
that the on going work
Is is very much in line with
reducing emissions
and and also creating economic
opportunity Madam chair
representative think where we
kind of disagree is that.
As we support that ongoing work
we're gonna meet the mark when
it comes to that house bill six
also so I I think that they're
very similar in many ways madam
chair representative house bill
six simply codifies
Daps and commitments we've
already taken and maintenance a
state and so as we support those
steps and commitments even
though Madam chair
representative the historic
budgets percentage wise for some
of our agencies
Have yet to recover from the
Great Depression or from the the
Great Recession excuse me the
twenty ten to twenty twenty
period the end these targeted
increases will absolutely
support the things that are
needed including the climate
change task force that kind of
Madam chair representative
brings together these various
executive agencies to work
collaboratively they're all
receiving support to to engage
in that and in my opinion Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair and Representative
small in particular this the if
it were passed it would become
law on July one.
Correct.
Madam chair representative and
last the body desires to
introduce an emergency clause.
Yes
and madam chair representative
you know prior to the budget
there was a different there was
a leader rulemaking date for the
energy for the I'd be more male
improvement board as the budget
came forward and madam chair
representative as we heard in
testimony in direct response.
To
The request from New Mexicans
that to move that rulemaking up
we we moved it out so they'll
annually Madam chair
representative we would begin to
get the sorts of reports and
assessments that'll be the
foundation for
the certifying the fifty percent
reduction by twenty thirty the
you know on the phone that zero
by twenty fifty but the the
rulemaking has to commence by
January one twenty twenty four I
think it is.
It Madam chair in Representative
small with the emergency clause
or if it were to pass in its
current form we agree that some
time.
Around or just before July one
this would be but in acted and I
see that you have that position
up here is all righty
I don't see the appropriation
assist legislation going to
appropriation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm it is not
scheduled for appropriations.
Madam chair I I think we are
considered sending this to
appropriations if it passes out
of committee clearly it our
cabinet position will be a
little bit expensive of and I
foresee some staff on that.
Madam chair and.
Representative small we go down
to wines were on page three once
twenty four twenty five we're
we're going to include U. N. M.
in New Mexico State University
why did we include them.
Madam chair representative can
you point me towards that one
more time I apologize yeah no
problem Madam chair
representative so H. three winds
are twenty four twenty five.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative briefly madam
chair representative
and and I apologize if I wasn't
clear the intent and are
drafting of the bill we would
not be creating a new cabinet
position Madam chair
representative what we meant to
say within this is it includes
the existing cabinet efforts so
madam chair representative
we can visit offline if that's
wrong in here we we are not
seeking to create a new cabinet
position with support staff
madam chair Representative Rehm
we're simply seeking to codify
the cabinet level work that
brings to that brings together
the various agencies so and if
we've gotten that wrong I want
to fix it hopefully we have it
Madam chair representative
Going down to.
page three.
some of this madam chair
representative I think is again
really it's continuing efforts
that are already in place
specifically I know madam chair
representative that
much of the implementation and
guidance for the energy
transition act the New Mexico
state university is
Is helping to lead much of that
work working in state and also
with external federal and and
NGO partners so.
I think much of that madam chair
representative.
Is meant to continue the work.
With our research universities
that's already going on as they.
As they help us do things like
implemented energy transition
act for a for instance.
madam chair and Representative
small but I look at the
streamlined twenty stated that
the means the cap that the part
of the executive branch of state
government so that's the
governor's office and then we
have several state agencies
listed under their so to be that
means that we've got a out a
person there to coordinate all
that and that's how I'm I'm
seeing the cabinet position.
yeah I think that
you know and and I don't know
how you're going to.
Of course all these agencies if
you don't happen individual such
as that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
A lot of that you know the we
have they have that work that's
ongoing with existing staff
Madam chair representative so
they're engaging in that cross
agency collaboration
Yes you know quarter then the
coordination is ongoing with
existing staff and that's
outside of the the support for
additional staff we provided
this year in the budget.
Madam chair and excuse me so
what we're getting called down
to the floor now we are starting
a little bit late and so we can
take this time to calls and we
can roll House Bill six right.
to a meeting tomorrow I
apologize I thought we could get
through our agenda today and
then I think we have to meet
tomorrow so I'm now checking
with staff to see what time we
can meet in the morning and I'll
send everyone a tax once were
able to confirm that in addition
to that Representative small we
it didn't take any action on the
amendment that you propose to
the committee substitute and
I've asked
my colleagues on the other side
it would be okay if we just have
you.
obtain a point to version excuse
and I'll hear the committees up
to ten which had the amendment
you could have of updated
committee substitute that
includes the amendment so that
we'll have that all in one bill
because we typically don't a man
our own committee substitute so
we can have that tomorrow we
don't have to take action on the
amendment.
That thank you madam chair for
that that's that sounds great to
us and thank you very much and
thank you to the committee great
so we will pick up and will roll
all of the bills that we didn't.
Take action on today until
tomorrow and I want to thank all
the members of our committee as
well as the participants from
the public that joined and
expressed their comments as well
today and with that everyone
thank you again where adjourned.
