You can show me is present.
My husband also.
Present.
Rep Tara L. Lujan this is the
first I hear anything going on
right now.
I don't think we can hear the
for terror.
Can you hear me folks on zoom of
you you can be heard in the
chamber so please the yes please
mute yourself.
Members rule calls clothes.
The electronic portion is close
the chief clerk to call those
without a recorded.
with whose presence is not yet
recorded Representative Alcon.
Here Representative of all point
is here Representative.
Deborah A. Armstrong.
Representative Barreras.
President Representative but it
is is present.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative boga.
Here Representative will guide
here Representative Cadena.
Here Representative Cadena is
here Representative Chandler.
Sorry here Representative
Chandler is here Representative
Cook.
Representative Dixon.
Here Representative Dixon is
here Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is here
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell is I'm
here.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Harper.
Representative Maestas.
Representative masses is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Ann Arbor tutor
and so is Representative Lujan.
Representative Nibert is here
Representative Lujan.
Present Representative Lujan is
present Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is here Representative Romero
Andrea Romero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Representative set out the.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Terrazas.
Here.
Representative Ortez is here
Representative Rod Montoya
Representative Rod Montoya is
here.
J. will close closer quorum.
Members please rise for today's
education offered to us.
The gentleman from Chavis any
and Otero Representative
Townsend.
We pray with me.
There.
We come before you today.
Knowing.
Your word says to our.
The alpha and the omega.
To Colossians.
It says that you are above all
things.
I just.
To protect those.
And those are love.
That are here today the need to.
Amber race in the
the ability.
To work together.
To do what's right.
And to do it for the right
reasons.
For that this each member.
That might not have a personal
relationship with you develop
someone.
And that.
In the internet.
In in the in the long game our
relationship with you and what
we do and where we go and how we
live with the.
Evident by what we say and do.
I just all these things in your
son's name Jesus Christ.
Thank you gentlemen have with
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval Torrance Valencia
Representative McQueen please
leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
The pledge allegiance.
And with the gentleman from
Sandoval Representative
Hernandez please listen saluting
New Mexico's flag.
Gentleman from Bernalillo good
morning Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection is ordered good
morning everyone.
Okay folks.
After we go through some
announcements we will read in a
bunch of messages from the
governor and then do bill
introduction.
Are there any nonsense.
Any commentary about the.
Jennifer playoffs.
I had this is one might imagine
had several members inquire.
as to the
seat it was opened up on the
Appropriations Committee by the
departure Representative at at a
that seat on appropriations will
not be filled this session
appropriations will continue
with eighteen members through
the end of this legislature so
the the the there will not be a
nineteen member added to that
committee after having a
discussion with.
With leadership we're going to
keep it as is.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business messages
for no objection it is so
ordered.
The clerk to read.
House executive message number
one.
Dear speaker you often members
of the House pursuant to article
four section five B. two of the
New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
initiatives of house bill six a
bill enacting the clean future
act establishing green gas
emissions limits and acting news
sections of the air quality
control act directing the
environmental improvement board
to adopt rules to reduce
greenhouse emissions and
creating the state climate Fund
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Mr chair.
House executive message number
two dear speaker Egolf members
of the house pursuant to article
four section five B. two for the
New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill seventy
nine a bill increasing the
statute of limitations for
second degree murder increasing
the basic sense of imprisonment
for second degree murder and
attempted second degree murder
and clarifying on Capitol
felonies and sentencing
provisions respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
Misattributed.
House executive message number
three there's bigger you often
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill sixty
eight a bill creating the crime
of criminal threat and amending
sections of the criminal code
regarding crimes relating to the
use or possession of a firearm
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor
physically entered House
executive message number four
years speaker you often members
of the house pursuant to article
four section five B. two of the
New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature's second
session submission of house bill
fifty two a bill amending the
harm reduction act to just the
duties of the department of
health.
And invite form of health and
advisory committee relating to
the harm reduction program
expanding supplies and devices
provided through the harm
reduction program amending the
criminal definition of
paraphernalia to exclude
possession of those items for
program participants and
repealing certain sections of
the act respectful years
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
Message we entered.
House executive executive
message number I do speaker
Egolf and members of the House
pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
second session submission of
house bill sixty nine a bill
creating the crimes of operating
a chop shop and criminal damage
to property by theft or
attempted theft of certain
materials prohibiting secondhand
middle dealers from purchasing
or receiving certain unlawfully
obtained materials and providing
criminal penalties respectfully
yours Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor message we entered.
House executive message number
six there's bigger Egolf and
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution
I'm authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth provided second session
initiatives of house bill fifty
five and bill enacting the
public private partnership act
creating the public private
partnership four creating the
public private partnership
project fund amending the
procurement code and authorizing
grants loans and bonds
respectfully yours show long
Lujan Grisham governor.
Distributor.
House executive message number
seven dear speaker you often
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing the for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill sixty
five a bill clarifying the
requirement for a written
statement of deductions under
certain circumstances.
Increasing civil penalties for
improper retention of security
deposits increasing the time
permitted to remedy non payment
of rent and issuance of non
payment notices clarifying owner
retaliation provisions amending
various procedural measures
relating to landlord tenant
actions and prohibiting a
landlord for refusing to renew
or seeking to terminate a lease
during a declared emergency or
disaster respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
this is Richard.
House executive message number
eight steers figure in often
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. to
the New Mexico constitution.
I am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
initiatives of house bill
seventy three a bill amending
the educational retirement act
to allow certain retirees to
return to work without a
suspension of retirement
benefits respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
Mr chair.
House executive message number
nine dear speaker you often
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. to
the New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill fifty a
bill amending the public
employees retirement act to
allow public employees to return
to work for affiliated public
employers under certain
conditions respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
Mr chair.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business.
Introduction of legislation
hearing no objections so
ordered.
Click to read.
House bill I introduced by
Representative Matthews Texan
Rian Johnson an act relating to
pre trial release establishing
when a rebuttal presumption
arises that a person is
dangerous to any other person or
to community and no release
conditions will reasonably
protect the safety of any person
or the community confirming the
prosecution the prosecuting
authorities burden of proof in
pre trial detention hearing
hearings declaring an emergency
House Bill five introduced by
Representative Matthews Dixon
Rian Johnson.
Yes I having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House bill six introduced by
Representative small and act
relating to climate and acting
the clean future act
establishing greenhouse gas
emissions limits requiring
reporting providing powers and
duties enacting new sections of
air quality control act
directing the environmental
improvement board to adopt rules
to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions directing the
assessment of fees creating a
fund making an appropriation
house bill six introduced
Representative small.
House bill six having been read
twice by title is germane
pursuant to house executive
message number one I ordered
printed and referred to the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee that's
government elections and Indian
Affairs.
House bill seven introduced by
Representative Dixon speaker
Egolf an act relating to public
finance and acting the
opportunity enterprise Act
authorizing the New Mexico
finance authority to provide
financing loans and to enter
into leases with opportunity
arise partners establishing
terms for financing loans and
leases creating opportunity
enterprise revolving fund
transferring certain access
revenue from the opportunity
enterprise revolving fund to the
general fund creating the
opportunity enterprise Review
Board providing powers and
duties required reports making
appropriation house bill seven
introduced by Representative
Dixon inspector egolf.
And we're going.
Four seven having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill eight introduced by
Representative McQueen speaker
egolf Representative Ortez.
Roger Montoya and Andrea Romero
and actuating to government
financing creating the land
grant.
Members of the agency that is
consistent Fund prescribing
duties providing for
distribution pursuant to the tax
administration act making
appropriation house bill eight
introduce I Representative
McQueen speaker egolf
Representative Ortez Roger
Montoya and.
Still the.
Having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee since taxation and
revenue.
House Bill ten introduced by
Representative been cut and
actuating to publish public
holidays designating every first
Saturday of may as Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian day declaring an
emergency House Bill ten
introduced Representative been
cut
school ten having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House Bill and introduced
Representative Sanya for science
technology and
telecommunications Committee act
relating to energy creating the
energy storage system income tax
credit requiring the energy
minerals and natural resources
department to provide an annual
report providing for the
establishment of an energy
storage some income tax credit
insulation website by the energy
minerals and natural resources
department imposing a fee
requiring reports making
appropriation house bill eleven
introduced Representative
Sarinana.
Eleven having been read twice by
title I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee then
to taxation and revenue.
House bill twelve introduced
Representative Saniona and act
making appropriation for a
statewide landscape assessment
to establish the American
America serves New Mexico
programs house bill twelve
introduced Representative Sanya.
House bill twelve having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution.
Ordered printed and referred to
the Education Committee then
separations and finance.
House bill thirteen introduced
representative Sarinana an act
relating to public education
amending sections of the teacher
residency act making
appropriation house bill
thirteen introduced
Representative Sanya.
House bill thirteen having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred the Education
Committee thence appropriations
and finance.
House Bill fourteen introduced
Representative Chandler and act
relating to energy storage
facilities amending the
industrial revenue bond act and
the county industrial revenue
bond act to include certain
electric energy storage
facilities as eligible projects
providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for sales of energy
storage equipment to a
government for the purpose of
installing a renewable energy
storage facility House Bill
fourteen introduced
Representative Chandler.
There's been requests are for
folks with jackets and.
Earring no objection to that
that is fine you can take off
your jackets.
House of fourteen having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee then to
taxation and revenue.
I still fifteen introduced by
Representative Lewis for the
Indian Affairs Committee and act
relating to taxation providing
that gross receipts sales or
similar tax levied by certain
tribes shall be limited to a
rate not less than a total of
the gross receipts tax rates.
And local option gross receipts
tax rates imposed within the
exterior boundaries of those
tribes house bill fifteen
introduced by Representative
Lewis.
House for fifteen having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee then to
taxation and revenue.
House bill sixteen introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia and
act making appropriation to the
crime victims reparation
commission to fund law
enforcement base advocates for
victims of gun violence and
violent crimes house bill
sixteen introduced
Representative Miguel Garcia
council sixteen having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee that's
appropriations and finance.
House bill seventeen introduced
by Representative Miguel Garcia
for the legislation health and
Human Services Committee and act
relating to taxation adding
certain pharmacists nurses
social workers behavioral health
counselors and therapists and
physical therapists to the rural
health care practitioners tax
credit house bill seventeen
introduced by Miguel Garcia.
House bill seventeen having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee then to
taxation and revenue.
House Bill eighteen introduced
Representative Miguel Garcia and
act relating to license sure
amending the degree requirements
for licensure as a professional
engineer house bill eighteen
introduced by Representative
Miguel Garcia.
House Bill eighteen having been
read twice by title.
I ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House bill nineteen introduce
Representative Miguel Garcia and
act making appropriation to the
aging and long term services
department to fund various
senior services through the and
tend to go land grants.
Just
senior outreach program house
bill nineteen introduce
Representative Miguel Garcia
school nineteen having been read
twice by title.
He is determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee that's appropriations
and finance.
Twenty introduced Representative
Miguel Garcia and act making
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration for the land
grant presented a Los pueblos
day tear Amarillo to purchase
office equipment to support
community programs operated
community center and to maintain
various properties for
communities and economic
development house bill twenty
introduced Representative Miguel
Garcia school twenty having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order prints the
referred to the rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
that's appropriations and
finance.
House bill twenty one entries
Representative Miguel Garcia and
act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration to fund youth
recreation programs and
community education services at
the entrance to go and grant
percent possible twenty one
entries Representative Miguel
Garcia house bill twenty one
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four
section.
Five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the rules of all of it land
grants and cultural affairs
committee this appropriations
and finance.
Twenty two introduced
Representative are about
Colorado and actuating to
governmental accessibility
requiring all state departments
to provide meaningful access to
state programs for individuals
with limited proficiency in
English making appropriation
house bill twenty two introduced
Representative Roybal Caballero.
With one to having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed
referred to the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
House bill twenty two or twenty
three inside introduced by
Representative Christine
Trujillo for Legislative Health
and Human Services Committee and
act making appropriation to the
board of regents of the
university of New Mexico for
operational infrastructure for
statewide human.
Would you.
One of the iris pap registry
house bill twenty three entries
by Representative Christine
Trujillo council twenty three
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee fence appropriations
and finance.
Twenty four entries back
Representative Lujan for the
water and natural resources
committee and act making
appropriation to the office of
the state engineer for water
planning administration and
management house bill twenty
four introduced Representative
Lujan.
House bill twenty four having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the agriculture Sankey is and
water resources committee dance
appropriations and finance.
House bill twenty five entries
Representative Rehm for the
courts corrections and justice
committee and act relating to
criminal law providing for a six
year time limitation for
prosecuting a first degree
felony for trafficking
controlled substance providing
for no time limitation for
prosecuting second degree murder
house bill twenty five entries
Representative Rehm.
House bill twenty five having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
House bill twenty six introduced
Representative brings an act
relating to criminal law
creating the crime of unlawful
carrying of a firearm for
trafficking a controlled
substance providing penalties
house bill twenty six introduced
Representative in.
House bill twenty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
Twenty seven entries
Representative Rehm an act
relating to pre trial detention
establishing a presumption that
the prosecution has proven by
clear and convincing evidence
that a person is dangerous and
no release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community allowing the
presumption to be rebutted
declaring an emergency house
bill twenty seven entries for
Representative Rehm.
House bill twenty seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
House bill twenty introduced
Representative Rehm for the
courts corrections and justice
committee and act relating to
criminal law providing that the
penalty for a felon in
possession of a firearm or
destructive device is five years
imprisonment house bill twenty
eight introduced by
Representative right.
House bill twenty having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill twenty nine
introduced by Representative
Rehm for the course correction
and Justice Committee and act
relating to crime creating the
crime of organized retail crime
imposing penalties house bill
twenty nine introduced
Representative Rehm school
twenty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill thirty introduced by
Representative Rehm for the
courts corrections and justice
committee act relating to motor
vehicles limiting the location
where motor vehicle maybe sold
or offered for sale prohibiting
the sale of motor vehicles by
not owner who isn't a motor
vehicle dealers house bill
thirty introduced by
Representative Rehm.
House bill thirty having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill thirty one introduced
by Representative right act
relating to criminal sentencing
providing additional violent
felonies in the criminal
sentencing act for the purposes
of life in prison for three
violent felony convictions
eliminate the possibility of
parole except geriatric for
medical parole for defending
convince convicted of a third
violent felony and sentenced to
life imprisonment imprisonment
providing that certain
convictions encouraged by
defendant before the age of
eighteen shall constitute
violent felonies providing
penalties house bill thirty one
introduced by Representative
bring.
House bill thirty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
The house bill thirty two
introduced by Representative
Christine Trujillo for the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
relating to taxation providing
gross receipts tax and
governmental gross receipts tax
deductions for the feminine
hygiene products because the
thirty to introduce
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
House bill thirty two having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee then to taxation and
revenue.
House bill thirty three inches
by Representative Ferrary for
the tobacco settlement revenue
oversight committee and the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee an act
relating to taxation increasing
the rate of cigarette tax
increasing the rate of tax on
tobacco products including
nicotine regardless of source
and the definition of tobacco
product in the tobacco products
at tax act house bill thirty
three entries for Representative
Ferrary.
School thirty three having been
read twice by title.
I determined to be.
During pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to health and Human
Services Committee that's
taxation and revenue.
House bill thirty four
introduced by Representative
Ferrary and act relating to
taxation extending than new
solar market development income
tax credit increasing the annual
aggregate cap for the credit
making the credit refundable
house bill thirty four
introduced by Representative
Ferrary thirty four having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee hence
taxation and revenue.
Thirty five introduced by
Representative Ferrary and act
relating to taxation extending
the committee thermal ground
coupled heat pump tax credits
pursuant to the income tax act
and the corporate income and
franchise tax act making the
credit pursuant to the income
tax act refundable amending the
definition of geothermal ground
coupled heat pump for the credit
pursuant to the corporate income
and franchise tax act house bill
thirty five injuries are
presented for.
House bill thirty five having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee then
to taxation and revenue.
House bill thirty six introduced
Representative Ortez an act
relating to natural resources
amending the national heritage
conservation act authorizing the
acquisition of land and other
interests in land for
conservation purposes making
conforming changes house bill
thirty six introduced by
Representative Ortez.
As for thirty six having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill thirty seven
introduce for Representative
Ortez and act relating to
utilities and acting the
community energy efficiency
program blocking block grant
access creating a grant program
to implement energy efficient
measures and low income
households authorizing the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority to apply for community
energy efficiency development
block grants mandating utility
reporting of customer
disconnects it appears.
Arrears and house holds without
services requiring utilities to
submit reports on energy
affordability and access the
electric water and wastewater
services authorizing utility
right preferences for low
income.
Customers directing rulemaking
creating a fund house bill
thirty seven introduced
Representative Ortez.
For thirty seven having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution.
Ordered printed and referred to.
The consumer Public Affairs
Committee thence Energy
Environment and natural
resources.
Thirty eight entries
Representative Allison and act.
Relating to taxation expanding
the rural health care
practitioner tax rate to apply
to all registered nurses
licensed midwives and
chiropractic physicians and
emergency medical services first
responders and essential health
care workers who provided
assistance during the COVID of
cities twenty nineteen pandemic
providing reporting requirements
house bill thirty eight
introduced by Anthony Allison.
House with thirty having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee then to
taxation and revenue.
House bill thirty nine entries
for Representative guided us act
relating to taxation extending
the deduction from gross
receipts and governmental gross
receipts for non athletic
special events that
postsecondary educational
institutions after thirty nine
entries Representative that yes.
As for thirty nine having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution.
Order it printed and referred to
the.
Education Committee then to
taxation and revenue.
Also forty entries
representative Nibert and Eli
and act relating to emergency
powers providing that a
declaration of a state of
emergency pursuant to all
hazards emergency management
after the public health
emergency response that
terminates after ninety days
unless the governor calls the
legislature into special session
to address the circumstances of
the emergency amending and
enacting sessions of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight declaring
an emergency house bill forty
introduced representative Nibert
in the last council fourteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House bill forty one introduce
for Representative at us I act
making appropriation to the
water Trust Fund house bill
forty one introduced
Representative at.
Those who forty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
agriculture sec using water
resources committee thence
appropriations and finance.
Yes.
House bill forty two entries
Representative Cadena endorsed
by the New Mexico financed
Authority oversight committee
and act relating to finance
authorizing the New Mexico
finance authority to make loans
for public projects from the
public project revolving fund
declaring an emergency hospital
forty to introduce
Representative at.
As for forty two having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Forty three entries
Representative Garrett and act
relating to public schools
requiring notification of two
charter schools a property
available for their educational
operations allowing school
districts to develop facility
prioritization plans creating at
the charter facility fund
requiring policies for loans
from the public project
revolving fund for the charter
facility Fund modifying the
terms applicable to requests
from the public school capital
outlay fund for lease facilities
specifying the date by which
charter schools must provide
information on capital
improvement projects proposed
for funding through property tax
imposition making appropriation
house bill forty three introduce
Representative Garrett.
House for forty three having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill forty four introduced
a representative Thompson for
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and act
relating to education requiring
public schools and public
and public and private post
secondary educational
institution to adopt policies
and procedures addressing
affirmative consent and
prevention of sexual assault
domestic violence dating
violence harassment and stalking
amending the public school code
to include a requirement to set
affirmative consent as the
standard for sexual activities
house bill forty four introduced
Representative Thomson.
House bill forty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
Also forty five introduced by
Representative Ferrary for red
legislation education study
committee and act relating to
school personnel providing for
program units for license school
employees certified by the
national board for the
professional teaching standards
house bill forty five introduced
by Representative Ferrary.
House for forty five having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill forty six introduced
by Representative Chasey and act
relating to child welfare and
acting the family Representative
Tatian and advocacy act creating
the office of Family
representation advocacy
establishing duties of the
director creating the family
representation and advocacy
oversight commission house bill
forty six introduced
Representative Chasey.
House bill forty six having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill forty seven entries
by Representative Chandler and
act relating to taxation
including personal care services
home healthcare and hospice care
from a destination based
sourcing rules for purposes of
determining gross receipts tax
liability declaring an emergency
house bill forty seven entries
Representative Taylor.
As for forty seven having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee then to
taxation and revenue.
House bill forty introduced by
Representative Gail Armstrong
and Catherine brown.
And act relating to taxation
exempting social security income
from tax house bill forty eight
introduced Representative Gail
Armstrong and Representative
brands.
Has for forty eight having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane order printed and
referred to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
then to taxation and revenue.
House bill forty nine introduced
Representative Gail Armstrong
and Representative captain
brown's act relating to taxation
exempting social security income
from income tax house bill forty
nine entries by Representative
Gail Armstrong and brown.
As for forty nine having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed.
And referred to the consumer and
public affairs committee dense
taxation and revenue.
Fifty introduced Representative
Anderson an act relating to
public employee retirement
allowing public employees are
trying to work for affiliated
public employers under certain
conditions house bill fifty
introduced Representative
Anderson.
House Bill fifteen having been
read twice by title is germane
pursuant to house executive
message nine order printed and
referred to the labor veterans
military affairs committee then
see Judiciary.
Fifty one introduce
Representative Anderson and
Representative unions and act
relating to public employee
retirement changing the
composition of the public
employees retirement board
changing certain election
requirements requiring notice of
an emergency meeting house bill
fifty one introduced
Representative Anderson and then
yes.
House bill fifty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill fifty two introduced
Representative Lujan and Hochman
Vigil.
An act relating to health
amending the harm reduction I to
X. band supplies or devices
provided to harm reduction
programs for his offense
providing the possession of
certain supplies or device is
not a violation of the
controlled substances act
adjusting the department of
health and advisory committee
duties pertaining to the harm
reduction program addressing
advisory committee members ship
repealing sections twenty four
to C. two and two twenty four
dash to see dash six and an
essay in nineteen seventy eight
building laws in nineteen ninety
seven.
Chapter two hundred fifty six
sections two and six house bill
fifty two introduced
Representative Lujan and Hochman
Vigil.
House bill fifty two having been
read twice by title is germane
pursuant house executive message
seven order printed and referred
to the health and Human Services
Committee thence judiciary.
Fifty three entries
Representative Rehm act relating
to driving under the influence
of intoxicating liquor drugs
amending the requirements for
testing the blood of a person
suspected of operating operating
a motor vehicle while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor
drugs providing that certain
medical professionals are
authorized to withdraw blood in
the performance of the chemical
blood tests for driving a motor
vehicle or operating a motor
boat under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs
clarifying that the chemical
blood tests may be used for
drugs or alcohol yes fifty three
entries Representative bring.
What.
As for fifty three having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
remake Committee.
Bill fifty three having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee yes.
House bill fifty four entries
Representative Rehm an act
relating to driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor
drugs or don't reckon with
recreational cannabis addressing
road safety issues related to
legalization of adult use
recreational recreational
cannabis provided for testimony
by interactivity of prohibiting
driving with certain amounts of
controlled substances are travel
whites in the blood amending the
requirements for testing the
blood of a person suspected of
operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of
intoxicating liquor drugs
providing that certain medical
professionals are authorized to
withdraw blood in the
performance of a chemical blood
tests for driving a motor
vehicle or operating in
motivated motor boat under the
influence of intoxicating liquor
drugs clarifying that the
chemical blood tests may be for
drugs or alcohol providing for
implied consent to laboratory
analysis appeared.
Aaron Fabio.
Providing that recommendation
interlock requirement only
applies to a Centers with
alcohol concentrations in the
blood or breath.
Still.
Because the fifty four
introduced Representative Rehm.
As for fifty four having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill fifty five entries
for presented to an act relating
to public projects and acting
the public private partnership
back partnership act along
public partners enter into
public private partnership
agreements to facilitate public
projects creating the public
private partnership board
creating the public private
partnership projects fund
providing for an exemption to
the procurement code authorizing
grants loans and bonds providing
powers and duties requiring
reports house bill fifty five
entries Representative get.
This bill fifty five having been
read twice by title is germane
pursuit house executive message
six hundred printed and referred
to the labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
see Judiciary.
Also fifty six introduced
Representative Barreras and
actually sorry the cemex has a
fifty five.
has a fifty five the.
The referrals on that are
commerce and economic
development.
Thanks Judiciary.
Fifty five it printed referred
to the conversation Development
Committee that's Judiciary.
One of the point of personal
privilege Mr speaker.
On that bill with respect to the
public private partnership.
I would request the the referral
to the house transportation as
well.
the motion is not in order.
Fifty six introduced
Representative Barreras and act
relating to veterinary medicine
requiring insurance of six month
temporary permits to practice
veterinary medicine to certain
non resident veterinarians
employed by or contracted with
the state and municipality or a
county to provide veterinary
services at nationally
accredited zoos or aquariums
located in New Mexico has a
fifty six introduced
Representative Barreras house
bill fifty six having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill seven fifty seven
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
For the legislative education
study committee act relating to
public school financing
adjusting school districts and
charter schools fiscal year
twenty twenty three
transportation distribution
talent calculations for effects
of the can Corona virus disease
twenty nineteen pandemic on
transportation making temporary
adjustments to the
transportation distributions
house bill fifty seven entries I
need Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
After fifty seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Fifty eight introduced
Representative Hernandez and act
relating to education and act in
the adult online learners
scholarship creating a bill
online learners scholarship
program in the higher education
department providing powers and
duties focusing the program in
New Mexico specific critical
workforce needs providing
eligibility requirements
providing scholarship priorities
for creating funds making
appropriations has a fifty eight
entries Representative
Hernandez.
fifty eight having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the Education
Committee then support
operations and finance.
Fifty nine entries
Representative Lara and G.
Andrés Romero and act relating
to insurance amending the group
insurance contributions for
school districts charter schools
and participating entities and
the public school insurance
authority making appropriation
house bill fifty nine introduce
for Representative Lara and G.
Andrés Romero.
Two fifty nine.
Having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Education Committee fence
appropriations and finance.
House bill sixty introduced
Representative Lente an act
relating to school personnel
requiring salary parity for
people who hold native American
language and culture
certificates making
appropriation house bill sixty
introduce Representative one
sixty having been read twice by
title I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill sixty one introduced
representative Lente and
actually and early childhood
authorizing the early childhood
education and care department to
enter into joint powers
agreements with tribal
governments has to sixty one
introduced representative Lente
house bill sixty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill sixty to introduce
Representative Dixon at and
Representative at.
And act relating to government
creating the grant opportunities
council providing powers and
duties creating a fund to assist
political subdivisions with
match requirement for grant
funding making appropriation
house bill sixty to introduce
our center Dixon and at at a.
Sixty two having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee that's appropriations
and finance.
Also sixty three introduced
Representative Miguel Garcia for
the Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee act relating
to the legislature increasing
the number of members that
comprise the Legislative Health
and Human Services Committee
assigning monitoring and
oversight duties so let us
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee members
providing year round staff the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee requiring
state agency compliance with the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee.
And its subcommittees requests
for information establishing the
committees and subcommittees
powers to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas making
appropriation house bill sixty
three introduce Representative
Miguel Garcia for sixty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
Sixty four introduce
Representative Miguel Garcia act
relating to criminal sentencing
for Crimean collusion of
brandishing a firearm in any
room related guilty plea house
bill sixty four introduce
Representative Miguel Garcia.
House bill sixty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
Also sixty five entries
Representative Andrea Romero and
actually need housing clarifying
the requirement for a written
statement of deductions in
certain circumstances increasing
certain sive civil penalties
increasing the time permitted to
remedy non payment of rent for
rental agreements increasing
periods of time requests
required for non payment and
notices for crime insurance the
judgment of restitution prior to
a rate of restitution.
Clarifying that issuance and
execution of a range of
resolution of restitution our
state during an appeal process
hitting an owner from refusing
to renew or seeking to terminate
a rental agreement during a
cleared emergency or disaster
declaring an emergency house
bill sixty five entries by
Representative right and
Jeremiah.
House bill sixty five having
been read twice by title is
during percent house executive
message seven ordered printed
and referred to the consumer
public affairs committee and
senator sherry.
House bill sixty six introduce
Representative Chatfield
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Small Crowder and Sweetser.
For the water and natural
resources committee and economic
development and committee and
Policy Committee and act making
appropriation for the New Mexico
I've start board to initiate and
maintain a system of meat
inspections of meat for human
consumption.
House bill sixty six introduced
Representative Chatfield Gail
Armstrong small Crowder and
Sweetser.
House bill sixty six have a read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the agriculture
sec use in water resources
committee then Senator creations
and finance.
House bill sixty seven introduce
our Senate Chandler and act
relating to taxation extending
technology readiness gross
receipts tax credit repeal in a
technology reading is gross
receipts tax credit funds
repealing the credits delayed
repair of repeal.
House bill sixty seven entries
by Representative Chandler house
bill sixty seven having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution.
Order printed and referred to
the commerce and economic
development committee then to
taxation and revenue.
Sixty entries Representative
Dixon and act relating to public
safety creating the crime of
criminal for increasing the
penalty for low level possession
of a handgun by a person
prohibiting and providing
penalties for unlawful carrying
a deadly weapon in a school zone
instead of on school premises
clarifying the penalty for
receive transportation or
possession of a firearm or
destructive device by a serious
violent felon adding penalties
for aggravated fleeing a law
enforcement officer providing
for a sentencing enhancement
when a firearm is possessed or
used during the commission of a
drug transaction or serious
violent offence clarifying that
farm possessed or used during
the commission of a drug
transaction or series fund
offense maybe sees houses sixty
eight entries Representative
Dixon.
House bill sixteen having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to house
executive message three I
ordered printed and referred to
the consumer Public Affairs
Committee that's Judiciary
inspirations and finance.
Sixty nine introduce
Representative Dixon act
relating to public safety
creating the crime of operating
a chop shop creating the crime
of criminal damage to property
by theft or attempted theft of
regulated material prohibiting a
secondhand metal dealer from
purchasing or receiving
regulated materials not lawfully
possessed providing penalties
also sixty nine introduced
Representative Dixon.
Right.
House bill sixty nine having
been read twice by title I
determined it is germane pursuit
has executive message I they
were printed and referred to the
consumer public affairs
committee this Judiciary thence
appropriations and finance.
What also seventy introduced
Representative Figueroa and act
relating to telecommunications
amending the roll
telecommunications act New
Mexico raising the cap for
obligations on the state role
universal service fund to forty
million dollars per year for the
year twenty twenty to twenty
twenty three and twenty twenty
four.
Authorizing the public
regulation commission to spend
up to seventy five thousand
dollars for audits or
evaluations of the results of
certain expenditures from the
state rural universal service
fund house bill seventy and fees
are presented Figueroa.
Council seventy having been read
twice by title is.
Ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
Thank.
House bill seventy one entry for
Representative McQueen and
harbor act relating to taxation
providing three percent
limitation on increases and
valuation of residential
property that is occupied as a
principal place of revenue
residents providing a ten
percent limitation on increases
in valuation of residential
property that is not occupied as
a principal place of residence
council seventy one introduce
services Representative McQueen
and harbor.
The house was seventy one having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order it
printed and referred to the
consumer public affairs
committee then to taxation and
revenue.
Still seventy to introduce fair
zanu-pf's McQueen and Harper and
act relating to taxation
clarifying that receipts from
the sale of tickets or services
for trans porting any person
into or near is space may not be
deducted pursuant to a gross
receipts tax deduction for
certain space and space
important services house bill
seventy to introduce farmers
entities McQueen and however.
This bill that in this world.
House bill seventy two having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article.
For section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred commerce and economic
development committee then to
taxation and revenue.
The seventy three introduced
representative there and act
relating to educational
retirement allowing certain
retirees to return to work
without a suspension of
retirement benefits house bill
seventy three introduced
Representative Garrett.
House bill seventy three having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuant to article I'm
sorry pursuant to house
executive message eight fire
printed and referred to the
Education Committee then some.
Labor veterans and military
affairs.
House bill seventy four
introduced Representative
Figueroa and act relating to
retirement health care
increasing employee and employer
contribution rates to the
retiree health care fund house
bill seventy four introduce
Representative Figueroa.
House Bill.
Seventy four having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill seventy five
introduced by Representative
Roybal Representative all coming
at a act relating to public
finance and acting The New
Mexico banking at creating a
public bank of New Mexico
establishing a board of
directors and the structure of
the public banks of New Mexico
providing duties permitting
certain investments for having
conflicts of interest creating
the state banking fund requiring
the state treasurer to deposit
and maintain a certain amount of
public money and the public bank
of New Mexico providing
penalties making appropriation
house bill seventy five
introduced Representative for
fall come I am.
Seventy five read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the E. commerce and economic
development committee thence
appropriations and finance.
Also seventy six introduced
Representative Anderson act
relating to taxation providing
an income tax exemption and
amount equal to thirty thousand
dollars of military retirement
pay house bill seventy six
introduce Representative
Anderson.
Seventy six seven hundred twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to labour Veterans
military affairs committee then
to taxation and revenue.
House bill seventy seven entries
Representative Reebok combat
endorsed by the investments and
pensions oversight committee an
act relating to see investments
requiring parity of pay for
certain investment staff
permitting an employer to
provide alternate alternative
qualifications for certain
investment staff house bill
seventy seven introduced
representative Representative
all coming at school seventy
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House bill seventy eight
introduced by Representative
Roybal all coming at us act
relating to landing imposing a
cap on interest rates avoiding
contracts that exceed the
interest rate cap lowering the
maximum annual percentage rate
for loans pursuant to the New
Mexico bank.
Installment loan act of nineteen
fifty nine and the New Mexico
small loan act of nineteen fifty
five house bill seventy eight
introduced Representative rebel
commander Council seventy eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House bill seventy nine
introduced Representative Eli
and my SS and act relating to
crime increasing the statute of
limitations for second degree
murder increasing the penalties
for second degree murder and
attempted second degree murder
clarifying not capital felony
sentencing provisions house bill
seventy nine introduced
Representative Eli and my S..
House Bill seventy nine having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuant to house
executive message to.
Mr printed and referred.
To the consumer and public
affairs committee.
It has a seventy nine order
printed and referred to consumer
Public Affairs Committee that's
Judiciary that's appropriations
and finance.
Eighty introduced Representative
Serrato and Dickson act relating
to taxation making angel
investments credit refundable
increasing the amount of credit
and the aggregate capping
credits for calendar year
amending the definition of
qualified business possibility
introduced Representative
Serrato and extend.
Robin.
Yes.
Yes.
House bill eighty.
The.
If.
We have.
The session.
I need to find out.
I.
House bill eighty having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee then to
taxation and revenue.
Eighty one introduce fair center
cut and endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee and act relating to
courts providing flexibility in
changing requirements for
payment of fines fees and costs
associated with conviction
expanding community service
options house bill eighty one
introduced more than it can just
forty one having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to.
The consumer public affairs
committee and Judiciary.
Eighty two introduced
Representative Cadena and act
relating to taxation making a
gross receipts tax deduction for
dialysis facilities permanent
amending the definition of
dialysis facility if those
facility in a deduction house
bill eighty two introduced
Representative and.
Hostility to having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee.
Since taxation and revenue.
Eighty three introduced
Representative Andrea Andrea
Romero and act relating to water
amending the eligibility
requirements for the position of
state engineer to include geo
hydrologists hydrologist
geologist and attorneys house
bill eighty three introduced
Representative Andrea Romero.
Thanks committee three having
been read twice by title.
I ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
Yes eighty four entries for
hours Representative Ely and
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
criminal justice reform
expanding the purposes for which
a crime reduction grant maybe
maybe house bill eighty four
introduced Representative Ely
and Hochman Vigil.
Thanks committee for having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Eighty five introduced
Representative Andrea Romero and
act relating to missing persons
creating the missing in New
Mexico event declaring an
emergency house bill eighty five
into the service center Andrea
Romero was forty five minutes
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill eighty six introduced
Representative Dixon Figueroa
Matthews lane and Crowder and
act relating to law enforcement
creating the law enforcement
retention Fund providing a
retention differential
disbursement to certain law
enforcement officers providing
reporting requirements making
appropriation house bill eighty
six introduced Representative
Dixon Figueroa Matthews lane and
credit counseling six having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee thence
appropriations and finance.
Eighty seven introduced
Representative Lente and act
relating to Indian Education
fighting distribution
requirements the Indian
education fund making
appropriation house bill eighty
seven introduce for
representative Lente Senator
have been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
I still eighty eight introduced
representative Lente and act
making appropriations for Indian
nations tribes and pueblos to
respond to the consolidated
Yazzie Martinez versus New
Mexico state of New Mexico
lawsuit house bill eighty eight
introduced by representative
Lente.
House bill eighty eight having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed I'm sorry
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Education Committee thanks
appropriations and finance.
As bill eighty nine introduced
for representative Lente and act
making appropriation of the
Indian Affairs Department for
library and educational
resources center.
Projects for Indian nations
tribes and pueblos house bill
eighty nine introduced
representative Lente facility
nine having been read twice by
title I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution.
Order printed and referred to
the government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee that's
appropriations and finance.
House bill ninety introduced
representative Lente and act
making appropriation to say into
institutions of higher education
and tribal colleges to comply
with the court's rulings in the
consolidated.
Martinez first Yazeed Mr
Martinez and Mr Iverson state of
New Mexico lawsuits by improving
educational outcomes for
certain.
Click schools and higher
education students and families
house bill ninety increaseper
percent of wanted.
House bill ninety having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order it
printed and referred to the
Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
Has been.
House bill ninety one introduced
by Representative Dow trusses
Townsend as out and put a group
and act relating to public
education prohibiting the
teaching of critical race theory
in public schools house bill
ninety one introduced by doubt
Terrazas Townsend is out and
pedigree.
I.
House bill ninety one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
I still need to introduce
Representative Hochman Vigil
endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee and the investments
and pensions oversight committee
and act relating to magistrate
requirement allowing for the
appropriation of money into the
magistrate retirement fund
increasing certain service call
credit multipliers providing in
the magistrate retirement act
making appropriation house bill
ninety two introduced
Representative Hochman Vigil.
House bill ninety two having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Judiciary Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill ninety three entries
Representative Hochman Vigil and
actually need to motor vehicles
requiring the taxation and
revenue department to establish
a design element that denotes a
permanent significant mobility
limitation and to issue that
design element on another
special registration plate if
requested by a person with a
permanent significant mobility
limitation who's qualified for
the other registration plate
House Bill ninety three
introduced Representative
Hochman Vigil councilman three
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
Ninety four introduced
Representative Hochman Vigil
endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee and investments and
pension oversight committee and
act relating to judicial
retirement allowing for the
appropriation of money into
judicial retirement fund
increasing certain service
credit multipliers provided in
the judicial retirement act
making appropriation house bill
ninety four introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil.
House bill ninety four having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
labor veterans and military
affairs committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill ninety five
introduced representative
Thompson and but at us and act
relating to health and acting
the easy enrollment act
establishing the easy enrollment
program requiring revision of
state income tax forms to allow
taxpayers to consent to
provision of certain information
pertaining to enrollment and
certain health care health
coverage programs allowing it
Human Services Department to
enroll consenting taxpayers in
Medicaid allowing the New Mexico
health insurance exchange
general consenting taxpayers and
qualified health plans under
certain circumstances providing
an exception to confidentiality
for certain tax return
information house bill ninety
five introduced representative
Thompson and but it just.
House Bill.
Ninety five.
Having been.
Read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Ninety six introduced
Representative Chasey for the
course correction and Justice
Committee and act relating to
crime and acting a violence
intervention intervention
program act creating the
violence intervention program
funded sabotaging application
and reporting requirements
making appropriation house bill
ninety six entries
Representative Chasey.
House bill ninety six.
Read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the consumer Public
Affairs Committee that's
appropriations and finance.
House bill ninety seven
introduced Representative
Matthew Hochman Vigil Trujillo
and Sarnia and act relating to
health authorizing New Mexico
finance authority to make rural
health care project loans
establishing terms for rural
health care project loans
creating the rural health care
project revolving fund providing
powers and duties requiring
reports making appropriation
house bill ninety seven
introduced by Matthews Hochman
Vigil Trujillo and serving on
house bill ninety seven having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
Ninety eight entries
Representative Lundstrom and act
making general appropriations
and authorizing you send
expenditures by state agencies
required by law house bill
ninety eight entries
Representative Lundstrom is
going to be a.
Having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety nine
introduced Representative Lane
Hochman Vigil Martinez Lente and
Chasey and act relating to crime
creating the crime of
threatening a judge or immediate
an immediate family member of a
judge creating the crime of
malicious sharing of personal
information of a judge or an
immediate family member of a
judge imposing penalties has
been ninety nine introduced
Representative Lane common Vigil
Martinez Lente New Jersey.
For many nine having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
One hundred introduced
Representative Lane Sweetser
doubt Andrea Romero and pedigree
act relating to law enforcement
increasing the amount of peace
officers New Mexico mounted
patrol members and reserve
police officers survivors
supplemental death benefits
increasing the minimum balance
of the peace officers New Mexico
mounted patrol members and
reserve police officers
virus frontier house bill a
hundred introduced by
representatives lane Sweetser
Dow Andrea Romero and pedigree.
House bill one hundred.
House bill one hundred.
Immunities by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
But it is still house bill one
hundred Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
In years past we did one person
probably Mr speaker in years
past we did have a legislative
events will we be doing that
this year and will the the
Sanchez be in charge of that is
normal Mr speaker.
We'll get to that announces
miscellaneous business journal
thank you Mr speaker.
House joint resolution one
introduced by representative
Allison Chandler a joint
resolution proposing to amend
article nine section fourteen of
the constitution of New Mexico
to our public assistance ride
accessibility to essential
household services primarily for
residential use including
internet energy water wastewater
and other services as provided
by law upon the enactment of
general implementing legislation
by a majority vote of the
members elected to each house of
legislature has tried resolution
one introduced Representative
Allison and German.
House joint resolution one
having been read twice by title.
Senator into the authorize for
consideration by article
nineteen section one of the
constitution prior to read
printed and referred to.
Transportation other person
capital improvements census
Judiciary.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business hearing
no objection it is so ordered.
Okay members I want to make one.
Announcement.
please pay attention.
Okay we are now gone so we have
a number of new members number
folks that work with this at the
last.
Thirty day session.
so are provided the practice
that we have been due to the
following for the last.
To spend at thirty A. sessions
including this one is that as we
go through bill introduction if
the bill is germane pursuit to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution I refer it
we rely on the major purpose
tested the rules committee
established in February of
twenty twenty in a unanimous
bipartisan vote that would be
the guiding principle for how we
determine whether or not those
are two main on the basis of
appropriations and fund creation
so that's the major purpose
tested the rules committee
adopted two years ago so we've
been following that today.
Another way the bills get
referred as if there's an
executive message.
Yes you heard that there are a
number of times that I refer to
an executive message by number
and then refer to bill.
the constitution also says that
you if you have a piece of
legislation that is on a similar
or an identical topic it is in a
message from the governor that
bill is germane during the
session.
my practice has been to
require members.
Who have a bill in the rules
committee
they believe to be germane
pursuant to executive meshes and
message that references the bill
of a different member to come to
me and say about it bills and
rules committee but it's should
be considered germane under.
The following executive message
I will then talk to the member
visit with the rules committee
chair and if we this is three of
us agree that is germane
pursuant to executive message
will just released a bill out of
the rules committee if it's a
close call if you don't have an
agreement will have a meeting of
the rules committee but I've put
the responsibility on members to
come to me to say I believe my
bills germane please remove it
from the rules committee and
then explain your thinking okay
so that happened with
Representative Freeman
Representative Dixon other a few
bills that mice into the rules
committee and then later on in
the afternoon we read executive
message that might apply to some
of the bills I finally mention
remained Dixon because I.
remember that as we're going
through it so come to me and we
will see about having built
removed from the rules committee
if we think that there germane
but I want to put the
responsibility on the members to
come to me so that I don't have
to keep all the executive
messages in my minds are going
through and do that additional
layer of analysis in real time
appear more likely to make a
mistake if we do that so please
come to me.
And we will work through the
process I just described to talk
to the rules chair and see how
we will proceed on that basis.
Any questions.
The gentleman from Chavis editor
thank you for that Mr speaker I
would just remind the body.
As the world turns.
I mean we're taking.
We're taking a process that is
totally part of some.
Between two rules committee
chair and we're making a
decision.
And I would tell you that the
crimes that are happening in
Albuquerque are not.
A partisan issue.
They are everyone.
And I think under what has
happened.
What the governor talked about
yesterday.
Of that those bills.
That affect crime especially.
Prime an advocation really.
We ought to look at them to the
committee and we ought to try to
make make this state a better
state and not play games with
the.
I don't disagree there's nothing
partisan about what I just said
I'm I'm simply trying to be
transparent and fair and even
handed with all the members is
why pointed out that this is
happened to bills sponsored by
Democrats a bill sponsored by a
Republican and before you
criticize what's happening where
you see the decisions that about
to make an been offer here here
here comment or criticism or
congratulations after you see
the decisions that we make and I
just I just you know pre judge
the process which is what we've
also been doing for the last
two spent two thirty sessions
and I don't recall there being
any complaint or concern in the
prior to thirty day sessions
about this process is work
before I'm sure it'll continue
to work just fine but out of out
of respect I would ask that you
not criticize before we made any
of the decisions I would
appreciate that.
You're more than welcome I hope
I have no reason to thank you
Sir.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker a just a
clarification if a bill is
a governor bill.
Does it also still need a
message.
Yes.
Thank you.
Any other questions.
Okay
we have I've received a number
of comments from members of this
morning
we have a rule.
about masks in the building on
the floor the rule requires if
the be a multi layer mask like
the one I have on or like it can
ninety five there's some members
who have.
Sort of
Place over there red nose and
mouth is not in compliance with
the rules I would ask that we
come in on the floor tomorrow
that folks.
Have the face coverings that are
compliant with the rule
that we don't have to ask folks
to depart the for today get a
rules compliant mask that would.
Of these you done I would
appreciated as with the other
members are there other
announcements the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia.
Mr speaker may announce a
committee meeting.
The floor is yours Mister
speaker the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee will have an
organizational meeting tomorrow
at nine o'clock zoom will not
hear any bills but we will need
to we have a lot of new faces
into the server reacquaint
ourselves with the process thank
you Mr speaker members say no
the Jennifer Dona Ana thank you
Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet today at one
forty five PM following the
floor thank you Mr speaker
members take note are there
other announcements the gentle
lady from Santa Fe thank you Mr
speaker your rules of element
land grants and cultural affairs
committee will meet tomorrow at
nine AM for an organizational
meeting and we'll be putting out
these in link later thank you
members take note.
Are there other announcements.
Chair is the end result even
answer.
Okay generally from Kenley in
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker there will
be we will have our caucus
meeting tomorrow.
A media early after four section
thank you.
Members take note.
members I made an error on the
bill referral earlier house bill
fifty seven houses
Representative address Romero
house bill fifty seven.
That should have been determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution printed and
referred to the Education
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
No objection that is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Valencia.
Mr speaker I don't know if
you're aware but today is
national popcorn day.
I was not aware that it is so in
honor of national popcorn day I
have a question for you that
your question why did the loons
hate kernels.
Giuliani they might.
Different programs okay.
There are enough.
members of the thank you thank
you those a gallery for being
with us today please be sure to
follow the work of our
committees this afternoon.
Someone
person generating thank you Mr
speaker I just want to let the
body know if anybody's
interested in joining that The
New Mexico Alliance for life is
holding a rally outside and it
starts at one thirty thank you.
Are there other announcements.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker I move that the
health centers or the job which
I was and you know Terry thank
you Sir Mr speaker the copies of
the messages that are attached
to these bills are they going to
be posted online is there a
place where we can see those.
The executive messages on the
governor's website.
and I believe copies are
delivered to your office.
And I get a copy the chief clerk
as a copy of that there the
leadership offices get a copy
the chief clerks to the office
gets a copy secretary St as a
copy on her website and also on
the governor's website okay I
would just ask I I haven't seen
them yet but I don't doubt that
there there someplace yeah we'll
get to.
I the chief clerk said you set.
Okay Jones really of.
Thank you Mr speaker I'll try
this again I move that the house
and in recess until eleven
thirty tomorrow morning thank
you members
enjoy the rest of your day.
Have a good evening
for members and staff if anyone
needs a booster shot they will
be made available
Thursday said a week from a week
from tomorrow so please be in
touch to the house she clerk's
office if you need a booster
shot.
Stay safe we'll see tomorrow has
