Because we.
His rise for today's
application.
By the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Figueroa.
Will you please pray with me.
Holy father.
Thank you for the water that is
falling down across parts of New
Mexico today even it's frozen
form we are grateful we ask your
blessing and protection on those
who must travel in it and be out
working in it keep them safe.
Today we ask you.
For wisdom.
And we thank you for your
promise that you know who gives
generously to all without
finding fault have promised it
to us.
We ask for your help to open our
eyes and ears and our minds and
our hearts to truly see and hear
each other and to discern the
voices of The New Mexicans
across the state.
Ask for your patience.
With us.
WSS with patients for one
another and stamina to
faithfully execute the charge
put up owners.
We pray COVID.
Representative Chatfield please
to the pledge allegiance.
The legions.
For the is in the C. eight
twenty with the you can see is
yes but it does thank you very
nice.
Representative Thomson for the
pledge The New Mexico flag.
Label.
The lady from the from Santa Fe
resented of semansky Mr speaker
I move we go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business in
objection it is so ordered good
morning members.
Happy non snow day snow day.
Are there announcements the
gentleman from Bonelli your
persons of the locker rooms.
Thank you Mr speaker today I'm
pleased to announce that I have
a shadow of a wonderful young
lady from by way of the north
west New Mexico Farmington high
school isn't either Garcia.
Welcome her welcome to the house
yes yes.
Gentleman I believe you also
have the house memorial honoring
jag NM day thank you Mr
chairman.
So I'm pleased members of the
house and speakers to sponsor
along with my colleague
Representative Wonda Johnson
jobs for America's graduates
otherwise known as Jack New
Mexico Chad The New Mexico is a
state based organization of the
national nonprofit jobs for
America's graduates is dedicated
to preventing people of promises
from dropping out of schools
jobs for America's graduates New
Mexico employees as in school.
Strategies to help students at
the greatest risk of dropping
out to shore up.
Graduated from high school ready
for further education career
that spanned life opportunities
and as importantly.
Improving by demonstration
graduation improved graduation
rates.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house memorial
twenty seven to be removed from
the speakers table and.
The next order of business no
objection it is so ordered that
Mr speaker I beg forgiveness
from from you and from the body
as I am new to this memorials
process.
The record reflect that election
is server placing House memorial
twenty seven on final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution and the gentleman
has explained the moral ahead of
time thank you for doing that
the gentleman for further
debate.
Thank you Mr chairman for wanted
to I could have a my colleague
Representative Johnson speak to
this man or certainly the gym
lady from McKinley is on one
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker and thank you my
colleague does the gentleman
yield.
You'll gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan thank you thank you
for sponsoring this memorial and
thank you for
letting me join you in
sponsoring this memorial it is
very important to me and I
support this program and I think
it's important to help for use I
think it's incumbent upon us to
help our use and to grow our own
use into a life skills programs
trainings professionals
education so that they can
continue to develop their
education and their whatever
they want to become and in their
career and I'm also very
thankful on behalf of my my
pueblo Zuni neighbors south of
Gallup that they are also
currently taking part in this
program so with that Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you for
bringing this memorial forward
thank you ladies.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Please read the report to read.
House memorial twenty seven
introduced by representatives
dela Cruz and Johnson.
A memorial declaring February
ninth two thousand twenty three
jag in in day in the house of
representatives.
Whereas the jobs for America's
graduates New Mexico also known
as Jack in them as a state based
organization of the national
nonprofit jobs for America's
graduates and is dedicated to
preventing young people of
promise from dropping out of
school and we're as jobs for
America's graduates New Mexico
employees and in school re
engagement strategy to help
students at the greatest risk of
dropping out to show up
reconnect and graduate from high
school ready for further
education career and life
opportunities and.
Whereas jobs for America's
graduates New Mexico is
committed to improving
graduation rates and preparing
graduates to successfully
transition into further
education and the workforce and
whereas the highly trained jobs
for America's graduates New
Mexico specialists are full time
classroom teachers to provide
academic support mentoring and
professional coaching to jobs
for America's graduates New
Mexico students to help them
take charge of their own
education and get back on track
to grade graduation and for us
over the past eighteen years
jobs for America's graduates New
Mexico has helped to improve the
lives and futures of thousands
of high school students in New
Mexico and currently has
programs in Albuquerque Rio
Rancho and the public Zuni.
And whereas the jobs for
America's graduates New Mexico
program is evidence based and
has proven successful and
helping New Mexico students
overcome barriers to graduation
and whereas the average
graduation rate for jobs for
America's graduates New Mexico
over the last ten years is
ninety six percent now therefore
be it resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico February ninth twenty
twenty three be declared jag in
in day in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the executive director of jobs
for America's graduates New
Mexico.
House memorial twenty seven
introduced by representatives
director who's and Johnson.
Is there debate.
On the memorial.
Seeing no debate the gentleman
from earlier to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house memorial twenty seven
do now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the house that the
record show that the role has
been called and all members
present voting in the
affirmative.
Madam chair members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered we are on final
passage of house memorial twenty
seven the vote is now open.
The vote is now closed
Representative formative and
zero negative house memorial
twenty seven has duly passed his
house.
Gentlemen we do have some guests
in the gallery that I'd like to
introduce in honor please rise
and be recognized house Amanda
Wilson amber and Reno Timothy
Guero ceremony ritual for the
funeral Christopher how to me
you'll.
George ball capable and forty
two students joining us today
please rise to be recognized
thank you for coming to the
house.
I love this relates.
Clearinghouses the gentleman
from.
Colfax one of your neighbor's
son again and dollars
Representative census thank you
Mr speaker I'd like to introduce
my shadow today this is
Elizabeth to foil she's a senior
lost almost high school where
she participates in student
leadership student council and
is the captain of the varsity
cheerleading team Elizabeth will
be attending the New Mexico
State University in the fall.
Well NMSC she plans on pursing a
degree in nursing Elisabeth
currently works at ability
beauty salon in Los Alamos
during her free time she can I
can be found at the gym painting
drawing or spending time with
the family please help me
welcome Elizabeth thank you.
Welcome to the house.
The gentle lady from Chavis
curry and Roosevelt
Representative read thank you Mr
speaker I I just had
announcements and I and I want
to thank you Mr speaker of today
was supposed to actually be a
memorial memorial ten was
supposed to be introduced
recognizing victims of violent
crime and families who had lost
a family members from violent
crime and and I've had guests
that have traveled from all over
the state for this and it just
got bottled up in Judiciary
Committee where was not heard
and now we have all these people
here today that if basically
want to be you know present for
this and Mr speaker I think it's
a little unfair that the
individuals here today will not
be able to have their memorial
present therefore Mr speaker I
move that the house memorial ten
be withdrawn from the house
Judiciary Committee the
committee consideration be
dispensed at the memorial be
made the next order of business
and I ask for unanimous consent.
Gentlelady we have
we've all the guests here and I
would very much like to honor
them as I'd like to honor the
committee process and I would
kindly kindly request that you
withdraw the motion so that we
can not only honor your guest
but avoid the procedural battle
on the floor
I did talk to the leadership
about this and we had a great
discussion about it and in fact
our office suggested perhaps a
certificate that could be drawn
up for this today we never heard
back and so I would kindly
kindly request that
that we not go down this
procedural path out of respect
for the committee process.
I do request Mr speaker.
Stand by.
There's been a motion to remove
House memorial to.
From committee and make the next
order of business public affairs
and I just And I suppose maybe.
The news have it.
Related.
Two of the floor.
Matt Mr speaker I request a roll
call vote.
Really we've already taken a
vote on the motion.
The division of the house.
I request a division of the
house roll call vote.
Can you explain what you mean by
divisional ounce.
That was uncertain whether the
gays or nays were higher or
lower gentle lady you wasn't
even close.
Mr speaker than I would like to
just make a point of personal
privilege the state appointed
lady.
Mr speaker I would just like to
say that there are so many
victims of of crime and and
Victims of families that have
lost loved members and I would
like to acknowledge of these
victims face trauma they face
hardships grief
on a daily basis until you're in
that situation it's very hard to
understand
I I believe that this would have
been a a great thing for
everybody to be able to vote on
I have listened to it over
twenty five years to stories and
hundreds of hundreds of stories
and and this is something that I
I feel would would not be a
controversial issue to honor
victims of crime Mr speaker I
have them respectively of seen
us honor employees at every
department and culture and
occupation and I totally support
that and I think that's a great
thing to do however I I just
feel this was a memorial that
needed to come forward and I
want to just recognize crime
victims and recognize all the
people that have suffered from
violent crimes you wake up every
day without their loved ones and
with that Mr speaker thank you.
Thank you gentle lady
Mr speaker I do have gas in the
yard okay certainly please.
In the gallery I got you okay
thank you gentle lady
I do have a list here and I'd
like to honor please please rise
to be recognized by this house
we have the founder of rob New
Mexico seven legal Chavis
So is.
We have
seen also a founder of rob New
Mexico seven.
Mexico distributors for justice.
You said.
New Mexico crusaders for
justice.
In Ryan so major artists exhibit
signifying the lives lost in
homicides welcome to the house.
Just.
Other announcements gentleman
from San Miguel in Torrance
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr speaker I'd like to also
welcome my shattered today in
Gonzalez she's fifteen years old
and have from our lovely capital
Santa Fe she attends a master's
program at Santa Fe community
college and I'd like to welcome
the.
Gallatin chamber please welcome
needed Gonzalez thank you Mr.
Welcome to the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Ramon.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
give the rebuildable presumption
update yesterday and Albuquerque
there were three people murdered
and the the Walmart at San
Matteo and central is closing
because of shoplifting the Mr
speaker the citizens of New
Mexico a bit loud and clear they
want us to go ahead and start
working on crime legislation and
almost all of money is tabled in
committee thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen delayed for
many years of Garrett thank you
Mr speaker today I'm honored to
announce toward chamber that it
is West Side date and we have
five hundred and sixty six
students probably we can round
that up to six hundred from
schools throughout the west side
of Albuquerque Bernalillo county
present with us you may have
seen them in the house chamber
earlier and touring around and
if you could read the list of
schools that are in the gallery
or were recently in the gallery
I would appreciate it thank you
deleted the additional are we
have paid this guy Services
raise Marmion academy coil
imagery adobe acres I'm also at
the school part of a lemon tree
Federal goes on is George
Sanchez Ernie Pyle truly middle
school kids on the high school.
Robert F. Kennedy charter high
school and the new America
school welcome to your state
house of representatives has to
be recognized.
C..
And Mister speaker I want to
remind everybody up in the
gallery that at the age of
twenty one you can run for the
house and the age of twenty five
you can run for the Senate so we
look forward in seeing you in a
few years and I'd like to
introduce my adult shadows I
have with me today sandy Alvarez
she's a treasure from the
Albuquerque westside business
association.
And I haven't seen a Hughes is a
west side health care access
advocate and Carly Norton has a
west side alternative
transportation advocate.
Welcome to the house.
Thank you Mr speaker.
From Bernalillo Representative
but.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house
I would also like to welcome all
of our west siders to the house
today into the rotunda this
morning and it's wonderful to
have all of these young people
all of these fresh minds amongst
us hopefully they rub off on us
but also Mr speaker and members
of the house I would like to
recognize two of my guests this
morning
I am of wanting to recognize
global give a book is a
nonprofit dedicated to promoting
literacy and education for
children in underprivileged
communities in can in New Mexico
there bring mission is to bridge
the literacy gap and provide
every child with equal
opportunities to succeed and you
should be getting a book from
them in a day or two and for
your grandkids or create our
children as well but the two
guests that I have with me this
morning Mr speaker and members
is I have Sylvia maser the
executive director of global
global give a book and I also
have.
And she's been wonderful to work
with she also took over our city
council lavender Lee rose
program I also want to recognize
one of her board members a daily
LA chica tena.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
appreciate the time really
welcome to the house the Julie
from but love your present
printed.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I rise today to tell you about
some special guests that I have
been living with us in the on
the house floor so we have some
students have come all the way
from the Sandia high school they
want to learn about the
legislative process and they
were the original students
conform students against gun
violence at their high school
please take a moment to
introduce them Lisa Whitaker.
Following freaky.
Simon to Noriko.
The wrong.
Zachary Chavez.
Just a.
Fernandes and Daniel Fisher.
Thank you all very much remember
the so she is the president of
the organization so thank you
all very much you may be seated
and Mr speaker also was to tell
you about some wonderful guests
that we have on the rostrum so
today we have with us visiting
from Connecticut we have none
other than Kristin and Michael
song they are gun safety
advocates visiting with us here
today would you please rise.
We also have with us.
The grandmother Bennie Hargrove
but NASA so I just.
And with.
And we we have saying.
And.
Mr speaker I just want to know
that the students don't travel
alone we are so happy that
parents have joined them today
so the parents of Karina the are
here and so we are happy to have
them to rise and to be
recognized.
Thank you Mr speaker welcome to
the house we also have a guests
in the gallery of Representative
and that is all medals his
teaching Nibert at this go head
to toe high school Georgene
going in is peer tutors in
English students please rest we
recognized welcome to house.
Sure.
Gentleman from Chavis and in a
dental representative tells.
Thank you Mr speaker as a point
person privilege state your
point Sir thank you Mr speaker
in reference to the of some made
by Representative right
following go I just offered this
that
That.
Was kind of our first.
Little spat that we often
relied.
In on in this house at times but
that was because that bills is
been locked up for two weeks.
she had asked for.
Her constituents that have
traveled many hours to sit on
the rostrum she did that timely.
It's not like there is no room
on the rostrum today's seems to
be a lot of empty chairs and a
little consideration at B. and
toward that Mr speaker we
probably wouldn't have that
today but I would just us going
forward that we don't let this
of.
more of good will with the new
speaker that we have had for the
last several weeks that I have
enjoyed and appreciate that we
don't let it go to hell in a
handbag over things like this if
we could Mr speaker.
Certainly Sir
thank you for that and and as I
stated earlier we did talk with
leadership about doing is
certificate finding different
ways and I would also encourage
the sponsor of the memorial to
discuss it with the respect the
chairperson of the committee to
ensure that there's a fair
hearing and and I'd gladly.
Help support that the gentleman
from Italy the you'll
representative Garcia
must be gonna raise the point of
personal privilege state your
point similar speaker
No not all is said and done on
this issue of
Of honoring the.
The families of victims of
homicide and violent crime
estimates speaker.
The process of drafting a
memorial.
Honoring the New Mexico
crusaders for justice
and it'll happen on the twenty
eighth of February.
and we'll be doing a simple
memorial than a knowledge of it
so that memo will not go to
committee it'll basically sit on
the speakers table and on the
twenty eighth will call it up to
the ceremony honoring three of
the founders here on this
chamber and again you know I
appreciate the effort that was
attempted to to honor
the differences of on survivors
of victims of homicide in line
and crime but
But the that the.
that chapters and close to see
most because we still have the
events in the future and that
will also be technology missing
the speaker on February twenty
eighth some.
House bill twenty one
which is a bill that I brought
forth and in this chamber
providing an appropriation of
five million dollars for victim
advocates.
Of homicide and violent crime is
the amount of speaker within the
armed forces and agencies in our
state.
And
I want to especially thank
Chair woman runs from.
For funding this initiative last
year to the tune of five hundred
thousand dollars and so Mister
chair were not over in terms of
addressing the needs and
concerns of
Victims of homicide in line and
crime forces this century is the
most speaker ranges starting the
chapter on bringing justice to
those victims and a lot of those
victims of similar speaker.
Yes we still have not found the
perpetrator these are something
cases call cases in some
instances.
Moving forward and I welcome the
the group of legislators that
were participating in this event
on that a moral Memorial that
didn't quite get out of the
judiciary to embrace our
February twenty eighth the event
and make it a true bipartisan
initiative thank you Mr speaker
members of the house gentleman
the gentleman from San Miguel
and tors representative Garcia
thank you Mr speaker I just want
to let the folks know that
there's donuts in the gallery
from the theme.
Former Representative seventy
Richard retail so they're from
speaking Spanish hope you guys
enjoy
enjoy the donuts thank you Madam
did you mean the gallery or the
lounge sorry the lounges can you
get a lot of people got excited
of the gentleman I could bring
him to the.
Mr speaker thank you dominated
gentlelady from anybody about.
Sun the face of the one thousand
percent of it at a thank you Mr
speaker I stand today in
recognition of bill Connor and
the New Mexico rural water
association for those of you
don't don't know this so
organization works with small
water systems throughout the
state they help them you know
improve their drinking water
systems or waste water systems I
mean they have an annual
conference about a thousand
people come is an important part
of the I'd say activism in the
north and they always have a
contest for who has the best
drinking water and then they
take that to the national
convention and last night all of
the state's fifty states got
together and they have a
national competition for clean
drinking water and I am so proud
to announce that the best
drinking water in the entire
country goes to zero Pueblo.
Regulations.
Those with the gentleman from.
The representative of Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise this
morning one point.
Of personal privilege state your
point.
Mr speaker.
This.
With respect to the conduct of
committee hearings.
Yesterday.
During presentation in commerce
on house bill two three seven.
Motion to table the bill was
made and accepted without any
opportunity for questions.
Or debate.
This is clearly in violation of
house rules committee rules and
Mason's manual.
Mr speaker.
This was on point popular piece
of legislation.
But with tax policy that
perpetuates significant and
rising payments to an individual
industry taxpayers expense it
deserved to be heard.
What I would request of you Mr
speaker.
Is to review the video evidence
and if you find the more
comments are accurate to
reschedule that piece of
legislation for Senator in
complete.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker.
That order business third
reading of legislation.
I see no objection it is so
ordered.
Right members we have discussed
with the respective leadership
offices we're gonna take of one
bill on third reading this
morning and that would be item
number one house bill nine.
After that we'll do a little bit
of housekeeping here on the
floor
and then we'll break for the
day.
It is the gentle lady from
Bernalillo ready on item number
one.
Mr speaker the gentle lady is
ready.
Mr speaker the record reflect
that election is a server
placing House Bill line has been
taken.
For this I am from from this
server please note on a final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amended
for substitution the lady to
explain the bills.
Mr speaker house bill nine is a
child access protection law that
holds gun owners accountable
when their guns are not stored
securely minus gain access and
someone is in danger to our
injured.
Under house bill nine an adult
would could be charged with a
misdemeanor.
If the adult negligence of the
store their firearms a child in
access the fire arm and the
child displayed or brandished
the gun an adult could be
charged with a fourth degree
felony if the child enters our
kills themselves or another
person with a firearm House Bill
line says that someone
negligently stores their gun
when they disregard a minus
ability to access the reminding
everyone that a person could
only be penalized after the
trial access is a gun and then
causes some action to occur
house bill nine does not
identify however our our must be
stored but states that a person
does not violate the law if the
fire arm was locked with a
firearm safety device that ended
the firearm in operable also if
they kept the firearm in a way
in which a child could not
access it.
Mr speaker it is important to
note that this gun in no way
affects anyone second amendment
right to hold a fire arm and it
in no way is interferes with the
child's participation in setting
activities or in any type of
hunting for saying things that
they may be part of this this
piece of legislation Mr speaker
only looks at how do we keep our
children safe so that they can
grow up and have a wonderful
life time and live out their
dreams.
The gentle lady.
I believe you have a foreman
meant to propose Mr speaker I do
have a floor amendment to
propose.
And the clerk as the abatement
and it is being distributed now
thank you Julie can you please
read.
Thank
you please madam for number four
number is two two four nine five
nine point one.
That is what I have on my desk
in that switch should have been
passed out.
It's getting passed out let's
give it a second Senator.
This.
This.
Can't believe the amendments
been passed so the gentle lady
finally the amendment.
Yes
the amendment.
Looks at ways to make gentle
lady please move the amendment
I'm sorry Mr speaker Mr meet Mr
speaker I move the amendment.
Delay the house floor amendment
Number one the delay has move
house floor amendment number one
to house bill nine the gentle
lady to explain the amendment.
Mr speaker the admit the
amendment.
Is presented to make sure that
there's clarity regarding to
particular pieces of information
that are shown in the in the in
house bill nine the first one is
on page three line to what we
will strike the term closely
close proximity of the person
and insert into their of the
person's media control by
including this information it is
very clear what is.
What is intended when we talk
about having access to a of fire
are an on page three we will
strike lines thirteen fifteen
and insert into their of the
penalties in this section are
not exclusive of other apple
table criminal charges or civil
claims that's to makes sure that
everyone knows that there are
other options that may also be
included as part of the.
The condition if any with
respect to this bill.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
C. line is objection to adopting
the amendment.
Mr speaker there's objection we
get a roll call vote on this.
You have your role
is a seven ends there we go.
You have a roll.
Yes.
We are on a roll call vote to
adopt House floor amendment
number one to house bill nine
able to yes and we would have
adopted this amendment.
It would have no and we're back
on the amendment.
This call good.
Okay.
The vote is now.
Forty one in the affirmative
twenty five in the negative
house floor amendment number one
to house bill nine has been
adopted.
lady from Bernalillo.
We're back on the amended bill.
Is here I stand for.
Debate.
There is debate.
Just a little bit.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative right.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield I yield to the gentleman.
Mr speaker and members of the
house.
We have.
A lot of police all across the
state.
We have a lot of people all
across the state.
Who have firearms in their house
for personal protection they're
not in a gun safe.
There there for personal
protection.
That we see a tragic incident
happened.
I'm glad that they are
of few and far between.
But for us to legislate.
How the rest of the responsible
citizens of the state must act
because of and it responsible
person.
Is not good policy.
Mr speaker members of the house
when I was a police officer I
didn't put up my gun when I came
home from work.
I didn't put it in the middle of
the kitchen table either.
But my children.
And my fellow law enforcement
officers.
Children were told they were not
to touch that farm.
Period.
And nothing happened again those
incidents are really.
Infrequent and I'm glad of that.
Mr speaker members of the house
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo does this violate the
DC versus Heller Supreme Court
decision.
The speaker and gentleman no it
does not.
Mr speaker and members of the
house.
it's easy to Google this I would
encourage you to Google it it's
DC versus Heller.
This is the court now in office
of.
The statement on this chart on
that decision.
So on that decision.
There was it it will prevented
you from owning handguns in the
city and there was a lawsuit
over but there were a couple
other things and the most
important part of that is.
Indeed trigger lock requirement
in so far as prohibiting the use
of functional firearms in homes
the District Court dismissed the
suit but B. C. reversed.
Holding that the second
amendment protects an
individual's right to possess
firearms and that the city's
been on hand guns as well as
its requirement that fire alarms
in the home building cap on
functional.
Even when necessary for self
defense violates the second
amendment that is from this the
first paragraph off Cornell law.
So I don't know how you get
around and I've discussed this
with the sponsor
That if I have to keep my gun in
a gun safe it's not readily
available for self protection in
all allow the gentle lady to
answer.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
important to understand how the
application of house bill supply
house bill nine is applied
there's absolutely nothing in
this bill that requires that a
person keep their gun in a gun
safe as you have described what
this bill does do it recognizes
the economic diversity that
occurs within our state and that
individuals make their fire arms
safely stored in a variety of
ways and this house bill nine
absolutely recognizes that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you for recognizing that must be
stored in a safe manner that's
exactly my point.
Mr speaker and gentle.
Members of the house so why did
our founding fathers make the
second amendment the right to
bear firearms.
And if you look back at our
founding fathers and their
writings.
It was to protect the first
amendment right.
And we have through history many
examples.
Of how for safety.
Firearms restricted.
Firearms were registered in the
government's came in and took
those firearms disarming their
citizens and then dictating them
how their lives would be.
We don't want to go down that
path.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
From Bernalillo please tell me
who's going to enforce this.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is nothing in this bill that
talks about having
a law enforcement officers to go
in anybody's home to take away
their file on there is nothing
in house bill nine that pertains
to affecting an individual's
constitutional right whether
that's first second or any of a
constitutional provision that
you wish to this keeping them
from having access to a file on
what this bill does is it
focuses on how we will be
keeping our children safe and
how we will be keeping firearms
out of the hands of minors.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Bernalillo so.
Is there a law that we pass that
restricts a firearm or how it
may be capped.
For how whether it's loaded or
load unloaded violate not only
the Heller decision but our
state constitution.
Mr speaker and gentleman our
focus is on house bill nine
house bill nine does none of the
items that you have listed the
focus on this bill is keeping
our children safe and keeping
fire arms safely stored and Out
of the axis in hands of
individual miners.
That Mr speaker and gentle lady
from.
Bernalillo then tell me what an
operable means for in the safe
storage.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
When looking at the firearm is
looking at the house bill nine
what house bill nine says it
must be stored in file or must
be stored in a manner in which
and into a in minor cannot
access the firearm and so as
indicated in my earlier
statement because we do
recognize the economic.
The Economic.
Diversity within our state in
terms of how our arms may be
kept we recognize that that is
what can happen so when we look
at this process those ways can
be any numbers ways and what
would be considerable what would
be considered a safe storage.
During the totality of the
circumstances.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
If the child care and access
the.
How does the adult access.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
House bill nine state as we know
when the owner of a fire on is
not near the FIR on it should be
stored safely and in a manner
when a child or minor cannot
access it when you are with your
fire on Mr speaker gentleman can
always access so far on the
focus of this piece of
legislation house bill nine is
focused on your building near
your fire arm are having it's
safe and stored when you are not
near it.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if my firearm is
stored in my bedroom and I'm in
the kitchen and mine near the
fire.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
no idea what your house looks
like so I'm unable to answer
that question.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo which go ahead will
make it real clear let's say
that I would have been a five
thousand square foot home.
And on the west end of the home
is where the firearm is and I'm
on the east end of the home is
it close to me.
This
gentleman.
You have given a scenario that I
have no idea because I cannot
see the house and I'm uncertain
where east and west is in the
house that you have described
what I do want to emphasize is
that this piece of legislation
focuses on it being stored and
in close proximity to you and
that means within your personal
control and that is what the
amendment to this bill states
and that is the purpose of house
bill nine we look at close
proximity.
Mr speaker gentle lady would do
that and tell me how many feet
away for me that farm can be and
be in close proximity.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What would happen in this case
if it if it was determined that
house bill nine was applicables
it would be that would be
looking at the totality of the
circumstances where were you
where was the fire on.
Well how was the child able to
access it so you that we could
survive a million scenarios it
sounds like you are a planning
to do but what could happen is
that we still have to look at
the totality of the
circumstances it would be up to
the prosecutor the judge and the
jury to determine whether that
close proximity had been that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think that the questions real
clear and I think that the body
now understands that we can't
even answer that if the gun was
at the west end of a home that's
five thousand square feet and.
The euro are at the other in the
east end of the house that we
can't even come up with an
answer whether this is in close
proximity so that means this is
so vaguely written that we can't
determine that
Mr speaker and gentle lady
members of the body want to take
you over to page two line
eighteen you'll see negligently.
Negligently is a standard that
is used when you run a red
light.
That should be reckless.
And this legislation has so many
problems with that that I could
spend hours on it I know that
there's several other people we
want to talk and so Mister
speaker that will be all my
questions for now thank you.
Thank you gentlemen there is
further debate the gentle lady
from burger the U. in Torrance
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr chair will the
sorry Mr Mr speaker sorry.
Get your free donuts.
Thank you for that
of course.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
county please yield.
Yes I will yield to the gentle
lady.
Have some questions for you.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Can you do me a favor because of
law enforcement officers they
work off rules and statutes like
thirty dash level blah can you
tell me where they would know to
look up negligently.
As regards on the front page one
twenty five.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Term negligently disregards
would be in the charging
document in addition when the
jury instructions are given the
and every person in the
courtroom and and evolved in
this proceeding will know
exactly what negligently
disregards means.
Thank you Mr speaker and a
gentle lady when I'm talking
about is one of the law
enforcement officer arrives and
they have to put the scene
together quickly how would they
know what negligently disregards
means if there's not like a
thirty dash one dash to dash a
how would they know that.
The question.
Absolutely Mr speaker gentle
lady so law enforcement officer
arrives they have to make a
quick assumption of what is
going on how would they know
because they work offer codes so
there's they would need to know
what is negligently mean and I
don't see any definition
anywhere for what a law
enforcement officer would know
because we don't want them to
have to going to make
assumptions about what happened
some looking for something that
defines this word on page one
number twenty five negligently
disregards what could they find
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's
important to remember that it is
not a law enforcement officer
who would be the prosecuting
person in a case that was
brought under house bill nine
what would happen in this case
we would be expecting officer to
write up the report and the list
and so any and everything that
he saw it would be up to the
district attorney to determine
based upon the information that
was presented in the report and
any of the information that was
presented to him to determine if
the firearm was negligently
stored if a child had access to
it and something happened as a
result of that.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so could you tell me what.
I'm talking about a law
enforcement officer goes in
there they have to make
assumptions what's happening
based on codes of what was in
violation.
Law enforcement officer cannot
go in there table I think it was
this I think it was I think it
was negligently disregard so
what I'm looking for is worse is
specific.
Code for law enforcement to meet
this definition because what we
don't want as we don't want
anybody's parents or grandma's
arrest and the rest of for
felony what I'm trying to find
out how do we do this when they
are on the spot in that moment
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I still repeat my response I law
enforcement officer is not.
prosecute cases what they do is
they write reports they write up
what they see the presented to a
district attorney however the
prosecuting officer prosecuting
person will be and based on that
report they will make a decision
whether or not something was
negligent when stored if I just
a police officer do you think
that the term and what was
negligently stored.
I believe the police officer
could probably make that
determination but their
responsibility is to find out
the facts as they see them when
they entered the premises.
And madam chair I'm sorry Mr
speaker and desolated that
leaves me second question so in
law enforcement officer arrives
on the scene first of all they
have to determine what was
negligently disregards miners
billet access to first of all
they have to make a.
They have to make an assumption
because it can't be objective
they have to make the decision
and then they also have to make
the decision of what is it.
That would be a locked
container.
I did this week will increase
I'm sorry but the it's so vague
I don't know what that would
mean for a law enforcement
officer to arrive on the scene
grandma says one example the
child says another and now we're
trying to law enforcement
officer has a state well I think
based on this testimony that
this probably is negligent
disregard and that this probably
may or may not be a locked
container what I'm trying to do
is make this clear Mr speaker
and
gentle lady for a law
enforcement officers and I don't
see any clarity I didn't have
any clarity on when it came to
see pack and I definitely don't
see anything here so Mr speaker
and gentle lady could you give
me a bunch of examples of what a
locked container would look
like.
The speaker gentle lady first of
all it's important to emphasize
that when a law enforcement
officer comes upon the scene of
the crime there is often going
to be differentials in terms of
the information that they
receive it is up to the law
enforcement officer to write a
report based upon what they're
told and what they observe with
respect to your question
regarding a lot container as
indicated earlier in my
statement whether or not is that
a container is locked is not the
sole purpose an aspect of this
legislation it says that it can
be locked are stored safely in
the manner in which a child or
minor cannot access a firearm.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it's still is very
very very vague at this point so
Mr speaker and
Gentlelady we had I had a
problem with
Close proximity because I'd
asked previously does that mean
if it's in the night stand yes
possibly.
But if you close your eyes are
shut your eyes to fall sleep now
that's not close proximity so
can you now to provide immediate
person's immediate control and
is there some sort of.
Expanding or law are simple that
I can have exactly what is a
person's immediate control Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
direct your attention to the
copy of the amendment that was
passed out particularly number
one where Mr speaker gentle lady
the discussion about the close
proximity indicates that this I.
fire on budget with and I'm the
person's media control.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
does that mean can you define
that for me to control does that
mean I have to be on my person
can I leave it on the counter
can I leave the room can you
please explain to me so are law
enforcement officers at home
know exactly what this is saying
so if they walked into a scene
there was a this was in close
proximity was a nightstand this
was ten feet away I mean it's
not immediate control I need to
have a definition what omitted
controllers Mr speaker and
gentle lady so Mister speaker
gentle lady.
The courts would be looking at
the totality of the
circumstances one of the
examples that was given by
Representative ring.
Was what if it was five thousand
feet away hello the setting
close proximity so I think that
not I think but gentle lady Mr
speaker we would begin by
looking at the totality of the
circumstances and whether or not
the fire arm was in the person's
immediate control that's one
item but we also must remember
to additional items must happen
the child must access the fire
arm and the child let's do
something with a firearm if
there is going to be any type of
prosecution under house bill
nine.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so is
totality something that's used
when there's initial
investigation and how would the
law enforcement officer define
or search for have an answer for
the mental state of both parties
Mr speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady the mental
stability and determination of a
particular person at any time is
not within the hands of the law
enforcement officer but in the
hands of a professional is
responsible for such duties and
responsibilities.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I'm not understanding that
at all because it seems like I
now have law enforcement
officers entering the scene
that.
Don't know what the definition
of negligently disregards is we
don't know what the definition
of it being locked properly or
not they're not looking at the
totality but they have to look
at the mental state so I'm
seeing that there's going to be
a whole lot of problems going
forward this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady in
the biggest problem besides
there being a valuation by the
law enforcement offices is going
to be because normally when they
do the right up it's very
objective this person look like
this they were wearing this this
happened this is what happened
one person said this one person
said that now I feel like they
have to become more subjective
in this to determine well.
Gramma said that she had it
locked up properly the jobs as
it was available it was out so
how would a law enforcement
officer just make that decision
the child says one thing the
grandma says another before we
maker Fallon and put in prison
how how does law enforcement
determined that Mr speaker
gentle lady law enforcement
officers not prosecutors the
prosecutors a DA or other law
enforcement prosecutor will
we'll take a look at the report
that the officer provides as
well as listen to testimony and
any of the evidence that is
presented if a trial proceeds at
a court.
And that is how the
determination will be bait.
I just saw this reasonable
trying to communicate with the
minority with the.
Proceed thank you Mr speaker Mr
speaker gentle lady okay so for
law enforcement arrests they
have to know the mental state of
the bad actor and that the
person actively committed a bad
act now they have to prove both
elephants how would law
enforcement do that Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
It's.
Speaker gentle lady there is
nothing in this legislation
house bill nine that state is a
law enforcement officer has to
determine the mental state of
any person it is the law
enforcement officer if you are
C. enters a scene where there
has been an incident where a
child has access to gun and
calls deaf are great bodily harm
to someone because some other
may Hamm to occur that report is
written up in is up to the
district attorney are of the
prosecuting officer to determine
whether to go forward with that
trial and then if there is such
a trial is up to the fact
finders and the court would
weigh the evidence and to make a
determination whether or not a
conviction is going to.
And Mr speaker gentle lady there
lies the problem because this is
what you how you prefer crime
you have to put the crime of the
mental state the back act actor
and that person actively
committed to back back so I see
first right off the bat we're
putting our law enforcement as
situation when they don't have
the tools that they need for
this bill which hopefully will
not go forward Mr speaker and
gentle lady I have a question
exemptions are there any
exemptions in this for survivors
of domestic violence for
survivors of sexual assault or
anybody that has an active
restraining order.
Mr speaker Dowling.
Mr speaker gentle lady house
bill nine focuses on child
access protection and making
sure that.
Firearms are safely stored and
out of the hands and reach of a
child or minor that is the focus
of this legislation we don't
look at the background of the
person whether or not they are
single or married or I think the
most of domestic violence the
question is to focus on house
bill nine and exactly what it
looks that it looks at whether
or not a firearm was securely
stored and if a child had access
to that far on and if they
caused any damage or other
mayhem with respect to that.
Access.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and I
am also a protector of survivors
of domestic violence having been
one myself so I will tell you
how incredibly scary it is to
have somebody beat you up and
then kidnap you and then when
you were released and you are
trying to find your own way and
you're scared to death that this
person is going to kill you
because they've made threats.
I feel that this is very
discriminatory towards our
survivors of domestic violence
or people who are restraining
orders because having had to
restrain our something myself it
doesn't matter they do not care
about a restraining order so I
want to make sure Mr speaker and
gentle lady that I understand
this bill so a survivor of
domestic violence.
He gets a gun make it a male or
female doesn't matter because
females can also be violent.
And they have a weapon they have
a fire arm.
And since we can't really figure
out what their media control is.
If they were to put it on the
night stand next to their bed.
Would they be looking at a
violation or is that okay is
that within this vague
definition of under control.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
It's important to continue to
emphasize that house bill nine
let's say the state storage of a
firearm if an individual placed
a fire arm on their nightstand
the question becomes did a tile
access it.
Did a child because some sort of
danger to an individual hard to
them sales and the other
question becomes how close was
the person to their to the fire
on if they just laid it down so
several things have to happen
first of all the child has
access it and then something has
to happen as a result of that
access so whether or not it was
in a media control the it
meaning the fire arm is still
going to look at the
circumstances the totality of
the circumstances and that would
be up to the fact finder if
indeed a charge was consumed by
an attorney.
By the age of the prosecuting
official.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
what I'm getting at is let's say
this person male or female is a
survivor of domestic violence
and fear for the life they have
purchased a firearm to keep
themselves from being harmed
because we keep talking about
one side but not the other.
A couple scenarios one what
happens if this person kicks the
door in they have a firearm is
she supposed to are you supposed
to say we would hold on hold on
I would open the safe give me
one second is this how this
plays out Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady there is
nothing in this bill that
requires a phone to be kept in
the safe if a person chooses to
keep it in the state that is a
matter within their own
discretion and with respect to
domestic violence Mr speaker
Madam.
The lady.
I think it's unfortunate the way
we're bringing domestic violence
survivors into this conversation
this conversation is about safe
storage of firearms and whether
or not a child has access to
that file on and with that they
are engaged in some activity
that causes harm.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
contract this has everything to
do with survivors of domestic
violence because this applies to
them if they are survivors and
they are afraid for their life
and they have to lock their fire
ops so they don't end up being a
family because this is a
pipeline to prison for everybody
who's gonna violate this so
we're trying not to put let's
say a single.
Mom who is working really hard
trying to get a life in order
and now she has a lock of this
weapon and he kicks in the gun
and kicks in the door and kills
her.
How is that fair because this
bill applies everything to us
survivors of domestic violence
because now we have a weapon
that we could use to protect
ourselves and it's now walked up
how do you justify that Mr
speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady there is
nothing in this bill that says
the fire on has to be locked up
the bill specifically states
that the file on has to be kept
in a manner in which of the tile
could not access it and if a
child does access it today
because some saw the danger or
harm so that's what's important
about this piece of legislation
there is nothing in here to say
that because you are survive of
the mystic violence because you
are in the you are single they
do have the ability to say well
I'm just going to be negligent
and laying my arm around so that
is not there and that is not
part of this legislation it is
important to emphasize it's
called safe storage and whether
or not the owner of the fire on
safely stores the power on when
they are not near it are in
close proximity of the.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
a by product of this bill.
It is a by product that we
cannot ignore it doesn't say it
but the implication is there as
a survivor of domestic violence
with children or grand children
in the home if you don't somehow
secure this weapon you can no
longer have access to it.
So now we're supposed to just
lay there and let this person
kill us because that's more just
it's not fair it's not fair to
the survivors of domestic
violence court in fear for their
life Mr speaker gentle lady the
other thing I want to know.
The questions before.
So there's a bunch of varying
degrees of what what what could
be locked up and consider locked
up.
So let's say have a grandma the
parents are not available.
And she's trying to raise his
grandchildren.
So she gets a weapon because she
can't because we have a second
amendment.
So grandma gets this of fire
arm.
And let's say and I know what
the answer was from before.
She comes home working all day
sets that farm down.
Turned around I'm is tend to to
to turn around.
And let's say one of the
children gets that gun.
And takes it and goes and does a
horrific thing with that.
Is grandma now going to prison
for eighteen months for felony
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Speaker gentle lady.
House bill nine.
Let's set the safe storage of a
firearm.
And when an individual.
Has the responsibility and wants
to own a firearm it's their
responsibility to keep it stored
safely they are not more if you
are at home you can wear it with
you you can have it near you so
that it is in close proximity a
pandemic at any time so the
scenarios that you present to
not fit.
The application of house bill
nine Mr speaker I'm asking for
permission to sit down because I
have been feeling sick for the
past few days and ask for
permission to sit to continue
with this debate.
The lady that will be fine.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
someone else's question before
in the committee and I said if
grandma comes all from a long
day at work sets it on the
counter.
Turned around she's now a felon
the answer that I got when she
grandma is now a felon that's
all I want to know if that child
takes a gun does something
horrific and harms another
children and stops live is
Graham up balance because she
turned around and didn't have it
within close proximity because
of this in the C. pack you guys
said yes before Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I go back
to the specific application of
house bill nine.
If grandma has
been grandma's responsibility is
to keep it safely store if there
are children in the house
responsibility is to make sure
that that fire on is not.
Captain a manner in which you
can access by the individuals
specific question is grandma
guilty of a felony I cannot
answer that question again it's
going to be looking at that's
going to be looking at the facts
that are presented if indeed a
prosecution is may what those
facts so and then it's up to a
judge and a jury to determine
whether not Graham is going to
be guilty of a felony.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady great answer to that she
could be charged with a felony
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker some lady I don't
know the answer to that without
looking at the totality of the
circumstances looking at the
evidence that the DA will be
looking at that the Attorney
General of the prosecuting
officer who has the sole
responsibility of moving forward
with prosecutions in a criminal
matter.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
guys are very quick to answer
less I'm gonna pass C. pack
before is she going to be rest
for felony yes you said anything
that she does is negligent even
by accident so let's clarify
that Mr speaker gentle lady so
if anything happens on accident
if you accidentally leave that
on a counter accidentally leave
it in your nightstand to get up
your survivor to mixology leave
it on the nightstand you get up
and go to the bathroom and that
child does something horrific
with it you'd said before that
even if it was an accident they
will be charged with a felony is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
not correct.
Internally so that mean when I
ask a question C. packed that
that was not the right answer
that when you said yes she would
be found I said Bob Graham is
gonna be a felon that that was a
lie and this is true please
explain to me Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady.
Whatever scenario you presented
and then of the committee I did
not know that is the exact
scenario the two percent now
what I do know Mr speaker and
gentle lady is that if there is
a child in the home are visits a
home and you as the fire on a
not securely store your file on
your not near it.
To be and the possibility if
indeed a child access is the gun
and then causes great bodily
harm or death of someone you may
be charged with a felony whether
or not you are is up to the
prosecuting officer.
D. A. the Attorney General or
other a prosecuting officials to
determine whether or not the
prosecution is going to rise to
the level of a fourth degree
felony.
Thank you Mr speaker gently that
was answers a where they may be
charged so they could very well
be charged so now we're going to
take our survivors of domestic
violence who have left an
abusive situation how may be
arrested probably will based on
the bigness of this and now
they're looking at eighteen
months in prison I cannot
imagine what that would feel
like for a woman.
Who knows that her husband
started picking on then I
apologize.
What I'm trying to go leave real
life scenarios where this woman
is now doing eighteen months in
prison.
Eighteen months for survivors of
domestic violence eighteen
months for our grandparents.
Eighteen months for our family
and friends in New Mexicans who
made a mistake would understand
what this meant with the closing
of the close proximity but with
the new definition of a meaty
control.
How many people are how many
people.
Mr speaker and madam chair when
I go out and I talk to people
about the bills were passed most
people don't have a big
understand like we do we have
all this time to dissect these
bills.
Our constituents are voters
which by the way I don't know if
you know this we're very high in
gun ownership Mr speaker and.
Gentle lady there's like a
million people that have guns in
the state and then the last
debate or at a ton of Democrats
from the north came that are
very upset about the
infringement of the rights.
So how can you explain to me how
would a normal citizen
understand how would they
understand.
This definition of immediate
control how would they know that
they are in violation of doing
eighteen months in prison Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady once this
legislation becomes law.
It is important that we use as a
legislator make sure that we
explained it to our constituents
that it's their responsibility
to keep a fire arm safely stored
if children are in the home or
visit the home so that owned a
firearm Mr speaker gentle lady
it is absolutely important that
you recognize the responsibility
that you have undertaken so no
matter what scenario you present
and no matter what what
description that to give to an
individual responsibility is to
store the fire arms safely.
Securely when they are done with
their children in the home with
children visit the home so that
the child cannot access fire on
and could not cause great bodily
harm or death to themselves or
to another person.
Mr speaker and gentle lady again
there's the vagueness in this I
would even know how to go home
and explain them to exact
definition of this and again at
eight our most vulnerable people
and I worry about the economic
diversity of who this is going
to affect because this pipeline
to prison for grandma she's
going eighteen months are
survivors of domestic violence
going to eighteen months in
prison if they're found guilty
even if it was an accident even
if they put the gun down for a
second even if they were scared
for their life and try to do the
best thing for their family
because I know this person is
going to come and kill them and
it's next to the nightstand and
Mr speaker gentle lady there
revert to my all over again
that's not what I want and I
understand what you're trying to
get it however in other states
what they're doing and I would
cosign with you in a second on
this bill I would co so with
anybody on this bill Mr speaker
gentle lady.
What they're doing in other
states as are offering a three
hundred fifty dollar tax rebate
if you go and buy a safe I think
that's a great idea that is such
a good idea and we have all this
money flowing around from oil
and gas thank you only gas with
all this money floating around
that we could have said you know
what if your parents and you
have children we're going to
offer every resource to you to
teach you how to safely secure
for your weapon instead of
making this more big government
issue and putting people in
prison.
So it's very disappointing that
we're looking at a very vague
written bill that is going to
affect our most vulnerable.
And especially our LGBTQ
community that will also be
affected by this.
And it is a direct pipeline to
prison Bill of taking legal law
abiding citizens are going to
look at this and say this is
very vague or a woman or man who
thanks to their hard they're
doing the right thing to try to
protect themselves their family
and they're gonna be penalized
and then where their children
gonna go.
CYFD I mean that's not a great
option either for the children
so Mr speaker and gentle lady
this is all I have on this bill
at this time I again I think
this is a very vague with the
bill I think this is going to
turn a bunch of people in the
felons I think there's going to
make a situation where somebody
is mourning and crying our eyes
out because there's nobody in
this.
State that is going to say oh
I'm so excited in my childhood
that they're gonna be grieving
the our gonna be wrenching
they're gonna have to come a
thirty forty fifty thousand
dollars in legal fees possibly
Sliq at eighteen months in
prison away from the children
we're taking a heartbreaking
situation and make it even more
heartbreaking.
Some I'm not yet almost.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I cannot support this I will
draft a bill I'm an addiction I
want to Georgia Mr speaker and
gentle lady ninety percent tax
credit if you go and buy a safe
whole and bored with that that
does not affect their net
economic diversity that doesn't
affect people in different
socio economic statuses as a
matter of fact that does the
opposite was this bill is going
to affect our poorest of the
poor.
Because they're going to have to
go out get attorneys to prove
themselves that they did not do
this and keep themselves from
doing eighteen months in prison
therefore can't vote for this
pipeline for the bill thank you
Mr speaker thank you to leave
there is for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
They before you go excuse me the
lady if you would kindly
introduce here or witnesses on
the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker and I am
happy to introduce my witnesses
on the floor I have with me
Daymon Martinez is a former US
attorney for the state of New
Mexico Mr Martinez would you
please stand.
I also have with me from the
Albuquerque police department I
have commander.
Thank language.
Thank you lady.
One
I also have one additional.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
This gentleman I do yield thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady Mr speaker I I I would like
a little help understand the
dynamics of this bill have this
proposed statute.
If I'm single.
I have no children.
I leave a gun on the side stand
by my bed is that a violation of
the statute.
Mr speaker.
A gentleman if I understand your
question you are asking if you
are single and leave your leave
your phone on the nightstand are
you guilty of this in this under
house bill nine and I understood
it correctly Mr speaker
generally from Bernalillo
provide single I have no
children I leave a hand gun on
my nightstand next to my bed and
my guilty of the statute so
Mister speaker and gentleman.
House bill nine states that if
you have a firearm and you don't
stored safely in you are in a
home or other area where a child
visits are has that comes to
your home on a regular basis are
you have a very good where child
could access it if there is no
child in your house you would
not be guilty of house bill
nine.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so if I'm single have
no children have a leave a hand
on my night stand is that a by
violation of the statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
answer is no.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo if I have to have
minor children in my home.
I leave a hand gun on the
nightstand but my children never
touches that handgun my have I
violated the statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman under
the provisions of house bill
nine it's important to
understand two things must three
things must happen one you
negligently stored number two a
child must access ID and number
three something must happen that
someone is it's severely injured
or dies they made Brandis said
in a manner which causes mayhem
in an area where where there is
no death of great bodily injury
so no police officer of the law
enforcement officer is going to
come into your house and see how
are you storing your house how
are you storing your farm none
of those items happen number one
Todd did not access it and
nothing happened with respect to
that access.
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo so by have minor
children my home I leave a
handgun on the night stand but
my child never touches the
handgun have I violated the
statute Mr speaker and gentleman
again there are three things
that have to happen and no
matter how would you phrase the
scenario these three things must
happen number one it the farm
has to be stored in a negative
manner number two the tile has
to access that and number three
the child has to do something
with the gun that causes of the
violations to occur that are
listed in house bill nine Mr
speaker gently from Bernalillo
so the child never touches the
gone have I violated the statute
Mr speaker.
A gentleman the answer is if the
child has not access the gun and
has not done anything with
respect to the gun been there is
no reason to charge you.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so I am have not
violate the statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman again
they have to be three things
that have to happen the.
has been negligently stored a
child has to access it and then
if the child access is that
something has to happen the
death.
Great bodily harm or some other
item that causes great mayhem if
those things did not answer did
not happen the matter how you
raised the scenario there will
be no charge unless the
provisions and items listed in
house bill nine are carried out
Mr speaker I some of the people
of New Mexico just need a
straight answer we're trying to
understand the dynamics of the
bill if my child never touches
the gun is that's a violation of
the statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
answer to the scenario that you
have described is no.
Mr speaker gentle lady the so
the the act in of itself of
leaving a fireman secured is not
a violation of the statute.
Mr speaker gentleman again the
elements of house bill nine are
specifically and clearly listed
those items would have to be of
would have to be would have to
occur in order for of the
violations of the of the house
bill nine to be a late state to
be carried out.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so the act of leaving
hand going on secured even when
have minor children in of itself
is not a violation of the
statute.
Mr speaker gentleman did
anything happen with respect to
the fire did a child access to
cause great bodily harm a
difficult step of somebody.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so at the fact that
for not willing to to answer
what I think is a pretty direct
question I think highlights what
we're trying to do here so
Mister speaker gentle lady are
giving other another
opportunity.
The act in and of itself of
leaving a handgun on the
nightstand that in itself is not
a violation of the statute.
Speaker and gentleman.
Again the trial access the guy
did a child cause great bodily
harm or injury or did something
else with respect to the gun.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
elements of house bill nine
specifically and clearly
specified within the legislation
and so to create a scenario
those that does not indicate
that those elements have carried
out have been carried out would
not cause prosecution or any
other type of
Liability or damages under house
bill nine Mr speaker gentle lady
this this bill creates a new
felony correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman house
bill nine does indicate that a
fourth degree felony can be
charged against the person who
did not keep their firearms
stored safely and a child access
the fire arm and cause great
bodily harm or death to
themselves or to someone else Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so it sounds like
this is creating a new felony.
Mr speaker gentleman's house
bill nine does have a felony
component a fourth degree felony
component.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generated from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker the fact that we're
creating a new felony that's why
I think we need New Mexicans
understand what this bill does
what this bill doesn't so Mister
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo again does the act of
leaving a fire arm.
On a bedside table in of itself
a violation of the statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman again
my statement is emphasize the
elements of house bill nine
specifically delineated within
the house bill itself and within
that house bill it says that if
the firearm is negligently
stored Amanda the child access
to this and causes great bodily
injury or death to themselves hi
to another been there could be a
chart of those elements have not
been met Mr speaker and
gentleman that would be a
violation of house bill nine.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo it's a it's a little
puzzling that we're not at least
willing to admit that.
You don't have to store fire.
The statute doesn't require
that.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
this house bill nine requires
safe storage the if a child
could access it.
And if they to access it if they
cause great bodily injury or
death some of the elements that
must be present Mr speaker
gentleman in order for a
violation of house bill nine to
occur Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo I'm sorry did you
just say that this this bill
requires you to stored if a
minor could access to.
Mr speaker and gentleman I did
say to you that this bill
requires for an individual.
Has a file on that to store the
firearm safely so that a child
could not access it if you know
that a child the needs of your
home our visits your home you do
not want to tell taxes this file
we have had sixty eight children
to die from firearm deaths
because they were able to access
the gun that was not safely
stored and we want our children
to grow up to have wonderful
lives and to have an exceptional
future.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo just feel like we're
really just dancing around what
we really want to do here which
I would submit is we want people
who have minor children home to
lock up their guns and I think
that's a that's a fair
discussion I think that we
should have whether we should
make that a requirement or not
because that's really what we're
talking about with this bill and
Mr speaker we were starting
around it when I asked do I have
to keep my guns stored or not if
I have a minor child in the home
we don't want to answer that
question but that's really what
we're trying to target here and
Mr speaker or trying to do and
the back door way were for
making it contingent upon the
minor getting a hold of the gun
and then either brandishing it
are causing damage Mr speaker
but what I would submit as of
the discussion that should be
happening in what I think this
gonna this bill is really trying
to do is we won't don't want
parents of minor children at
home.
To have firearms that are locked
up.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
first scenario that you
presented said if I am in the
home and I laid my fire arm on
the table am I guilty of house
bill nine and I say to you know
you are not if the child does
not access the gun does not
cause great bodily harm or
injury to anyone if you are Mr
speaker and gentleman if you
have children in your home your
responsibility is to keep it
stored safely you are not near
your file or if you want to wear
your firearm and always have
admitted you and utilize it in
that manner you can do that if
you know that children are in
the home and can access it and
cause harm to themselves or
others it is our responsibility
to keep it stored safely and
away from one our children to be
of Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo I I I appreciate
those comments because I think
it it shows exactly what it is
that we're trying to do here.
If you have minor children home
you should have your gun
secured.
That's what this bill really is
about this issue that we're
trying to skirt around Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you speak to what
the men's right component of the
statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I the house bill nine is not
skirting around the issue that
if you have children in your
home the bill should be banned
firearms have been safely stored
so Mister speaker gentleman yes
if you have children in your
home it is clearly specified not
skirting around the to firearms
should be stored safely if you
are not if you are not close in
close proximity of those fire of
that firearm and that the child
could have could access it can
cause injury to themselves or to
another Mr speaker gentle lady
but that doesn't that's not what
the statute says now with the
bill says it says you're only
guilty of a crime if you don't
store safely and the child
access is a and either
brandishes it causes damage to
himself or herself or others Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you please speak
to the men's right component of
this bill so that means right Mr
speaker and gentleman is
negligent.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Negligence.
As you know is defined by
uniformed jury instructions.
Mr speaker generated can you
describe what that means when we
talk about negligence in the
criminal context.
Gentleman.
Negligence is defined in the
uniformed jury instructions that
you have a preference and that
is fourteen days one three
three.
Sign.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so the way that the
uniforms or instructions just of
the body understands what
happens in a criminal cases
there's a set of uniforms or
instructions that have been
adopted and these are these are
terms that apply basically in
all criminal context with the
jury trial for trying to explain
to the finder of fact.
What these these terms of our I
mean so Mister speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
The way that negligence is
defined attorneys this uniformed
jury instruction is that that
you mean the jury must find the
defendant acted with willful
disregard of the rights or
safety of the others in a manner
which endangered any personal
property Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo did I read that
correctly.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
have read the uniform jury
instructions fourteen this one
three three.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you explain to
the body what is the the rights
or safety of others that I'm
just regarding.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman if you leave your gun
around in a manner in which a
child could access it and that
tile uses that fire on to kill
them sales are to kill another
to disregard for the life of
that child your child may be
that of another person and their
life is what would be considered
as part of the jury instructions
under those circumstances if
those were the scenario
situations for the
to be considered in a court of
law Mr speaker gentle gentle
gentle lady from Bernalillo so
it seems like what you're saying
is it's the act of leaving the
firearm not securely stored.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
must be three aspects that must
happen.
Number one the farm was not
securely stored number two the
money I was able to access it
and number three they were able
to cause great bodily harm or
death are they would Brenda
submitted are causing some of
the mayhem ours scale really
scary situation to occur Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo but but the jury
instruction focuses in on on my
actions.
It says the defendant acted so
Mister speaker gentle and I'm
trying to get the bottom of this
so that New Mexicans understand
what it is that they're going to
be.
Prosecuted for so I'm talking
about my actions as a defendant
it seems like what I'm
understanding you say Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo is
it's the act of leaving the
firearm on secure.
A fire arm is led Mr speaker and
gentleman if the firearm is left
unsecured pandemic a child
accesses and a child causes
great bodily harm or injury to
themselves or another.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
your accidents are considered.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if I'm
understanding you correctly what
you're saying is that when the
year uniforms or instruction
talk about the defendant acted
it's not just the defendant
acted it's defended Act plus a
third party as well.
Mr speaker the gentleman.
The the terms of house bill nine
focuses on the owner of a
firearm and whether or not the
phone of the fire arms securely
stored it causing and causing or
of creating a situation where a
child could access the fire on
cause great bodily harm to
themselves or to another so
those elements still exist.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo what you're what
you're saying is that when we
talk about what this negligence
means that the judges both
instruct the jury negligence
essentially means the three
elements of the crime.
Mr speaker and gentleman that.
Is.
The gentleman.
In a case where House Bill none
was used to prostitution being
for the prosecution.
Regions is one of the items that
will be considered and that is
what is related to the jury it
will be up to the jury.
And if it's if the case is tried
solely to the judge to look at
the totality of the
circumstances and what causes
matter to be brought by the
prosecution official and whether
or not the person charged.
Determined to be guilty as
described within the house bill
nine Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo just just of the body
understands of what we're
talking about
What does it mean to violate the
statute well there's three
elements okay what does that
mean one of them is negligence
okay what what is negligence
meanwhile it's the three
elements.
Mr speaker gentle lady
understand the circle repeating
within ourselves with with Mr
speaker gently from Bernalillo
we're trying to get to the
bottom of what is negligence me
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo there's an objective
definition did you the objective
definition focus on the
defendant's actions Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you're now trying to bed within
the defendant's actions of three
elements of the very crime we're
trying to find the understand
what I'm saying not survive to
it very well but it seems very
circular to me.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that you are not hearing what I
am saying and so the three
elements that must happen number
one.
The phone number to you did not
secure it's to safely number
three of mine it was able to
access it from and actually
there for a number for the they
were able to use that farming
cause great bodily harm to
themselves or to another and the
question will be for you and
negligent in the way and what's
that most stored and the child
of mine and was able to access
the.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo and you hit it there
at the end and so how do you
understand if you're negligent.
Mr speaker of gentleman the
judge and the jury will let you
know that decide the verdict in
the case Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo that that to me
is a scary answer for a we're a
nation of laws and so we have a
jury instruction that defines
what negligence is it says the
defendant acted Mr speaker
gentle lady I would submit the
concept that you're introducing
flips that on its head as we're
no longer worried about what the
defendant did or didn't do were
worried about what a third party
did Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo let me let me ask the
question this way so typically
in of.
In.
Felony negligence cases.
There's this concept embedded
that there's an underlying
predicate offence.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo let's take an
involuntary treatments are using
a vehicle so the the predicate
offenses typically something
like careless driving reckless
driving Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo what is what is
the underlying predicate offense
to justify criminal negligence
of rising to the standard of a
felony.
Mr speaker gentleman the
underlying predicate offense is
the fact that the fire arm owner
kept it stored in a negligent
manner in which of which a child
of mine it was able to access
the fire or and then when they
have access to cause great
bodily harm to themselves hard
to another and perhaps they even
cause the death of themselves or
another.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo you just describe for
me what the for the offenses.
I'm asking what's the underlying
predicate offense to justify
criminal negligence rising to
level of felony not this offense
itself I know what this fences.
Senate.
There is no predicate offence to
describe Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo I I think the
body should take note of that.
The men's ray is not intense.
It's not
what we consider for most
typical felonies the men's radio
component is strictly criminal
negligence I were saying there's
no underlying predicate offence
and Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo I want to read
one of the sentences from from
the committee that that compiles
these uniformed jury
instructions I think this is
really important for the body to
understand and be aware of so
this is in the context of
defining what criminal
negligence is which is all that
this hinges upon this is what
the committee wrote is this is
so important committee that they
made sure to meet in the
committee committee it says.
When a crime is punishable as a
felony civil civil negligence
ordinarily is an inappropriate
predicate by which to define
such criminal conduct Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo
that's exactly what the statute
is attempting to do I can
understand maybe make it a
misdemeanor okay fine I I still
don't support that but when we
get to the level of felony now
you're inhibiting people civil
rights at a very very serious
level whether it's the right to
vote what's right to bear arms
those right to run for this very
body.
And the committee recognized
ulcers that is as well Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thanks above the probe the.
Arguments that you're making now
it sounds like you're trying to
make a distinction between
criminal and civil negligence.
Is is what's indicated an
articulated in the upper case Mr
speaker
and gentleman this case is
looking at criminal negligence.
Mister speaker July formerly I'm
sorry I wasn't clear I read
directly from the committee
committee set talks about
criminal negligence that's where
that came from just to be clear
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo is it possible for a
parent to have no criminal
intent.
The child to have no criminal
intent and yet the part B. for
found guilty of a felony.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman.
Under the terms of this statute.
One of the things that has to
occur is that you are the owner
you are available on our the
owner of the farm
had food from stored in a
negligent manner.
And once you can't use store
that imminent return matter the
focus on house bill nine is
whether in that it calls the
death of someone R. the death of
themselves is it a crime for
someone to die when they when
they were shot by the are some
of the files on.
So the answer would be well
house bill nine is set out some
elements that must be met and
there is no set of said there is
no separate set of elements that
must be satisfied before the
statute would keep before this
rule in statute would kick in
what would have to happen is the
district attorney our other
prosecuting officials will have
to make a determination whether
or not the elements of house
bill nine remit and with an
automatic and go forward with
the prosecution.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo so is that what we're
talking about permanent legend
says that some Andrea is it
possible for the parent of no
criminal intent.
The child of no criminal intent
and yet the current be found
guilty of a felony.
Mr speaker and gentleman looking
at the house bill nine the man's
right is negligence and so if
you are any of the person who's
the owner of the farm Stewart
did negligently and a child
access to and because the items
that I have iterated many times
during this conversation.
It is a crime.
Mister speaker July from earlier
so that I'm sorry is that a yes
or no.
I'm sorry Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman I didn't hear the
question would you please repeat
it Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo be happy to is that a
yes or no.
I'm sorry what is a yes or no Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so is it possible for
the parent to have no criminal
intent the child of no criminal
intent yet the parent be found
guilty of a felony.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
judge and the jury will make
that decision and that's what we
have a wonderful judicial system
to make that determination
within that it will happen.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so.
I leave my my state fund lost my
child axis is the state.
That's an accident typically
lock it up.
It's it's arguably criminal
negligence but it's an accident
there's no intent or criminal
intent on my part.
Child X. is the of the firearms
cares about it Mr speaker gently
from Bernalillo.
Discharges the fireman actually
shoots herself no criminal
intent it's an accident Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo the the shot causes
serious damage the child.
Am I guilty of a felony.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
No matter what we do.
The determination of whether or
not somebody is guilty or
innocent is in the hands of our
judicial system and that's why
we have a wonderful judicial
system a jury and a judge that
will make a determination
whether or not the facts that
are presented in any particular
case wallet I determination of
guilty or innocent.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo I'm a little
surprised that that word this
shy.
To share with the people of New
Mexico what the implications of
this bill are this is the point
of debate is to go through the
details of the bill so that we
New Mexicans understand what we
are and are not voting on so
Mister speaker generally I'm I'm
given another opportunity this
is not a tricky example I'm a
parent typically leave my state
flocked I accidentally left
unlocked one day.
My child access is the firearm.
Is curious discharges a firearm
happens or herself significantly
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo my guilty of a
felony.
This is
gentleman.
Under the circumstances the to
present.
It's less likely that you may be
charged under the statute Mr
speaker and gentleman it is up
to the prosecuting attorney
whoever's responsible for the
case to determine whether or
not.
There is going to be a
prosecution and that's what we
have a judicial system.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo I'm actually
surprised he said it's unlikely
that I'll be prosecuted so full
of the bill the person keeps our
stores a fireman a manner that
negligently disregards the
minors ability access farm if I
leave a safe unlock Mr speaker
gentle lady from early are you
suggesting that that's not
negligently disregarding Mr
speaker and gentleman that is
not what I'm saying you
presented this scenario did you
say you normally drive safe on a
regular basis that would be the
evidence presenting in the case
which is set on this one
incident simply forgot and that
would be something for the
judges to determine whether or
not that simply forgot was
enough to proceed with a
prosecution or not so I think
that I've been very clear to the
people of New Mexico who may be
listening to this conversation
about what this bill will do
and what their responsibility is
if they decide to be a firearm
owner that is their
responsibility to keep it safe
and stored in out of the reach
of children in mind.
Mister speaker July from earlier
can you point to language in
this bill where it talks about
my history of storing you're not
storing firearms.
I'm sorry where Mr speaker and
gentleman what I can point to
where sorry I didn't hear that
Mr speaker generated from
Bernalillo can you point to
language in the bill that allows
the jury to consider my press
past practices in storing or not
Citrix securely storing a farm
because the way that I read this
bill is it doesn't matter what
I've done the last thirty years
it only matters on the day in
question whenever the incident
takes place this.
Gentleman what will what does
matter is whether not the
prosecution is looking at the
totality of the circumstances
and whether or not they're going
to go forward with the
prosecution in the case that is
what is going to be considered
so house bill nine again these
are the elements of the of the
man's right and every other
aspect of this house bill and
whether or not they will be
whether or not they would commit
and going forward
so no matter what we do there is
still an element of gathering
the evidence and looking at the
totality of the circumstances
and I'll leave it into the hands
of our wonderful judicial system
whether or not that there will
be a prosecution of guilty or
not guilty.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo I would encourage the
body of encourage the people of
New Mexico just to take note
that this bill does in fact
create a felony even in the
absence of the pair having no
criminal intent in the child
having no criminal intent which
I submit is a new concept within
criminal law we've never done
this before creating a felony
for there's no criminal intent
on either the part of the actor
or third party Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo I want to
ask are you familiar with we
have a set of civil statutes
that actually allow people to
sue parents for a civil recovery
when their child has maliciously
or willfully injured a person Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo are you familiar with
that set of statutes.
Mr speaker I am Mr speaker and
gentleman I am aware that there
can be a civil case that results
as a result that sells because a
criminal matter did occur.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo the reason why I
bring that up because I think
there might be an alternative to
accomplish what you're trying to
accomplish without creating a
new fourth degree felony so
Mister speaker gentle lady there
there's a statutes thirty two a
dash to dash twenty seven thirty
on the books and what it does is
again if if you're a parent of a
child and you have a child who
commits.
An act maliciously or will fully
in the injure another person
then you are entitled to sue the
parents for relief but Mr
speaker generated from
Bernalillo its captive four
thousand dollars so Mister
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
What I would submit is maybe
maybe consider reviewing that
statute and something that we
update rather than creating a
brand new felony classification
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
I'll finish with this.
I think we said try to highlight
that this bill it's really not
about guns at the in the day.
and and not in in the sense that
this this is an behavior that we
shouldn't be concerned about I
think education is key when it
comes to gun owners
but what we are doing is are
introducing a new concept in
criminal jurisprudence.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I would submit that
is a very dangerous road that
were walking down we're creating
a felony classification that's
dependent upon the rights or the
actions of a third party.
And Mr speaker gentle lady that
that criminal culpability is
wholly dependent on the statute
upon the actions of a third
party I as a defendant can have
no criminal intent it's purely
negligence I think we should
talk about whether it should be
a misdemeanor not Mr speaker
gentle lady when we were we take
it to the level of a felony.
That I am now fell in based on
the actions of a third party I
think that's a dangerous
presents were sitting in New
Mexico and Mr speaker thank you
for the time thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Chavis current
Roosevelt Representative read.
Mr speaker of the gentle lady
from Bernalillo county yield
Mister speaker gentle lady I
yield.
gentlelady I I have a question
for you originally when you
presented this bill do you use
the term at recklessly versus
negligently commute explain why
you change that term this year.
Mr speaker gentle lady the term
negligence was more appropriate
for the purposes of this piece
of legislation Mr speaker gentle
lady could you please explain
what you mean by more
appropriate.
Mr speaker gentle lady I look at
the fact that we have a
uniformed jury instruction that
we've been talking about doing
this conversation today and that
uniformed jury instruction
specifically defines what is
negligent and Mr speaker gentle
lady what would happen if the if
such a case would go forward for
trial and for prosecution one of
the things that would happen
with the reading of that jury
instructions it's a based upon
the information and the research
looking at other state statutes
the best term to utilize in this
legislation was determined
projects Mr speaker gentle lady
could you describe whether you
believe negligent first
recklessly is negligent a lower
burden or higher burden.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady look at
uniform jury instructions one of
the things that happens is that
the jury instruction itself uses
the term it negligent and
reckless.
Mr speaker gentle lady here talk
about fourteen dash one thirty
three deviney negligence
recklessness Mr speaker gentle
lady yes that is correct Mr
speaker gentle lady in my
experience dealing with crimes
of this nature accidents
involving small children
they can also be analyzed under
thirty dash six dash one of Mr
speaker gentle lady isn't that
true.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do not
believe that is correct Mr
speaker gentle lady thirty to
success one is negligent child
abuse are you familiar with that
statute of Mr speaker and gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady I am
familiar with the staff to the
negligent child abuse has to do
with the child and that you
causing abuse to the tile itself
in this case under house bill
nine what we're looking at is
where the owner of the farm was
negligent and left file I'm I'm
securely stored so that they
cause the death or injury of
another person this is not the
abuse of the child in sales so
that statute would not does not
apply Mr speaker gentle lady but
in the actual jury instruction
for negligent child abuse
reckless disregard
it does say that you're placing
a child in a situation of the
state your child Mr speaker
gentle lady in a situation that
endangers or life or health and
the reckless disregard for the
safety of the child is shown and
you must find that the
defendant's conduct was more
than merely negligent and
careless rather you must provide
reading was fine that the
defendant the cost or permitted
a substantial and unjustifiable
risk of serious harm or state or
to the child a substantial and
unjustifiable risk is one that
any law abiding citizen or
person would recognize under
similar circumstances the and
out of concern for the safety of
the child.
And then Mr speaker at.
Lady at gentle lady and then it
says you are a parent guardian
or custodian of the child for
you accepted responsibility of
the child
and and my question Mr speaker
and gentle lady is this is a
statue the prosecutors have been
using to analyze whether these
types of crimes are placing a
child in the situation the
dangers lie for Health and my
question to Mr speaker gentle
lady is why are we repeating and
adding a statute that we already
have a statute on the books that
addresses this issue.
Mr speaker gentle lady house
bill nine gives a prosecutor
another tool for which they can
utilize when a child has caused
the injury or death of another
person I go back Mr speaker
gentle lady Farmington budget
how to be statute that to
reference it talks about the
injury to the child themselves
so Mister speaker gentle lady
perhaps it could be you as when
the child uses a gun to kill
themselves but we're looking at
other situations that have
occurred in the hardware for
example the little boy who was
shot I look at the four year old
who was shot by his two year old
because he was able to access
admin secured gun I look at the
little boy and and and in the
Roswell was shot because there
was a guy that was not secured
this gives the prosecution
another tool one that I do hope
will occur with respect to this
bill Mr speaker Mr speaker
madam.
gentle lady is that it will also
serve as a deterrent so that
people will know it is your
responsibility to keep your guns
stored safely we want our
children to be safe wanted to
grow up and have wonderful
amazing features and we have a
long and full life Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you for those
comments but I understand you're
saying you want to prosecutors
another tool I'm just not sure
they need another tool actually
you're making it a lower burden
in order to prosecute people and
and have them be felons Mr
speaker isn't that true
generally.
Mr speaker gentle lady what is
happening here is that.
House bill nine Indian is
referring to firearm owners to
make sure that you are storing
your firearm safely because Mr
speaker gentle lady.
I know that you would not want
your child order by another
child because they had access to
a phone that was not stored
safely said yes it is another
tool when the child has access
to respond on that was not
stored safely and cause injury
or death to another person Mr
speaker gentle lady
I examples myself and all I was
the prosecutor on the Clovis
carver library shooting and I
would like to discuss that with
you for second Mr speaker gentle
lady in that case you had
parents and you had a sixteen
year old child I guess a
teenager where there was no
indication that he had any
mental health issues or anything
like that the parents stored
their guns in a save a lot state
he actually had access to that
state because the parents wanted
him to be able to defend the
house itself defense and to make
sure everyone was safe if they
were not there and then of
course he got into that safe and
went out and and shut people in
the clothes cover library in in
that situation with the parents
be charged as a felony because
they locked their firearms up.
Speaker gentle lady this
legislation house bill nine
specifically say is that if you
had your firearms stored safely
in the tile had access to it and
still cause death are made him
are to themselves or another
thing you would not be a charge
that's one of the exceptions
that is specifically listed in
house bill nine so Mister
speaker gentle lady you're
saying he would the parents
would not be charged even though
they gave them a key.
Mr speaker gentle lady you are
you keep adding additional
evidence and facts that would
have to be determined by the
prosecutor and whether or not
those items which then would
make that negligent and then
that negligence would have to be
determined by a jury or a judge
in a court of law and Mr speaker
gentle lady so let's say in the
in the state were common law
state and we have guns in our
house I'm the wife of my
husband's husband and in my
house I don't really deal with
the firearms my husband deals
with the fire arms and where he
stores and locates them and if a
child were to get access to
these firearms and and something
were to happen in a in some ways
to be injured Mr speaker gentle
lady would I be charged as a
felon because I was in that
household with him.
Mr speaker gentle lady under the
terms of this house bill nine it
would be up to the prosecuting
attorney to determine who would
be charged again circumstances.
The prosecuting attorney would
look at the facts and
circumstances determine.
That would be charged under the
circumstances.
If you are not the owner of the
gun and wouldn't one of the
specific items within this staff
to within house bill nine it
says the owner of the farm.
Mr speaker and gentle lady but
it if it's a community property
state I am the owner of the
firearms.
Mr speaker gentle lady again it
will be up to the prosecutor
maybe the prosecutor would
charge both if you want to look
at the common law statue of
above.
Of
community property that would be
up to the to the the.
prosecuting attorney in that
case to determine whether or not
they will not go against both of
you one of you are none of the.
Mr speaker gentle lady so.
Bottom line is I I could be
charged.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
bottom line is is up to the
prosecuting attorney.
Okay and Mister speaker gentle
lady at the every thing and all
due respect seems the bottom
line is about the prosecuting
attorney on everywhere you and
and now sizes the bill and I'm
concerned that it it doesn't
define negligent
and we have now are at a lower
standard than we were previously
when you try to introduce a beer
bill with recklessness
Mr speaker
gentle lady are you can you
explain what you're what you're
really trying to address in this
bill parkway as far as who
you're trying to protect.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm
trying to protect our children
and I want to make sure that our
children live safe and healthy
lives with a very strong future
that is the purpose of this bill
keeping our children safe.
Mr speaker gentle lady so you're
wanting to protect children I'm
assuming with accidental
discharges and things of that
nature so this bill is not
addressed to controlling crime.
Mr speaker.
Generally the this bill is about
keeping children safe this is a
child access prevention statutes
and one of the things that we're
looking at is will how do we
keep children safe one of the
things that we do again I just
take a look at the case of the
Hargrove had children for minors
one had access to a gun and now
one is dead so we want to keep
our children safe so that they
don't have access to firearms
when they should not have them.
Mr speaker gentle lady when you
talk about prosecutorial
discretion and you're talking
about children and what is your
position or again is it the
prosecutor's discretion of a if
a parent has just lost her child
from an accidental shooting
should that be taken into
account their mental well being
as far as just losing their
child.
Mr speaker.
Generally the.
The details in terms of house
bill nine.
Specifically laid out but if you
kept your firearm negligently
stored and the tile had a tile
had access to that phone and the
death of great bodily harm this
charge to the minor themselves
are to somebody else.
Then it's up to the prosecutor
looking at the totality of the
circumstances within that they
will go forward with
prosecution.
And Mr speaker gentle lady and I
appreciate your your answers all
those questions of my problem I
still have with this bill is
that what I do believe we have a
statute on the books that
addresses addresses this very
instance there's lots of
undefined definitions in this
bill this lowering the standard
to negligent and and a lot of
the comments made by leader lane
are concerning to me I just
think this is a bill that is so
one clear and as a prosecutor
the previous prosecutor would
have a very hard time trying to
decide how to charge this so
thank you and at this point I
yield.
Thank you lady lady from Dona
Ana reserve good.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Speaker gentle lady I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Survivors of domestic violence.
Us parents.
Just people that live with
mental illness.
As people.
That raise little ones that
struggle to find themselves safe
in this world.
People who show up as social
justice advocates.
believing criminal legal reform.
Us people that are very hesitant
to create new felonies a new
criminal charges and
convictions.
Each of us elected to serve in
this body.
Kerry so many identities.
Kerry so many perspectives as we
show up to take these monumental
votes Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I'm hoping that sometime today I
get to meet up with my little
ones.
As they live their best lives.
As they find room in this world.
To step into different
situations with safety and
confidence and security.
Mr speaker gentle lady but when
I heard we're debating this bill
today.
I did everything I could.
To re route my schedule.
And be here for this debate.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
may.
The making some assumptions but
I think on our side of the aisle
and on this end of the chamber I
may be one of the few.
Democrats in the caucus that is
a firearm owner and also has
children that I'm raising at
home.
Mr speaker gentle lady that also
means that I have young people
that are not my own in and out
of my home on the regular.
Whether they're there for a
homework assignment that's due
at midnight or spending a night
with us with their parents
consent of course.
Young people are in and out of
my life.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Like many in the body I received
so many emails about this bill.
And as usual I was disappointed
to see a lot of.
Inaccurate understandings and
misinformation about what H. B.
line is an of what H. B. line
isn't.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I receive some personal emails
from people I represent people I
know.
People that are parents.
The other teenagers in the lives
of my kids.
And over the last couple of
weeks I had room to speak with
my kids about this bill.
In part Mr speaker and gentle
lady because I was frustrated
because I was emotional because
I was scared.
And as it happens seems like the
session just like all of my
others.
Being a parent and the
conversations I have with my
kids.
Is in these debates.
In many ways it's because those
kids are my center there my
grounding that my purpose.
But there clarity and courage
and guides me everyday.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
got this particular email from a
family that we know well.
A family that's been very
consistent in their opinions
about who I am and the votes
I've taken as an elected
official New Mexico.
And this time my girls said.
But what do you mean mama what
is this bill do that everybody
so mad about.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I actually appreciated the
points that are the minority
leader maybe at the beginning of
his comments and I thought to
myself those are the same points
I'm sitting with Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Because Mr speaker gentle lady.
This bill is not criminalizing.
A single mama domestic violence
violence survivor this doing
everything she can to make it
through another night another
week another year keeping
herself a little unsafe.
The speaker is not Mr speaker
gentle lady this bill.
Is not criminalizing.
Someone that's put their due
diligence to safely storing
their firearms.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
As you've heard and many in the
body of heard I routinely have
concerns about over policing in
the communities I called home I
continue to raise concerns about
the impact of over policing as
it lands on black people and
indigenous people and other
people of color so Mister
speaker gentle lady.
I thought this bill somehow gave
police or law enforcement or
others the right to come in our
homes and verify where we kept
our firearms whether that was on
the night standard under the bed
or in a very expensive firearm I
don't imagine I could support
this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady to
confirm nothing in house bill
nine.
Means that on any given day.
A law enforcement officer could
show up in my home or the home
of the New Mexicans to verify
safe storage of any firearm that
we rightfully and legally owned
such shares Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady that
is correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady then it's
my read.
That New Mexicans the own
firearms these responsible
firearm owners that I know and
love.
Can actually do is they damn
well please with their firearms.
And all that they are risking.
Is that one day a young person
that has found their way to
access that firearm or one of
many firearms.
Might accidentally or
intentionally.
Alright themselves or someone
else.
What might intentionally take
that firearm to brandish or
threaten someone else.
Mr speaker gentle lady only
then.
With that person who could do as
they please with their firearm
taking on the risk of facing a
misdemeanor or felony fourth
fourth degree felony criminal
charge correct Mr speaker gentle
lady you are correct.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
I've appreciated learning and
listening to this extensive
debate we've had today.
Including examples by colleagues
I respect on the floor.
Talking about how.
Their kids knew not to touch the
firearm.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
makes me really nervous.
Every day I say to my girls be
safe be smart.
And every day in this world I
hope they have room to make
those decisions that keep them
safe.
And are in line with the values
that we've tried to raise them
with with every single second of
every single day.
Mr speaker gentle lady I worry
about the days that something's
a little bit off.
I worry about the days that
someone has faced discrimination
or bowling I worry about the
days that someone doesn't know
their value or worth or doesn't
hold deeply that they are sacred
I worry about those days Mr
speaker.
And gentle lady.
This body is heard me speak to I
am a survivor of intimate
partner violence and I'm someone
that lives with mental illness
and PTSD.
And someone that's had to
discuss it greatly that my
incredible counselor the
difference between being
suicidal and moving through
suicidal ideations.
Mr speaker gentle lady when I
think of our responsibility as
policy makers.
I hope that we have the courage
to hold close.
What it means to respect the
constitutional amendments of New
Mexico the constitutional
rights.
And also to propose amendments
including the second amendments
that so many New Mexicans and
Americans hold dearly.
But I hope that we also have
room Mr speaker and gentle lady.
To think about the implications
of our votes.
And what it means to live up to
those policy expectations
including the family Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Named in house bill nine.
On this floor we often seem to
be fighting to see who can.
Better representative for stand
up for the victims of violent
crime.
Mr speaker and gentle lady often
makes me so angry.
That these issues have become so
political.
Mr speaker gentle lady you and I
have all seen on social media
earned media in the
conversations we have after
every seemingly routine
situation of mass violence.
And people are starting to say
prayers are not enough.
And so when I think of this bill
in front of us Mr speaker gentle
lady that does indeed create new
criminal penalties.
I think about that calling.
There were all sorts of victims
in the situation.
The unfortunately had to become
the impetus for your bill Mr
speaker gentle lady.
And with those families have
charged you and asked us to
consider.
Is that we walk into the
complexities.
That we take on the hard
questions.
And that we ask New Mexicans who
I trust.
So many of whom to be
responsible farmers owners every
day.
To help shoulder that
responsibility differently.
To step into that responsibility
with the different levels.
Of affirmation.
And awareness.
That so much of our lives is out
of control.
Whether the young people we
raise whether it's the young
people that stop in for an after
school snack.
That our responsibilities
firearm owners can also be those
conversations about safe
storage.
And those conversations but also
on the other side of that are
checking in with those young
people in honest ways in clear
ways in checking in and making
sure that if they're having a
day where something's a little
off or they had a day where they
heard a threat that they also
have trusted adults to turn to.
As a means of navigating those
immense situations.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
I'm grateful for your
leadership.
I'm taking on such an immense
issue.
I'm grateful to this body.
That we have the capacity to be
in this conversations with such
clarity and such learning.
And I'm grateful to my
daughter's.
Because they ask and expect me
as an elected member in this
body.
To show up and do it it's common
sense.
To do what's right to do it New
Mexicans deserve.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Thank you lady there's been a
request for members to remove
their coats and jackets the
chair will.
A knowledge that improve that.
There is for the debate
generated for Leo Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
field.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
I want to echo some of my
colleague just spoke about
and as the parent of two young
children I do believe that this
legislation that you're
introducing will help to keep
our children safe it will reduce
the number of suicides by gun
and unintentional shootings that
occur among our youth I also
respect the rights of my fellow
New Mexicans and responsible
responsible gun owners
Mr speaker and gentle lady I've
heard from many of my
constituents about this bill
constituents who are parents
grandparents gun owners
and even firearm safety
instructors and there are a lot
of different perspectives on
this piece of legislation.
However Mr speaker and gentle
lady I do think that there is a
common value that is shared that
we do want to keep our children
safe
there are some differences
though in how my constituents
believe we can accomplish that
some of my constituents would
like to see more of an emphasis
on education and perhaps
some incentives or rebates for a
gun safe storage for for
firearms owners to take a gun
safety courses.
But
regardless of all of the
different opinions among my
constituents I also have the
opportunity to look at some of
the research around various done
proposals and so what I would
like to reiterate Mr speaker and
gentle lady is that child access
prevention laws are one area
where we do have significant
research and data that shows the
positive impact that child
access prevention laws can have
them specifically studies show
that between seventy and ninety
percent of guns used in youth
suicides unintentional shootings
among children in school
shootings perpetrated by
shooters under the age of
eighteen are required from the
home for the homes of relatives
or friends.
Mr speaker gentle lady another
to study which I think many
people have read and have seen
it in some of the analyses about
this bill.
Highs from the rand a meta
analysis and Mr speaker and
gentle lady I would actually
like to share some of those
findings quickly.
The rand studies as of what we
provide supportive evidence our
highest evidence rating that
child access prevention laws for
safe storage laws reduce self
inflicted fatal or nonfatal
firearm injuries injuries
including unintentional and
intentional self injuries among
youth.
There is also supportive
evidence that these laws reduce
suicide among young people
supportive evidence that such
laws reduce firearm homicides
among young people and moderate
evidence that they reduce
firearm suicides for this group.
There is also supportive
evidence that child access
prevention laws reduce
unintentional firearm injuries
and deaths among children and
limited evidence that they
reduce unintentional firearm
injuries among adults so Mister
speaker and gentle lady I think
that there is conclusive
evidence.
That child access prevention
laws are important into
consectetur and reducing.
unintentional and suicide by gun
deaths among our youth.
Mr speaker and gentle lady based
on the feedback that I did
receive from many of my
constituents and from reading
the analyses I would like to
offer an amendment.
To house bill nine as amended to
lady
let's wait for the amendments we
passed out.
The best out generally the would
you please read the two to four
number on the bottom.
Thank you Mr speaker the two to
four number is point two two
four nine one five point two.
Hey we've all got internally to
be a favor please move the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker I move
house floor amendment number two
to house bill nine as amended.
Is that first of all
Gently explained the amendment
to the we'll go back to sponsor.
Thank you Mr speaker in this
amendment does two things first
it clarifies that discharging
the firearm is also included so
it's specifies brandishing in a
threatening manner just charging
and
Created a injuring or.
Great bodily harm.
And then second it adds several
exceptions to the language that
include target shooting organize
competitions and legal hunting
activities.
Gently.
From Bernalillo Representative
Herndon is as a friendly
amendment.
Mr speaker.
A gentle lady.
After looking at the items that
you have provided is that
amendment to.
House bill nine.
This is a friendly amendment I
think it provides for the
clarity with respect to the
application of house bill nine
and I think the term lady for
helping to make sure that the
people of New Mexico to
understand this bill and that
the clarity is amplified.
Is there debate on the amendment
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Lee.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
Ginnelly from Bernalillo do you
yield.
Mr speaker yes I will Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
I appreciate what the attempt is
here.
I think the the target shooting
the organized competition.
Does make sense to me legal
hunting or trapping but Mr
speaker gentle lady I think this
actually makes the bill Wirth.
And let me explain why and
particularly for rural folks.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo what we're doing
here on the very first paragraph
on this proposed amendment on
page two line three after the
word manner.
For now inserting discharges a
firearm.
So now we've got three scenarios
that you're to this it's either
brandishing and threatening
manner.
It's discharging the firearm
point causing injury.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and here's the
scenario that I think why this
makes it worse if you have farm
kids you have ranch kids you
have a seventeen year old.
Mom and dad are out of out of.
Pocket.
You have a printer that comes on
site attacks livestock anything
like that.
This bill now would create a
crime.
For that child discharging a
firearm so Mister speaker
generated I I would submit that
this amendment actually makes it
worse for for rural New Mexico.
Are for the debate on the
amendment.
The gentle lady from Katrin
Seattle scoreless Representative
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker
with the gentle lady from
Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker yes I will yield
thank you Mr speaker
I think all of you know that I
represent the largest district
in the nation house district and
most of that is rural and
frontier New Mexico.
I think people probably heard me
but maybe not understood me on I
wish my grandson a Happy
Birthday.
And what he like to do on my
ranch.
I will repeat it.
But I think.
I would be in big trouble.
If this ammendment was
Thank adopted.
Of.
We live in rural New Mexico Mr
speaker and a lifestyle that
made many people don't
understand.
What I try to do.
Is educate people why I live
where I live and why I choose to
live there and so Mister speaker
kind lady I too would agree with
Representative from San Juan
that this would be a really bad
amendment thank you Mr speaker
thank you Julie for the debate
on the amendment the gentleman
from levy.
Excuse me John from Travis
sitting at the Representative
Townsend thank you Mr speaker of
the gentlelady yields.
Mr speaker yes yield.
The lady that.
It often becomes really this in
this body of the differences in
lifestyle between rural and
urban New Mexico and this is one
of those times.
There are.
There were there were many times
in my life going up and there
are many days in the life of my
kin folk.
When.
They put a saddle on.
And stick a gun in this gabber.
And go to work.
Part of our life.
Coming their protecting animals
are protecting their
livelihoods.
And this.
Quite frankly is not going to
stop.
It's a way of life it's a
heritage that I spoke of during
Asian days the other day and
said that every heritage in New
Mexico had to be respected and
it was cherished in New Mexico.
And this would prevent that way
of life.
Well it wouldn't prevented it
would criminalize.
And that is what I think is
just.
very troubling about trip
amendment it's not what you're
trying to do I understand what
you're trying to to.
The lady every day.
All over New Mexico.
Young men and women.
Between fourteen and seventeen
years old get the farm pick up.
A ranch pick up.
It's got a two twenty three ran
tribal stuff in the in the in
the in the in the state.
And they go to work.
And we have to understand that
respect that the lady of grandma
criminalizing that I just I
can't support thank you very
much the gentleman from Santa Fe
and Santa is out of the chamber
the gentleman from.
Chavis Representative Nibert to.
You Mr speaker does the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
yield
thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Like to rise to express concern
about the amendment because if
you look at.
The first portion of your
amendment.
He basically created crime.
If the person.
Allows a minor to get the
economic it's not stored
properly then we go to your
paragraph two on the top of page
two.
And the minor access is a farm.
This blazer brandishes a firearm
in a threatening manner comma.
Discharges a firearm.
For causes injured so there's a
crime created if a minor access
is a fire arm and simply this
discharges a firearm.
It's one of the elements here
and it says for so that very
active having the firearm in
discharging the.
Causes the.
Parents for the adults to be
culpable for the action of the
minor in that case Mr speaker
and gentle lady was Senator
into.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen my
intent was to address the
concern that was noted by the
New Mexico Attorney General
in it there and Alice's.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
it and and so the Attorney
General is advocating that the
more acquisition by the minor
and then discharging the weapon
should be come the crime.
Mr speaker and gentleman
specifically The New Mexico
Attorney General stated this
bill does not provide for a
felony charge of some minor
discharges that economic and
people or does not strike a
person with a projectile for of
the minor shoots a dwellings
animals that set track.
This is a misdemeanor section.
But it's a crime nonetheless for
the for a minor to access to
weapons and simply discharge
that economic.
Sorry Mr speaker gentleman was
there question at an.
Could you repeat the question.
Well the question is.
So this bill now provides with
your amendment.
The all is guilty of the
misdemeanor if a minor accesses
the farm.
Emily this charges the farm.
Is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think that that is correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
applied to would provide that a
correct reading of of your
amendment and for that reason.
I'm concerned about the the
breadth of it because prior to
your amendment.
To be at least charge with
The misdemeanor the minor would
not only have to have access to
it what they would have to
display for brandished a firearm
in a threatening manner for.
Cause injury.
Now the more picking up the
economic and discharging it
becomes another element so that
that's a concern and as a
gentleman from Eddie and Chavis
stated.
This bill.
Does highlight a lot of
differences between.
Those that live in a fairly of
urban environment knows that
we have in a very rural
environment.
And.
In many places in the state in
fact in.
Most areas of the state.
I would I would suggest to you
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
most.
Places where people go target
shooting.
Are at locations other than.
That which you described in
subsection six of your of your
bill.
because that requires the range.
To be authorized by the
governing body of the
jurisdiction so on a ranch.
You can simply go out behind the
house and start shooting ten
games.
The minor couldn't do that they
would be the parent would be a
violation of of allowing that
activity you to occur and I
would suggest to you that that
is the rule not the exception in
rural New Mexico so for those
reasons I have some serious
concerns about that follow us
question Mr speaker and gentle
lady is in the the subsection
eight on your amendment we go
hunting.
His legal hunting intended to.
Limit that to legal hunting of
game animals that are subject to
game and fish jurisdiction.
I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentleman could you repeat the
question portion of that
statement.
In subsection eight at the very
bottom of your.
Amendment.
It says for legal hunting.
For trapping activities but I'm
focused on the words legal
hunting my question is.
Was it your intent for legal
hunting to be illegal hunting
with the Lysons under game
animals subject to the
jurisdiction of the of game and
fish department.
Mr speaker gentleman would you
have a clarification that you're
suggesting.
Mr speaker and gentle lady now
I'm I'm trying to understand
what your intentions are with
respect to the words legal
hunting.
Mr speaker gentleman the intent
was to account for.
People that are legally hunting.
And so that will be with with
respect to game animals would
not.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
If that is the current for the.
Definition for legal hunting.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
don't know what the definition
is elsewhere I'm I'm wanting to
know what your intention is for
your amendment and the use of
those terms in the amendment so
if if it's just looking to
elsewhere in the statutes I
guess we can do that Mr speaker
and gentle lady thank you for
the developmental agenda from
Santa Fe and Santa Fe
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady this is generally
deal thank you Mr speaker will
yield.
Mr speaker Delhi of tremendous
in the the amendment the second
part of the amendment as it fits
into the bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady I see
generally.
Under on page two starting in
section C. of the list of things
that are not.
Criminal activities under the
bill.
In the.
And possible exception are
things we don't want to happen.
We don't want there to be
You illegal entry into a
person's property.
we don't want there to be access
to a firearm that was properly
blocked.
Senator in in in the speaker
gentle lady the six seven and
eight on your amendment.
Are are kind of things that we
don't mind if they happen
communities are things that.
We expect.
the speaker to levy is the the.
The members of the pointed out
we expect this especially in a
rural setting.
interest I'm just trying to
figure out how these two three
classes of activities fit
together because I don't.
Mr speaker gentle lady if if a
minor access to a gun the for
target shooting.
I I don't believe.
There would be criminal
liability I I it looked at the
less the Meyer also.
Center I'm trying to figure out
how the physical the the minor
hasn't brandished the weapon.
Or or even in the the more
severe cases cause great bodily
harm.
But I don't I don't think target
shooting.
Or competition or even hunting
would be covered.
By the law to begin with.
The speaker gentle lady can you
help me understand the.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman the intent was to
clarify that there are certain
activities that are.
Common and traditional in our
communities and so under those
circumstances
They might be exceptions.
The lady that I appreciate that
and I
Understand that's the intention
and appreciate the intention.
But if of minor access to
weapons for target shooting.
Whether or not this of the
strange.
Is there any is there potential
liability under the the bill as
written.
Mr speaker gentleman liabilities
for the
entity or the individual.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
rephrase my question is if the
if a minor access to fire arms.
For one of these purposes.
and did not.
Threaten anyone.
or cause great bodily injury
with the owner of the fire our.
have potentially created a
condition speaker committed a
crime.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
apologize but would you mind
repeating the question.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am
struggling to formulate the
questions although I'll do my
best
if a minor access to weapons.
For the purposes of target
shooting or a competition or
hunting.
With the owner of the economic.
Have committed the crime in the
speaker
Actually I think that I think
the answer is kind of like there
is there's previous discussion
about its owner economic have
the weapon on the nightstand and
the minor did access it or did
access it and didn't do any of
these things.
I don't believe there's a crime.
So I I believe it's the same
results speaker gentle lady can
you clarify that thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen I
think that you are bringing up
excellent points as have a
number of other colleagues here
that have spoken as well as
identified you know other
concerns so Mister speaker I
would like to withdraw this
amendment and continued to work
with the sponsor on potential
improvements fair enough.
Thank you lady issue of the
floor collection of the back.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
yield back to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo thank you we're
back on the bill.
Next to debate we have the delay
from Santa Fe Representative
said about the.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo Lee
yield I yield to the gentle lady
thank you Matt and Mr speaker
thank you madam for bringing
forward this bill I know it's
something that is very dear to
your heart because it's
something that when you first
came to the chamber on you
you've brought with such gusto
because you saw the pain and the
need in your community and I
remember that the disappointment
that I shared with you at the
time.
That
that I that they didn't go
through and and did you you
brought it back in you you talk
to different experts you really.
Major this was something the
representative the community and
all that time that this is
happening that you were work
shopping this we saw more and
more uses of firearms.
Amongst youth between use
I believe in in a new city with
that you representative ma'am N.
or the colleague and and I know
that's very difficult on you
know I was the other day I was
looking up to go to an event
where a lot of different groups
that help young people first
generation college goers in our
in our state
consider all their options we've
wonderful program now that we
don't have to pay for in state
college they were single here's
some other options to read a
paper anything Davis scholarship
and all these cool things and I
got a chance to talk to some of
the the independent schools and
in Albuquerque and other places
and.
Fortunately the conversation
wasn't just about these exciting
opportunities that our kids have
going to college picking their
careers figure out what what
talent and skills are going to
bring back home and to finalize
our communities our economies we
we were talking about and
morning and apologizing for the
deaths of students who went to
house parties or someone wasn't
allowed in the brandished a
weapon and they killed somebody
who had a bright future ahead of
them now at the moment that that
person was you know those people
were were caught and arrested
nobody you know that we didn't
know where the guns came from
and I don't imagine that will
still continue to be part of a
conversation but as we know as
my colleague mentioned earlier a
number of these shootings and of
coming from the homes of people
who love these students for
making a mother calling
mentioned rash decisions and
moments of fear or moments of
anger or adolescent moments.
And so for me.
We we had a lot of time we
weren't looking out wine or how
people were going to.
The room held responsible for on
for allowing access to the these
pieces I I know I represent
Santa Fe I probably
Representative just outside of
Santa Fe probably Representative
for number of families live and
I can tell you things have
shifted a lot from our
childhoods and I think we all
know that things are very
different now you know when I
was young I grew up in a rural
area and or who was out of the
callers we we drive out on
Friday nights of friends and we
go out we just hang out look at
the stars I just talk for for as
long as our parents let us be
out and their trucks and
whatever was good time and then
as I got older people undergoing
that you know you know doing the
same thing and and changing and
that's things are a lot
different now because now when
I'm raising my kids who are very
young children now and who will
grow up to be the does a lot of
our colleagues kids.
That's going to shift a lot on
because now I didn't I don't
have active shooter drills I
was in my mind and asked me if
my for my friends who hunted as
parents are members the on and
are a if they had guns we needed
guns was fine go ahead all the
time to matter but things are a
little different now with how.
Often.
I'm considering the homes that
my children as young as they
are.
Have weapons in those homes and
I'm considering the responsible
gun owners and that's a neat
thing I think where we live now
and today is that we do have a
lot of responsible gun owners in
our state who know that securing
a weapon
is really important and I really
did appreciate a lot of the
exemptions that the the lady for
that the my colleague from from
Bernalillo included in here that
ensures it's not just a specific
type of storage but that is also
looking at accessing and you
know if there's exceptions that
are there are very clear that it
is kept in the container
that if it was you know close
proximity if if it was a matter
of self defense there is
exemptions that actually apply
to the real lives of responsible
gun owners of the people that I
know that own guns for the most
part that I know of the ensure
that their of their weapons are
secured in that and that any
excess is very purposeful
there's not a question of old
the critics such department is
not a hot air on a hot hot hot
here iron you know it's very
different it's a weapon and and
and and they secure it as such
because kids don't always
understand that and so I
appreciate that I think
oftentimes and as we talked
about a little bit today is that
responsible gun owners are you
taking a lot of the steps
absolutely this is something
that is is is intrinsic to what
they do you know when my husband
I were first married we went to
visit one of his good friends on
the time use you saving up to
buy homes so he was living in a
trailer he had no kids we had no
kids we just got together as
friends I don't ever get because
you just cleared up all the guns
of the on his kitchen table was
fine there's no kids that one is
home he was a single guy he went
to visit his sister's kids they
don't come over to his house he
knew who was coming over that
night that was us this would not
apply to him because there were
no kids are going to access it
goes a weapon no kids were going
to hurt
utilize those and in a moment of
of of recklessness in a moment
of of of of negligence a moment
of something that that that the
work couldn't predict because we
know sometimes that can be the
state of children who access
guns he knew that.
And so he would not apply to
this that's very different today
is a parent with kids I would I
would ask you beforehand just
checking making sure guns are
secure because kids are curious
sometimes of the age my kids are
and that's the case.
And as curious as kids are
they're also super aware and my
kid alerted us she
She asked me all the time if she
safe yes we're not the bad guys
I don't talk about what I do at
home I don't think she's ready
for a lot of things we debate
here's very young.
But even though we don't let her
watch cartoons that you don't
have weapons and we were very
sure sensitive kid she asks me
what she can do to protect
herself if that guy should come
to our school and she asked me
what she can do the bad guys
come into our home.
And I you know we we don't own
guns with dog he warns us of
people come to our house he's
he's my right hand man when it
comes to everything of securing
our kid and I don't want to tell
her will your five and so what
you need to learn is how to
operate a gun and how to operate
and how to completely understand
with this this does because I
don't think she's ready for yet.
Unfortunately we have seen kids
as young as that access guns and
her other individuals with their
weapons so I I wanted to say I
appreciate the thought that went
into this so I I I did start
with the exemptions that Mike my
colleague included in here I
thought that was very useful I
appreciated a lot of the the
definitions here as well and and
I look forward to the you you
know any amendments that should
come forward to clarify some of
this language because when we're
defining the statute here and as
we all know as we define such we
don't to be too prescriptive
right we can't we we don't you
know what the did was talk about
the devil the details every
single have policies we present
forward so it's very difficult
to to bring those those forward
on to what I'm looking at this
bill I think it's a bill that's
made for the future of what our
kids are facing on and a lot of
the troubles in a lot of the
fears they have because I I want
to be able to always say don't
worry it's fine to my kid when
she goes to school that she
feels safe and I can say that
now because I've had
conversations with our
superintendent in my in my
district and I've had
conversations with the teachers
and the and the principal at my
daughter's school to make sure
they have proper protocol and I
know all these things in my
community members asked me about
it regularly because we are all
concerned that when our kids are
away from us that they're
surrounded by others that are
have their that are sent by
others and not a reply weapons
and so it's really important to
me that I think with this
does it really clarifies that.
It's not about responsible gun
owners in our communities who
are members are communities who
are friends all of us and we we
you know go hunting it's part of
the culture of our of our
communities it's not about when
you want to go hunting and and
and the STO that tradition on on
your children we should keep
that it's about ensuring that
our families are safe about
sharing that our kids feel safe
to learn and thrive and it's
about ensuring that we as
parents can do a my parents and
so yeah you can go you can go
their friends for a ride go
check out the Derry's just look
at the stars anybody's because
we haven't had that kind of
culture in a long time since
I've been raising kids and I I
would love to see that kind of
come back to sense of of safety
and and you know I I think what
I what I appreciate about this
bill is that well there's more
that we can do to ensure.
That we are encouraging our
children to have to understand
the power of fire arms.
It's not included in this bill
but I think that's a subtle
piece that's in here and I think
it's some of my colleagues on
the other side referred to is
that they know that their kids
would get a hold of guns because
their kids to the power that a
gun has and and and what that
responsibility comes with that
power and so you know that's not
set in this bill and I and I and
I want to receive on the topic
of your your bill but it does
get to is the idea that we want
to encourage our kids not to
fear their communities for
adults to take responsibility
for the actions of our kids and
what their their work they're
doing and and to ensure their
kids understand the power and
the responsibility that comes
with that so thank you gentle
lady for the bill I wanted to
say thank you for that I didn't
have one quick question if I may
I'm just curious because I I
went back to the exemptions how
you came to these exempt
exemptions.
Mr speaker gentle lady with
respect to the exemptions one of
the things that we did as have
several conversations with
people in both rural and urban
areas and how indeed there may
be a difference in the way in
which our youth may use guns in
rural and air and urban areas so
it wasn't important to so that
it was all encompassing with
this piece of legislation was
created so that's how bands
exemptions came about.
You Mr chairman of the Mr
speaker thank you calling for
that answer and that's what I
read when I order because I do
think that we have of incredibly
diverse state with
a really diverse state where we
just have so many different
communities and cultures and
historical
it importance in our state but
the truth is some of our
communities are suffering from
gun violence in a very real way
and I know people and adults a
lot of the school that I was
mentioning earlier that are
scared to let their kids go to a
house party now and house party
you know we think of that I
think of that is going to get a
five to six kids get together
you know hanging out eating
watching movies Mansingh I don't
know kids do just hanging out on
a good time and now we've seen
over and over again
unfortunately this is a plural
issue that people will go to
house parties and they get
larger and larger and larger and
and and anger gets the best of
them and they have access to a a
fire arm and that intensifies
the issue so incredibly quickly
so I think what you do so well
what I appreciate about this
bill what you said out loud is
that given exemptions for how
people responsibly use guns
you've given exemptions for help
our diverse communities are
shifting and changing and and
and and growing and and.
The cultures is thriving in
different ways you given those
exemptions to allow that to
happen but I do think the what
what you've also known as the
knowledge that I you know I I
may not live in the beautiful
city of Albuquerque but I do
know that you what is cool
what's happening there is
difficult for parents at times
and I do know that up here in
Santa Fe we see it every once in
awhile as well and so I think
that we are preparing ourselves
to ensure that when we talk
about firearms as a respected
responsible gun owner will and
as my colleagues on the other
side who own firearms do we take
it very seriously you absolute
people Americans New Mexicans of
our right to firearms but it's
important that we utilize these
firearms to for our cultural
practices for for for traditions
for for protection but that
we're not allowing our kids to
see them as a solution to their
daily problems and that
unfortunately is what we have
have seen time and again I
believe this bill addresses that
and and I returned to you rest
of it.
There's a lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please feel.
Mr speaker gentle lady I yield
thank you Mr speaker I would
respectfully ask that I'm gonna
stand but if I need to sit down
would you allow me to sit down.
Yes ma'am thank you.
So Mr speaker and and gentle
lady.
First and foremost.
I wanted to express my.
Alright felt condolences.
To the family Bennie Hargrove.
I ran into the grandmother and
the whole way.
And
I asked her to please stay
strong.
She was listening to these
deliberations.
For a long time.
Mr speaker.
She could not continue to listen
to the deliberations.
As a grandmother.
As a mother.
I fully understand.
She sounds.
And so I expressed
Mr speaker I expressed.
That in the name.
Of Bennie Hargrove.
In in defending and debating H.
B. line today.
That we invoke this bill.
Anne's bill.
In his name.
And in the name.
Mr speaker gentle lady of all
those innocent children.
Whose lives were taken.
Unintentionally or
intentionally.
Because of a responsible.
Use of guns are a responsible
gun safety.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
It pains me.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
stand here because as some of
you have heard.
I am the grandmother of two
grandsons and eight year old and
a six year old.
And they had to experience a
violent.
Drive by shooting.
Across the street.
From the elementary school that
they attend the.
While this children.
Four out on recess.
Is there had been a change of
direction.
If there had been.
Continued shooting from this
assault weapon.
Not for bed.
What would have happened.
On that school ground.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
came to find out.
That one of the children.
In one of the classes.
Was actually related actually
two of the children were related
to both.
The victim who was killed.
And unfortunately related.
To the shooter or shooters
because there were multiple
shooters.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
This happened.
About I would say two years ago
now.
Almost three.
That eight year old and that six
year old.
Actually was I am sorry miss and
this was last year.
still to this day Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Are traumatized.
They hesitate.
And even looking towards that
corner.
And even hesitate and wanting to
go out to the playground.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
bring this up because I also.
Many of you heard.
I'm also the daughter.
Of the three war combat veteran.
I grew up in a household.
That had guns and rifles.
And at the time.
My father had to store them.
In our home.
Any kept him locked up in a many
of you might be familiar foot
locker Mr speaker.
It not only had one law because
it had some sort of padlock on
it that.
Was really prominent gentle lady
Mr speaker.
We were taught in that household
not to be afraid.
Of the guns or the rifles we
were allowed to watch my father.
Safely.
Claim the weapons.
Sign them up do whatever he does
or whatever is done with the
economic and of his three
daughters Mr speaker and gentle
lady I was the only daughter
that had an interest in learning
self defense in learning how to
shoot.
And I was not afraid.
So he allowed me Mr speaker and
gentle lady to learn he taught
me.
And then he took me to.
Classes on base on the military
base where we were stationed so
that the classes would be
formalized not just by a family
member by a another
professional on trainer.
So I I raise these issues
because.
This was a military household
again three war combat veteran.
Purple Heart several times
prisoner of war.
Who understood the value.
Of not only training his
soldiers correctly about proper
gun safety but also about proper
storage in their homes with
especially with children in
their homes with children
because we we we made of the
children at the time we also
slides together because of the
military base and we all talked
about our experiences at home.
So.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
It's critically important.
For me.
To make sure.
That our constituents that our
families were listening to this
debate.
Understand.
That house bill nine Benny's
bill.
Is a responsible gun safety
measure.
Is my correct to articulate that
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
our public listening and
watching.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes it is
a gun safety ideal.
Thank you very much.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and I
realize that you've been
repeating that quite a bit
today.
But I think that given the
direction that the questioning
was going multiple times.
Just as you emphasized that over
and over again.
I think it's important for those
of us that stand in support of
this of Benny's Bill.
That we also articulated over
and over again.
Also Mr speaker gentle lady
would you agree that it house
bill nine Benny's bill.
Is a common sense measure that
will also hold.
Adults accountable.
When they're firearm is not
safely stored.
And then accidentally used by a
child.
Mr speaker gentle lady I agree
that this is a common sense
legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and Mr speaker and
Gentlelady there were some
system the statistics alluded to
earlier that I'd like.
Mention very quickly.
I stand as many of you know I do
a lot of research so I research
a lot of our bills I research
the language I compare it to
other states and I was appalled
to come across the statistics.
Mr speaker gentle lady an
estimated fifty four percent of
gun owners don't law all of
their guns securely.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Three hundred and fifty children
under the age of eighteen
unintentionally shoot themselves
or someone else.
Mr speaker gentle lady four
point six million children in
the United States live in a home
with at least one unlocked or
loaded firearm.
And the final one that was hit
close to home based on the story
I just accounted Mr speaker and
gentle lady is that eighty
percent.
In incidents of gunfire on
school grounds or up to eighty
percent of shooters under the
age of eighteen.
Not the gun.
From their homes or the homes of
friends or relatives.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
understand that you're aware of
all of the statistics and this
data and that is why Mr speaker
and gentle lady you've been so
dedicated so passionately.
A committed.
To the family of Benny Hargrove
and to all of.
The families that have lost
children.
And.
In the hopes Mr speaker and
gentle lady that with passage of
house bill nine Benny's bill we
might prevent.
Even one more loss of a child's
life or anyone's life due to.
Having unlocked access.
To a fire arm.
So Mister speaker and
And gentle lady one another.
Piece of data or statistics.
That really surprised me and hit
close to home was that what I
learned that actually the
culmination of the research I
was doing indicated that
firearms were the leading cause
of death among children and
teens.
Ages one.
To nineteen years in New Mexico.
And then I think someone
mentioned that sent in in twenty
twenty thirty four children and
teens lost their lives.
I think it's gone up higher now
and Mr speaker and gentle lady.
One might grant first grand
child was born.
Eight years ago I still had.
And was owner.
Of the firearms.
And the foot locker.
My father left behind when he
passed away.
When my father passed away Mr
speaker and gentle lady I asked
my sons his grandsons.
What they wanted me to do with
these personal items.
We kept them stored.
In the home.
Of my father.
Because Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
He left.
He left at home to us.
The immediate reaction of all of
us was we need to remove that
foot locker we need to remove
any and all firearms and rifles
and any animal anything that he
had associated with that foot
locker.
Precisely for the reason.
That we wanted to present.
An accident.
To occur.
Even though this grandchild was
just born we knew that sooner or
later that grand child and
hopefully others would be
roaming in this home.
And we wanted to make sure.
That any firearms rifles and
ammunition that we had in that
home.
Would not be accessible.
And I would not even be
accessible to us so that no
other accidents could occur or
no accidents that occur.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
This is
this is beyond common sense.
This is about responsibility as
family members as neighbors.
As church goers with our fellows
churchgoers as senior citizens
sitting an adult
Centers talking to each other.
As teachers as educators as
anyone anyone of us.
It is about being responsible.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
No one.
No one has mentioned.
Any violation.
Of the state of the constitution
in fact many of us have stood up
and said.
That we stand and honor our
constitutional rights.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
And when we do that we in
honoring the constitution and
the rights.
That my father fought so hard
and put his line is life on the
line and others.
Have died for.
Are revered.
Constitution.
Is really important to all of us
but Benny's bill and if I could
say eight house bill nine.
Actually further.
It gives us the responsibility
to uphold our constitutional
rights but more importantly to
uphold the constitutional rights
and protections afforded.
For those.
Innocent.
Children.
And others.
Whether intentionally or
unintentionally are caught in
the cross fires.
Of a firearm.
That.
Could have very easily Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Been stored safely.
It's as simple as that I don't
want to ever simplified the loss
of life.
Many Hargrove lost his life.
Doing the most honorable thing
that any human being can do Mr
speaker and gentle lady and that
is standing up and the defense
of someone else.
He stood up.
In the defense.
I'm another.
Child in that school.
He stood up in the hopes that he
would be able to prevent.
Violence from occurring Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
And he was caught.
And his life was taken.
For standing.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think it's time that this house
of representatives.
That this legislature stand up.
And stand strong.
In the name of many Hargrove.
And that we have the courage.
To respond to our constituents.
In the sense of our actions
today which I hope.
Is.
To pass.
House bill nine as amended.
Again in the name of Bennie
Hargrove this is Benny's bill
now.
And it is exactly.
In the name of.
All the children that we are.
Acting.
That we are protecting by
enacting this piece of
legislation.
Or adults that we're protecting
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Will general lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Will.
House bill nine Vinnie's Bill.
Also protected those
Mr speaker general counsel the
gentle lady yes it will.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
everyone.
Has a state.
Everyone lives matter.
In this piece of legislation.
Whether you're rural whether
you're urban whether you're what
whatever community you come from
every community.
In the state this state of New
Mexico.
Is subject to the protections.
Of house bill nine Benny's Bill.
We have nothing to fear but fear
itself.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
fear is our worst enemy.
I believe.
Mr speaker and gentle lady every
single one of us that have
spoken today have indicated that
were either.
Parents grandparents and even
those of us that said they were
single.
Everyone in this room.
Is related to somebody else
either because they're a
neighbor or family member.
We all.
Are related and we are all.
We all have a stake in this.
And it hurts me to no end Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
When I had to.
Given the biggest that ever
again depending high girls
grandmother in the hall hallway
because she had to listen.
To a lot of the.
The questions the hard line.
Misinterpretations of what house
bill nine.
Was intended to do.
It was breaking my heart I had
to leave Mr speaker and gentle
lady and take a break.
In the ladies room.
Because I was non stop crying.
Because I didn't know how to
console.
Vinny's grandmother.
I can only give her a hug.
And both of us did not want to
let go.
Because I know Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
That I don't know how.
I can only imagine but I do not
know where or how she has found.
The courage the strength.
To be in the committee.
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
you defended this bill she said
as long as she could.
Today.
She stayed with us as long as
she could.
All I could do was continued to
tell her.
That we have her back.
That we prayed for her.
I and hopefully all the
grandmothers in this room and
grandparents and parents.
And just all the human beings in
this room.
Would have the courage.
To talk to our constituents who
were.
Right now to us about violations
of constitutional rights or
fearing that their firearms
would be taken away or that
their homes would be invaded by
law enforcement Mr speaker or
any of the other things that
were described in the lines of
questioning.
That was not
what this is not what house
bill.
Nine Benny's bill is doing as
we've done as we've attempted to
clarify over and over and over.
And it's important Mr speaker.
And gentle lady to convey that
message.
To everyone listening.
To everyone watching to everyone
a company and us in the gallery.
And to every one of us.
Here today that are charged.
With doing what is responsible.
With doing.
What is.
Actually one of the best.
Bills that I've seen in many
years.
On gun safety and gun
prevention.
We do not want.
More tragedies to occur.
We do want to send our children
are get grand children off to
school every day not only with
our blessing.
But with our good words that
hopefully means something.
Do not be afraid.
Do not be afraid the school is a
safe space for you.
You will learn a lot.
You have a.
Long future ahead of you.
Just do your work focus on your
assignments mind your teachers.
Hey follow the rules and you'll
be safe but can we really say
that Mr speaker.
And gentle lady.
I think we have a long way to go
but this is the first most
important.
And.
Lee vital piece of legislation.
That will take us and be the
foundation.
For us to give that sense of
security and safety.
To everyone.
Of our children as they go to
school and to all of those
educators in the classrooms.
All of us as we go to church or
we go to a store we go pick up
our medicines or whatever
Aaron's we do.
To dispel.
Unnecessary.
Here.
Being the target.
Of yet another preventable.
Yes.
My firearm.
Or by any any means but most
importantly by firearms that are
a responsibility.
All and the responsibility.
Allow to be accessed openly.
In a home.
So Mister speaker.
And gentle lady.
I want to be able to have the
conversation I have regular
facetime calls every week.
With my grandsons.
And I think they're watching I
think there there father.
Was going to allow them.
To listen a little bit today
because I've been talking so
much about.
The gentle lady and her courage.
Mr speaker and the gentle lady
who also is my office mate.
They already know the gentle
lady by name and by face.
They already know that she's
championing.
A piece of legislation that's
meant to protect them and their.
Hello students their classmates
and all the children in those
schools and those.
Playgrounds.
They know.
They know you I hope you don't
mind Mr speaker gentle lady they
know you very well.
And I know that
he was going to allow them to
listen in.
Because they want to know.
The gentle lady.
That's committed.
And that's introducing Benny's
Bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady they
also know that they're very
familiar with Benny.
And the Kerr Rory is Rory.
And they even asked us.
If that happened to me.
What should I do.
What can I do and we had to go
through all the rules of the
school Mr speaker and.
Gentle lady because they had to
follow the rules of the school.
And then they said gentle lady
Mr speaker do we have to follow
the rules or can we just punch
him in the face.
And we had to have that
conversation about.
School's not for punching in the
face Mr speaker and gentle lady
that they still have to follow
the school rules if they were on
recess and then the.
A grounds or wherever they were
and they saw.
Something.
Or.
They saw something going on they
had to read let their teachers
or with whatever the rules
indicated we did not want them.
To know anything differently
they needed to follow the
school's rules.
So Mister speaker.
And gentle lady.
One day soon I hope.
You will be able to.
Meet.
My grandsons.
Hopefully in person and not on
facetime.
Mr speaker and gentle.
I implore.
Everyone in this chamber.
To take a moment.
Before you take that vote.
And I Mr speaker and gentle lady
I ask everyone that as you do
that.
That you invoke the name of
Bennie Hargrove and that when
you vote.
That you're voting for Benny's
bill.
Mr speaker.
And gentle lady I am honored.
I am beyond honored.
To stand with you today.
As a sponsor.
And I urge everyone.
In this chamber.
To vote for house bill nine as
amended in the name of Bennie
Hargrove thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady
deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker this matter having
been under consideration for
three hours I moved to close
debate.
It is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker it's important to
focus and to reiterate that in
New Mexico thirty three teens
and children die by guns every
year.
New Mexicans all too familiar
with the tried to do that and
since when children get a hold
of guns that on security.
In twenty twenty one thirteen
year old boy by the name of any
hard gold in Albuquerque was
killed by a classmate about his
parents gun to school.
In twenty twenty to a four year
old boy accidentally shot and
killed his two year old brother
with his father's gun.
Tragedies such as these could be
prevented by responsible gun
storage practices and policies
eight states and the district of
Columbia mandates owners secure
their firearms while another
fifteen have passed child access
prevention laws similar to New
Mexico's house bill nine.
Currently New Mexico has no laws
relating to child access
prevention.
New Mexicans widely support.
Allowing gun owners to securely
store that follow institute in
could not gain access to the
Albuquerque journal has done a
poll others have done a poll.
Only conducting conducted by the
every town in has confirmed that
more than sixty to sixty five
percent of New Mexicans
including sixty two percent of
gun owners support secure
storage child access prevention
laws work there is evidence that
they can reduce the number of
children killed or injured and
also substantially reduce child
gun suicides it's up to this
legislature to make sure that we
are doing everything that we
possibly can to keep our
children safe want to require
gun owners to to particularly
and responsibilities store their
firearms.
We urge every single person
I urge every single person to
pass this important legislation
and to keep our children and
families safer we can't wait for
another completely preventable
shooting by young person to have
a wake up call we need to take
action now by passing child
access prevention secure storage
legislation.
Mr speaker.
I close.
I move that move that house bill
nine do now as amended do now
pass we are on final passage of
house bill nine as amended.
The vote is now open.
What's about to close.
Representative level of thirty
seven in the affirmative thirty
two in the negative house bill
nine as amended has duly passed
this house the lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
This is the right to go to that
order of Business messages to no
objection it is so ordered
trade.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the Senate
has passed the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six with emergency clause
Senate bill seventy one as
amended with emergency clause
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty one as amended Senate
bill three sixty four as amended
with emergency clause and
requests the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
sure it's even on Senate chief
clerk Mr bian
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute to Senate
bill one.
Senate conservation committee
substitute to Senate bill twenty
one as amended with emergency
clause Senate bill twenty nine
in requests the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherrie dean on Senate chief
clerk message will be entered.
Committee members of chasing.
Mister speaker you've got about
to business committee reports to
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee too is been referred
house bill one twenty six has
had it under consideration point
in with recommendation letter to
pass respects respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
the speaker move adoption of the
committee report reduction of
federal committee report on
house bill one twenty six all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was made the eyes are committed
for adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
chairman been referred house
bill one twenty seven has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendations to pass an
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
the speaker move adoption of the
committee report but optional
Federal committed Fordham house
bill one twenty seven all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
The S. have a committee report
is adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
one ninety nine has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendations to pass and
this referred to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
from the doctor fable Committee
port on house bill one ninety
nine all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Does make the eyes of the
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too and it's
been referred house bill fifty
three has had it under
consideration and report same as
recommendations do not pass but
that house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill fifty three to
pass and is referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted
Representative Thomson chair of
adoption for the option of an
approval committee committee
report on house bill fifty three
but a favorable committee report
on house health and Human
Services Committee substrate for
House Bill fifty three of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Was made the eyes of a committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker and health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill one thirty
two has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that I do
pass and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption or adaption
of federal committee report on
house bill one thirty two of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Yes I'm a committee report up to
two.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill four has had it under
consideration import same
presentation that I do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committee
part of house bill for almost
everything about this and I.
Was made the US Senate committee
poured up to.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
house bill forty six as amended
has had it under consideration
point same as recommendation to
do pass respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption adoption
of federal committee report on
house bill forty six as amended
all those in favor say about
this and I.
Yes I have a committee report up
to.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee term is
been referred house bill two
zero eight has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation of do pass as
amended an answer for to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Dayan
Hochman Vigil chair Mr speaker
move adoption.
Mr speaker move adoption
production of federal committee
report on house bill two zero
right all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
The as of a committee reported
opted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works capital improvements
committee team has been referred
house bill two thirteen has had
it under consideration point in
with recommendation of do pass
an answer for to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Dayan Hochman Vigil chair Mr
speaker move adoption for
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
two one three all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
The eyes have it committee
reported opted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works capital improvements
committee to is been referred
house bill three has had it
under consideration person with
recommendations to pass as
amended and the answer for to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Dayan Hochman Vigil chair Mr
speaker move adoption for an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
three all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Was me yes have a good reported
up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
termism for House Bills seven
has had it under consideration
point seems recommendation to to
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr speaker move adoption
read optional Senator committee
report on house bill seven of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was made the as of a committee
report opted.
The.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee team has
been referred house bill seventy
nine has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation to to pass
respectfully submitted during Y.
Gallegos chair Mr speaker move
adoption option Federal
Committee port and house bill
seventy nine all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was made the eyes of a committee
report is adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill ninety three
has had it under consideration
point I was recommendation that
it to pass as amended
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
Gallegos chair move adoption
reduction of a federal committee
report on house bill ninety
three of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Was made the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill one fifteen
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that do not pass the house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one fifteen do
pass sentence referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair Mr speaker move adoption
we're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill one fifteen but a
favorable committee report on
house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one fifteen all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me the eyes have a committee
report adopted.
Deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go that
order of business introduction
of legislation to no objection
it is so ordered click to read.
House Bill three fifty nine
introduced by Representative
Ortez and act relating to
professional licensure amending
sections of the uniform
licensing act nursing practice
act medical practice act
professional psychologist Act
counseling and therapy practice
act and social work practice act
to make the provision of
conversion therapy to any person
regardless of age subject to
disciplinary action House Bill
three fifty nine introduced by
Representative or tests House
Bill three fifty nine have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three sixty
introduced by representatives
Mason Pettigrew lord Alan
Martinez and Townsend and act
relating to motor vehicles
providing for the issuance of a
special support for the national
FFA organization registration
plate providing for cessation of
issuance based on new issuance
of renewals making an
appropriation House Bill three
sixty entities are
representatives Mason Pettigrew
lord Alan Martinez and Townsend.
House Bill three sixty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee then said house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three sixty one
introduced by Representative how
to meal and act making
appropriation to the children's
trust fund to continue to carry
out the purposes of the
children's trust fund act House
Bill three sixty one introduced
by Representative how to meals.
House Bill three sixty one have
been a twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three sixty two
introduced by representative
Armstrong an act relating to
emergency medicine amending the
emergency medical services act
to allow certified nurse
practitioners to provide medical
direction House Bill three sixty
two and dues by Representative
Armstrong.
House Bill three sixty two have
been read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee.
House Bill three sixty three
introduced by representatives
Duncan Cortez Vincent block and
Pettigrew an act relating to
motor vehicles requiring the
motor vehicle division of the
taxation and revenue department
to apply for a license to use
the Smokey bear image and name
providing for the issuance of a
Smokey bear fire prevention
special registration plate
providing for cessation of
issuance based on new issuance
and renewals making an
appropriation House Bill three
sixty three introduced by
representatives Duncan or taz
Vincent's block and Pettigrew
House Bill three sixty three of
amendment twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house taxation revenue committee
this house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill three sixty four
introduced by representatives
lane Gaydos Hernandez dela Cruz
and senator Maestas an act
relating to alcoholic beverages
amending the requirements for an
alcoholic beverage delivery
permit making the requirements
generally applicable to license
holders prohibiting the
acceptance of advertising money
to preferentially list of
product House Bill three sixty
four introduced Representative
Lane guy it goes Hernandez Cruz
and senator Munoz house bill
three sixty four have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house commerce and economic
development committee then the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three sixty five
introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero Ferrari Lujan
and Sarinana an act relating to
geothermal resources adding a
center of excellence for
geothermal resources at the New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology amending the duties
of the energy conservation and
management division of the
Energy minerals and natural
resources department creating
the geothermal projects
development fund authorizing
grants creating the geothermal
projects revolving loan fund
authorizing loans making
appropriations House Bill three
sixty five entities by
Representative Roybal Caballero
Ferrari Lujan and Sarnia house
with three sixty five admitted
twice by title is a reference
refer to the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee advanced the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three sixty six
introduced by Representative
Ferrary Sariñana Harry Garcia
and I'll call.
And act relating to motor
vehicles amending sections sixty
six dash three dash four one two
N. M. S. a nineteen seventy
eight being laws nineteen
seventy nine chapter two ninety
nine section two thousand ended
to allow the issuance of
additional disabled veterans
special vehicle registration
plates and excess of the two
plays provided to qualified
persons without a fee providing
that the qualified person pays a
standard plate and registration
fees for the additional
registration plates House Bill
three sixty six introduced by
representatives for VRA Sariñana
Harry Garcia and uncle House
Bill three sixty six been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans military
affairs committee then the House
excision and Revenue committee
House Bill three sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Harper Senator Shendo junior and
Representative Hernandez and act
relating to taxation reducing
the rates of the gross receipts
tax and the compensating Tax
expanding gross receipts tax and
governmental gross receipts tax
deductions for the sale of
professional services House Bill
three sixty seven introduced by
Representative Harper Senator
Shendo Representative Hernandez.
House Bill three sixty seven
I've been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house taxation and revenue
committee.
House Bill three sixty eight
introduced by representatives
Harper and Cadena an act
relating to taxation converting
a certain exemption to a credit
for pass through entities that
elect to pay and entity level
tax amending the definitions of
base income and net income and
the income tax act House Bill
three sixty eight introduced by
representatives Harper and
Cadena.
House Bill three sixty eight
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house taxation and revenue
committee.
House Bill three sixty nine
introduced by representatives
Harper and queen.
An act relating to the lottery
abolishing the New Mexico state
lottery renaming the legislative
lottery tuition scholarship act
as a provided tuition
scholarships Act renaming the
lottery tuition Fund as a
provided tuition scholarship
fund amending sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight to
remove references to the lottery
repealing sections of the NM as
a nineteen seventy eight making
appropriation House Bill three
sixty nine introduced
Representative Harper and
McQueen House Bill three sixty
nine of been read twice by title
is a prince referred to the
house Judiciary Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill three seventy
introduced by representatives
Chavez and Cadena an act
relating to insurance extending
the sunset date for the
reimbursement requirements and
the surprise billing protection
act House Bill three seventy
introduced by representatives
Chavez and Cadena.
House Bill three seventy having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee.
House Bill three seventy one
introduced by representatives
Thompson Hermio Kate's Trujillo
and Ferrari an act relating to
higher education changing the
short title of chapter twenty
one article twenty two H. and M.
as a nineteen seventy eight to
the school personal loan
repayment act.
Including instructional support
providers in the act House Bill
three seventy one introduced by
representatives Thompson brought
you Kate's Trujillo and Ferrari
House Bill three seventy one
have been read twice by title is
or printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee sends
a house Education Committee.
House Bill three seventy two
introduced by representatives
guided us and Hochman Vigil an
act relating to professional
licenses changing administration
of the interior designers Act to
the regulation and licensing
department changing requirements
for the interior design
licensure and renewal of the
Nile and suspension and
revocation of licences
transferring appropriations
records and contracts of inner
design board to the regulation
and licensing department
changing a prescribed penalty
repealing sections of the
interior designers Act House
Bill three seventy to introduce
our representatives guy echo and
Hochman DF House Bill three
seventy two have been read twice
by title is are presented for
two house commerce and economic
development committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three seventy three
introduced by representatives
gave us Matthews Cadena and
Ferrari an act relating to
mental health amending and
enacting sections of the mental
health and developmental
disabilities Code divining
defining crisis triage center
authorizing peace officers to
bring individuals in crisis to
crisis triage centers for mental
status examinations authorizing
crisis triage centers to
involuntarily admitted certain
individuals in crisis and to
provide involuntary treatment to
certain individuals in crisis
House Bill three seventy three
introduced by representatives
guy it goes Matthews Cadena and
for our.
House Bill three seventy three
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee vents the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three seventy four
introduced by representatives
katana Anand is Alan Martinez
Harper and I ate us an act
relating to economic development
projects amending municipal
population requirements for
certain projects that the
Economic Development Department
may participate in with local or
regional governments House Bill
three seventy for entities that
representative Cadena and then
this Alan Martinez Harper and
guide us.
House Bill three seventy four
have been read twice by title is
a replacement for to the house
commerce and economic
development committee since the
house government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
House memorial thirty nine
introduced by Representative
Chatfield Castellano and senator
No sorry Representative
Sweetser.
A memorial declaring February
thirteenth two thousand twenty
three Las Vegas stay in the
house of representatives and
recognizing Las Vegas as
trailblazing through success and
education House memorial thirty
nine introduced by
representatives Chatfield
Castellano and Sanchez House
memorial thirty nine have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed in place of the
speakers table.
House memorial forty introduced
by Representative Chasey and
Cadena.
L'oreal requesting the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs incorporated to
convene a task force to make
recommendations for policy and
legislative changes to improve
local county state and federal
jails and detention and
correctional facilities
compliance with the federal
prison rape elimination act of
two thousand three House
memorial forty entities
Representative Chasey and Cadena
House memorial forty have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
and act relating to public
finance requiring the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration to find zero
interest loans to political
subdivisions of the state for
projects to replace or repair
public infrastructure damaged by
fire flooding or debris flows
caused by or stemming from the
hermits hermit's peak calf
canyon fire requiring approval
for federal assistance funding
requiring reimbursement
contracts providing for
enforcement making appropriation
declaring an emergency Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill six the Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill six having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed.
And referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill three sixty four as
amended introduced by senators
Baca and worth an act relating
to governmental conduct
clarifying that hit that
prohibitions against references
to a legislators legislative
capacity or against use of
provided stationery do not apply
when the legislature appears for
representative or assisting
another person before a state
agency in certain matters
without compensation and for the
benefit of a constituent
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three sixty four as amended
introduced by senators Baca and
works Senate bill three sixty
four have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Well Mister speaker now been
eleven fifty nine AM I move we
adjourn until twelve or one PM
thousand come to order Mr Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended in
the journal show that all those
present this morning session are
president this afternoon session
there's a judge it is so ordered
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
business committee if there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker it now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve OO one PM as we
come to order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session
there's some tension it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended as of the record show
that the journal has been read
in full approved subject to the
revision and approval of the
rules in order of business
committee if there's no
objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered
members a little bit of
housekeeping before I go to the
membership
This will conclude our business
for the day
in conversation with the
leadership offices we have I
think figured out the rest of
our schedule this week.
Tomorrow is joint session also
breeding African American day
here in the legislature we do
intend on taking up Senate bill
three sixty four and those are
conversations we're having with
the majority and minority
leadership that is a bill that
we just introduce in place on
the speakers table that'll be
the only item on third reading
tomorrow.
we do not plan on meeting this
weekend.
So you'll have the weekend off I
can't say the same about
committees I don't know what
those plans are will learn here
soon enough
but I did want to give you all a
little bit of heads up as to
what's coming over the next
couple of days the gentleman
from.
Santa Fe and San Juan
Representative and thank you Mr
speaker you taxed revenue
committee will meet Brighton
early tomorrow morning eight
thirty to do taxing stuff.
He's going to.
Did you to remember gentleman.
Three E. seventy amber signal
the gentle lady from the
university of Rubio thank you Mr
speaker house consumer and
public affairs committee will be
meeting ten minutes after the
floor session today and we will
be meeting in room three
seventeen we will also be
meeting on Saturday at nine AM
we have a full agenda and we
will also be in rural actually
we will be in room three oh nine
thank you members signaled the
gentle lady from earlier percent
of Thompson thank you Mr speaker
house health and Human Services
will meet tomorrow at eight
thirty in three oh seven but
just kind of to think forward
we're having to go back into our
tiny room for Monday and
Wednesday of the next week
Representative you know the
gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa Fe Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee will meet on
Tuesday.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Cells like some celebration on
that side of the chamber.
The gentleman from San Juan
McKinley resentment going.
Yes Mr speaker in your house
labor veterans and military
affairs committee will meet in
rural.
In rural Mr speaker
please be advised the house bill
twenty seven has been rolled
over so we're going to have an
easy.
In and out fifteen minutes after
we get off the floor members
take note the gentle lady from
San Juan McKinley Representative
Johnson thank you Mr speaker
your house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow morning at eight
thirty AM room three zero five
and then we will again meet on
Saturday at one PM and three
zero six thank you members
signal delay from Santa Fe
percent of set up the I thank
you Mr speaker your house
commerce and economic
development committee will meet
tomorrow at one thirty or ten
minutes after the floor ends
whichever make sense we hearing
to built in room three seventeen
there will be no Saturday
Committee for us so enjoy your
businesses worry maybe.
Representative Lujan lady from
Los Alamos Santa Fe and Santa
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting tomorrow at one thirty
or twenty minutes after the end
of the floor session we have a
full agenda we will not be
meeting on the weekends Mr
speaker thank you in room three
oh nine correct in room three oh
nine thank you members signal
gentleman from the nun I
resented small thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker first
tomorrow is February the tenth
that day is important because
that's the day that we
collectively is set for our
house be to junior supplemental
appropriations deadline Mr
speaker members please referred
to the email and or hard copy
for the guidance that you
received it lists a majority and
minority staff to work through
if you have any questions of
course will be here all day
tomorrow Mr speaker members
of house bill two junior is due
tomorrow number two Mr speaker
body the house appropriations
and finance will not be meeting
today.
in room three oh seven we will
not be meeting today in room
three oh seven Mr speaker we
will meet tomorrow in room three
oh seven fifteen minutes
following the floor session
members taking notes submits the
gentleman from the.
Representative Pettigrew thank
you Mr speaker I rise for point
of personal privilege please
state your point Sir.
Mr speaker I feel like I'd be
remiss if I didn't want to get a
couple of thoughts uh out with
respect to.
Legislation we passed today.
Mr speaker during the during the
debate I got to listen to both
sides very spirited very
passionate debate yes the one of
the Mr speaker one of the
topics.
For one of the points to to fix
those given was the amount of
children that died with respect
to farms.
Mr speaker I think it's
important that we remember.
The leading cause of death.
Among children.
Our children.
In this state.
The questions.
That is the leading cause of
death as we continue Mr speaker
to continue to go down that road
and it concerns me yes Mr
speaker.
I feel over the last couple of
days week we've learned that yes
means yes only yes means yes.
And the our children can give
consent.
Our children have a right to
abortion without the consent of
the parents.
But now Mr speaker when it comes
to firearms.
The parents are now culpable.
I don't understand the dichotomy
in that conversation it concerns
me that we continue to go down
that road.
I'm wondering my last thought on
this Mr speaker if we change the
word firearm to car keys in car
would we have had the same
debate today thank you Mr
speaker thank you John and John
from San Juan Representative
Harper thank you Mr speaker went
over the house today was
another.
Milestone date in the land of
science space flight.
The starship Mr that is first
serving three hundred static
fire burn today two hours ago in
Texas
certain economic performed
perfectly that's enough to get
us to orbit.
Now just a couple of facts as I
mentioned how awesome this
rocket is.
Compared to the Saturn five
which took us to the moon in the
Apollo missions right.
Okay so the Saturn five rocket
is three hundred sixty feet
tall.
Starship is four hundred feet
tall so it's the biggest rocket
ever.
Senator I had the distrust of
the Saturn five rocket was nine
million pounds.
The thrust for starship is
seventeen million of pounds
others work it's really fun.
The maximum passengers percent
and I was three.
For starship it's one hundred.
The cost to develop centered I
in today's dollars.
Fifty billion.
The cost to develop starship.
I.
Million.
The members of last time if it
is really plan every time you
take a trip.
The cost to launch set and I was
one point three million dollars.
The cost to launch starship will
be two million dollars so this
is this is huge so successful
static fire test today I'm
hoping before we all go home
what the first orbital test
flight of starship thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you.
Just got a couple of
announcements to make at the
request of the primary sponsor
percent of stirring and Ashley
will be removed as the primary
sponsor of house bill one forty
three and instead Representative
forget all will become the
primary sponsor announcing that
out loud for the record and for
our madam chief clerks of peace
of mind health gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
Mr speaker Mr.
I have earlier Santo Domingo
thank you for the good and have
one last announcement probably
not as exciting as the gentleman
from Senate rules but the house
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow morning eight thirty
room three oh nine we have three
bills that look to be good so
hope to see you all members
their room three oh nine house
education thank you miss members
signal generated from earlier
percent of Chasey.
Hostetter recess until ten
thirty tomorrow morning Sen
objection the house was in
recess until ten thirty tomorrow
morning.
