As we have a quorum please rise
for today's vacation I
Representative Figueroa.
Please pray with me.
Holy god we come before you with
thanksgiving for your grace and
your strength.
Today as we look at the numbers
keep our brain sharpen our eyes
open to every opportunity to do
good things for our service and
in service to the people of New
Mexico.
Remind us that the big numbers
are not just.
They're the lives and
livelihoods.
Of the people in our
communities.
The access to education and
health care and Justice.
Our hearts and minds of the
target.
Thriving Mexico with strong and
healthy communities.
Again with thanks for your grace
and strength and.
Representative for the pledge of
allegiance Representative Alcon.
Filled with the which New Mexico
flag.
Law.
Really really you.
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Members of god of Google
announcements first and foremost
I want to let you all know that
today we will be taking up as
planned House Bill to as well as
house bill tool I there is no
evening session so that you can
ongoing joy Act fest.
Hey that's right.
but I do have some guests to
recognize in the gallery.
We have guests.
From.
That's in high school FFA.
Representative Lara please rise
to be recognized.
We also have against of
Representative Baca students and
staff from those listed middle
school please rise recognize.
We have students from school of
dreams academy.
School guest of Representative
arms please rise.
Yes Representative Wonda Johnson
FFA from Bloomfield high Mr Mrs
Trent Linda Spencer thank you
for your visit thank you for
joining us here in the house
today rest recognize.
Gentlelady from Katrin Sierra
support environments here
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker I wanted to draw
your attention to these items on
your desk
Senator of crystal diamond and I
provided those with the New
Mexico FSA FFA is a
distinguished.
Part of New Mexico my husband
and I and our businesses found
that we've been Sanchez of FFA
for over ten years through NMAA
and we welcome all the FFA
people here today Mr speaker I'd
like to introduce a few of my
guests on the rostrum New Mexico
FFA president Grady Hodnett.
New Mexico FFA vice president
Mike the light for.
And Jordan family.
Please welcome them.
Thank you for visiting also Mr
speaker I'd like to have a
certificate read of Ford FAD to
read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
declares February sixteenth two
thousand twenty three F. F. a
day whereas FFA formerly future
farmers of America has been a
Primera youth leadership
organization in New Mexico for
more than ninety five years and
whereas FFA sponsors chapters in
rural and urban areas throughout
the state and we're as more than
forty five thousand two hundred
use between twelve and twenty
one years of age participate in
FFA youth program.
Statewide and whereas FFA youth
development programs are diverse
and help participants to acquire
important life skills such as
leadership responsible
citizenship critical thinking
problem solving decision making
conflict resolution and
communication skills that
directly contribute to the
successful transition of young
people into productive adults
and whereas FFA participants
report having more confidence
positive self identity greater
control in their lives and a
better ability to make decisions
independently and whereas FFA
participants also report that
they set goals to Christmas
ability for their actions take
pride in many things I believe
that their lives have purpose
and meaning now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico the recognition of
the contributions of the FFA to
the state February sixteenth two
thousand twenty three be
declared FFA day in the house of
representatives signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker and once
again I'd love to welcome all
the FFA participants to the
round house today thank you Mr
speaker.
Welcome to the round house of
FAA
you numbers and Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker of a couple
announcements so I would like to
first of all introduce my my
shadow have a shuttle today Mr
full sentences from a rainy
Mexico he's a sophomore majoring
in pre nursing and use a person
is immediate family to graduate
from high school and go to
college kids to graduate with
honors a nurse at the nursing
and he's also involved in the
knee NMC certain student nursing
association and he would like to
eventually pursued Indian IT and
indices ology so if I can around
with possibly for my shadow
control center battles.
Welcome to the house present.
Mr speaker I also have some
guests on the rostrum from gas
and FFA I'm so happy and proud
that they are here today so we
have our FFA advisor Mr trump
you know not.
We have a Mr Martin I I yellow
or if the president.
We also Mr alder than although
if the vice president.
Mr speaker I would also like to
acknowledge or recognize or if
it was from gas and thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
Welcome to the house the
generals of one percent of
leading thank you Mr speaker
keeping with the FFA theme I
want to share with the body long
time mentor of mine was once the
national vice president for FFA
and he taught me the FFA motto
which I've always appreciated I
think it's it's a wonderful
model I just want to share it
with the body so they understand
what that model is it it's very
simple it's twelve words it's
learning to do doing to learn.
Learning to live and living to
serve thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen.
In the affirmative service
representative on million.
Thank you Mr speaker I am is a
to and keep along those lines I
have some wonderful guests from
Berlin high school FFA who it is
so nice I teachable in high
school so it's so nice to see my
students here so I have a miss
running Martinez who is the Ag
science teacher in the bill and
FFA advisor.
Stint.
And her officers are and Bobby
all of the other who's a
secretary.
Isn't this so those a treasure.
And he's also my cousin by the
way.
and Jackie Martinez switches
reporter
Bobby roads as and that Sentinel
I have to say that right.
Which we in rules Development
today we asked what a Sentinel
was and it is the same thing as
a sergeant of arms so and then
we also have president or CEO
student adviser.
And last but certainly not least
especially could she's family
also is a meticulous student
visor.
Welcome to the house
representatives the gentle lady
from ending the reserve brown
thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house so we have some
guests on the rostrum Eddy
County as well the Carlsbad FFA
was named the superior chapter
for the state of New Mexico in
twenty twenty two in addition
the chapter was recognized as
the only chapter in the state to
receive a three star rating by
the national FFA at the most
recent national convention in
many of Indianapolis Indiana the
chapter is led by a group of
that standing officers in a
wonderful advisory so Mister
speaker I'd like to make a few
introductions.
I'd like to these people to
stand as I mention of their
names ms Leslie Clark Hey is the
adviser issues a seasoned Act
teacher who has had the pleasure
of teaching and Eddy County her
entire career welcome this Clark
also.
Mr speaker and on the rostrum we
have some FFA students research
Estrada she's there to standing
over there to the left
This is a junior at Carlsbad
high school and participates in
dairy cattle judging she's on
the food science team which to
me sounds rather fascinating and
she has a job working for the
city of Carlsbad at the
municipal recreation center next
we have Allison Ackland please
stand.
Allison is the chapter secretary
she's a sophomore at Carlsbad
high she competed as a member of
the national parliamentary
procedure team and is currently
on the milk quality and pasture
and range CDC teams in addition
she is the current NM our New
Mexico teen the sector culture
congratulations Allison.
Mr speaker next we have cash
Ryan.
Cash is the chapter treasurer
he's a sophomore at Carlsbad
high he will be competing in the
lives on the livestock and milk
quality team this year any also
competes on the Carlsbad
football and golf teams good job
right cash cash Ryan.
Two more introductions Mr
speaker Brandon solving please
stand.
Brandon is the chapter reporter
he is a sophomore at Carlsbad
high he will be competing on the
dairy cattle and milk quality
team this year and he also
competes on the Carlsbad
basketball team and then finally
Mr speaker and members are Ryan
would you please stand he is the
chapter Sentinel we just got a
definition of what that means
he's a junior this year and
competed in the employment
skills competition and shows
goes he is a member of the
Carlsbad basketball team and
tennis team Mr speaker these are
special guests today thank you.
House.
The gentle lady from Chavis
representatives.
Mr speaker thank you very much
I've got a wonderful set of
early because it and appeared
that I would like to introduce.
These young people are from the
Logan FFA and we all know who
the superintendent of Logan
schools is former representative
Dennis Roch station people here
today.
Were brought in by their advisor
Mr clay light food.
And I would like to introduce
Braden light food who is a ninth
grader if you will remain
standing until I finish in
reductions Justin Johnson who is
a senior this year Logan.
Charmaine hall who is in the
tenth grade April Lansdale who
is in the freshman this year.
Kylie Phillips she is a
sophomore and Mona tensioner who
is a junior in high school Mr
speaker.
I love to brag about good kids.
And these young people that are
up here today and they're
believe coats in the the young
people that were here yesterday
wearing the green.
Are our future leaders of our
state and our of our nation Mr
speaker these people these young
people.
Have been coached they have
learned responsibility they have
just become outstanding citizens
in their schools we have had the
national winners whenever
they've gone to competition at
Indianapolis and they have
brought those honors back to the
state of New Mexico and these
FFA chapters do need to be.
Applauded for all that they have
done to make people more aware
of thank goodness and all of our
children and our state thank you
Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady ran across
to you all.
Committee from Katrin Sienna
Valencia supporter
Representative.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative scream.
Thank you Mr speaker point of
personal privilege state and
state your point Sir.
Mr speaker I wish to give a
rebuttable presumption update
this last weekends on Saturday
about noon Eric Ford was in as
circle K. gas station in
Albuquerque causing a
disturbance when the clerk us to
leave he began punching the
female clerk a twenty four year
old male intervened.
Mr Ford shot that male killing
him and wounding another person
that was pumping gas.
Mr Ford has a long criminal
history the other one I'd like
to highlight this was last
Thursday.
The state police clocked the
vehicle at the big guy going
south bound at a hundred and
twenty five miles an hour.
A chase ensued the vehicle
exited scenes are Chavis after
it correctly after it crossed
the Rio Grande river it crashed.
Both occupants fled.
They were both later arrested
the passenger was being held by
a civilian at gun point.
In that car was a hundred and
thirty thousand dollars in cash
and two hundred and thirty
thousand seven all pills six out
of ten federal bills are a
lethal dose.
The troubling part of this is
citizens intervened in both of
our community is asking us to
Adair dressed criminal activity
can make the community safer
given thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen we have other
guests here as well that I'd
like to recognize yes
Representative Rubio seven what
I know from and then as you
counseling and community
psychology in a yes
Representative Cadena Hammond
the Santa Fe New Mexico State
University business and
economics department from Wagner
New Mexico welcome to the house.
The gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker I to rise
to recognize and congratulate
the young people who are with us
here today from FFA throughout
New Mexico I'd like to point out
it maybe and courage my my
colleagues to if you ever want
some excitement go to the annual
convention of the FFA down at
New Mexico State University and
see the energy that these young
people have it is remarkable and
I'm certainly glad to see them
here today but I particularly
I'm pleased to see them work
really hard throughout the
school year and then come
together as a state to together
as a state organization and
really show each other in the
amount of energy that they have
in the pride that they have in
their schools and the the
excellence that they are in
stealing in these young people
so thank you all for being here
and thank you wish you well in
your competitions and hopefully
some of you go to nationals and
brings home some trophies thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman.
The gentleman.
From
those beautiful counties
Representative particularly
Thank you Mr speaker I rise
today to.
Point out of an object is on
your desk.
Within this there's an insulated
bag and a ticket for access
tonight we hope that you will
join us.
Since nineteen ninety three
access has grown.
It.
Grown into an agriculture
homecoming hosted by New Mexico
farm Alliance for bureau.
In the agricultural community we
invite you to come tonight enjoy
our beloved New Mexican foods
and agricultural products that
connect.
To connect with those that grow
them.
Our culture serves the second
largest industry in our state
and directly supports more than
twenty three thousand jobs and
contributes over fifty three
point four nine billion to the
state's economy.
We're home to over twenty four
thousand farms and rank in the
top ten nationally for per con
chili onion and milk production.
Please join me in New Mexico
agriculture community tonight as
we celebrate agriculture in the
many wonderful hard working
people who are part of the this
event will take place from six
o'clock to nine o'clock tonight
at the Santa Fe can community
convention center we hope to see
you all there Mr speaker and
gentleman and and let me take
the opportunity to thank all of
our farmers and agricultural
workers and ranchers and the
folks of feed us second round of
applause.
The gentle lady from.
Barely you importance
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker you make me
laugh of a point of personal
privilege please state your
point please thank you first
before us on that I want to tell
you guys I'm so proud of you an
FFA really I'm so incredibly
proud of what you guys do that's
I want to make you know that
first Mr speaker my point
approval as personal privileges
there's going to be a very
important bill that deserves a
very honest debate it'll be
heard today and C. pack is
Holocaust and genocide studies
and is it Kauffman and a
descendant of Jews from Germany
that were persecuted I want to
be assured that I will be able
to ask for a direct questions on
this bill and not large arising
gathered down simply because I'm
a Republican this is something
has happened numerous times and
this committee we get gobbled
out when I'm speaking and it's
very frustrating because I feel
like it's more July simply
because I'm a female in the
Republican and and a book on
page twenty eight says to limit
debate should not be allowed to
there's no limit on the number
of times in the committee
members from in to speak to
limit debate or the number times
members speak what defeat the
purpose of which Committee was
committed Mason that says on
page four Sixtyeight section six
thirty seven.
Public I'm sorry to commemorate
I'm sorry paid for somebody
section six thirty eight no
motion to close or limit debate
are allowed so Mister speaker
what I'm asking for as a
descendant of Jews I want to
make sure that I have the
ability to critically analyze
the bill on Holocaust that is
coming forward today and C. pack
thank you.
Thank you delete a delayed from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that order
business committee reports to no
objection it is so ordered
correct right.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
house joint resolution eight as
amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendations to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We're not able to report on
house resolution eight as
amended all those information
about is not opposing the eyes
of a committee report on.
Mr speaker commerce economic and
economic development committee
team has been referred house
bill two eighty one has had it
under consideration point I was
recommendation that a do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
reduction of federal committee
for in house between one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye opposed may just have a
committee board up to.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to has
been referred house bill three
twenty two has had it under
consideration point things
recommendation that to pass
sentence referred to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted during
like I guess chair Mister move
adoption reduction of federal
committee report on house bill
three twenty two of those in
favor say if I was and I suppose
maybe the eyes of a committee
board up to.
Mr speaker your rules
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee tune
that's been referred house
memorial forty one has had it
under consideration point it was
recommendations to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
or yes chair Mr speaker move
adoption reduction of federal
committed put on house memorial
forty one all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Was me the as have a committee
report up to.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to ms been
referred house bill ninety five
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill ninety
five to pass respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
of an unfavorable report on
house bill ninety five but a
favorable committee report on
house energy environment natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill ninety five of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Proposing yes have a committee
board opted Mr speaker Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to is been
referred house bill four twelve
has had it under consideration
point saying with recommendation
that it to pass and then for the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
referral could report on house
bill four one to all those in
favor signify by saying aye
opposed make the eyes have it
committee report opted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business in objection it is so
ordered the gentleman from the
name the excuse me the general
from Chavis and you know that
are Representative Townsend
thank you Mr speaker I I rise
this morning for two reasons one
to recognize the blue and gold
that was in the room which are
the future leaders are some of
the future leaders of New Mexico
which is I think critically
important the other of.
Mr speaker is the thank you for
recognizing the access this
evening and scheduling
accordingly I appreciate that
and I know that that community
in New Mexico appreciate that
thank you Sir thank you
gentlemen the gentleman from C.
will in McKinley with an
announcement.
Okay folks today is last day to
introduce legislation
we will take up legislation as
long as we're on the floor
hopefully not too long because
we all want to access but if
need to be a leader lane and I
and the leader Chasey will
volunteer to stay behind in
reading bills.
You're welcome
but seriously get your bills in
as we as we get into this the
next phase of the floor session
income ask if you have any
questions or any issues.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker that order of
business introduction of
legislation.
See no objection it is so
ordered.
House bill four forty eight
introduced by representatives
Trujillo corolla Herndon Johnson
and Sarinana.
And act relating to public
education and acting the dropout
recovery act amending the
definition of qualified student
to include dropout students
providing eligibility
requirements to become a dropout
recovery school requiring the
public education department to
annually maintain a list of
students who are identified as
dropouts.
Providing rulemaking authority
requiring dropout recovery
schools to annually report
enrollment totals house bill
four forty eight introduced by
representatives Trujillo corolla
Herndon Johnson and Sarinana.
Before forty eight I've been
there twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill four forty nine
introduced by representative
Allison Duncan Montoya and
lanes.
An act relating to economic
development revising eligibility
for assistance to displaced
workers declaring an emergency
House Bill for forty nine
entities by Representative
Allison Duncan Montoya and Lane.
House before forty nine amended
twice by title that are printed
in front of the house commerce
and economic development
committee then said house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill four fifty introduced
by Representative Sanchez and
senator Munoz an act relating to
taxation providing on oil and
gas severance tax exemption for
re stimulation wells house bill
four fifty introduced
Representative Sweetser and
senator student manuals house
bill four fifty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee then
so House accession and Revenue
committee.
House bill four fifty one
entities to representative
Armstrong for an act relating to
health amending the public
assistance act to ensure that
reimbursement rates for
community based pharmacy
providers cover the cost of
ingredients and professional
dispensing fees for covered
outpatient drugs and and all
Medicaid programs house bill
four fifty one introduced by
representative Armstrong house
bill four fifty one have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee fans the house
appropriations and finance
committee there's been a request
for members to be able to remove
their jackets.
That is corrected unless the
ruling of Jack's.
I see no objections so ordered.
House bill four fifty two
introduced by Representative
Ferrary LA Cadena and guided us
and act relating to employment
including veterinarians and the
definition of health care
practitioner for the purpose of
making certain provisions and
health care practitioner
agreements void unenforceable
and against public policy house
bill four fifty two introduced
by Representative Ferrary
Herrera Dana and diables.
House bill four fifty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house agriculture us against
and water resources committee
this the house Judiciary
Committee.
Also for fifty three introduced
by representatives have data
Andrea Romero Castellano Lynde
and Chandler and act relating to
water creating the emergency
drinking water funds to provide
potable water to community in an
emergency situation when the
community's Water System fails
to function at a level required
to provide water to the
communities resident residents
making appropriation house bill
four fifty three introduced by
representatives have data Andrea
Romero Castellano the day and
Chandler House Bill for fifty
three minutes was by title is a
printer for to the house
agriculture sec yes in water
resources committee thence the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill four fifty four
introduced by representatives
Pettigrew brown and Montoya an
act relating to budgets
prohibiting the authorization of
budget adjustment request for
amounts appropriated to state
agencies for personal services
and benefits for any other
budget category house bill four
fifty four introduced the
representatives Pettigrew brown
and Montoya house bill four
fifty four have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee thence the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill for fifty five
entities by Representative
Herndon and act relating to
workers compensation increasing
the amount of money that an
employer shall advance for
discovery increasing certain
limits on attorney fees changing
procedures for the provision of
additional discretionary
attorney fees for moving a
penalty house bill four fifty I
introduce the Representative
Herndon.
House bill four to five minutes
twice by title is a reference
referred to the house labor
veterans military affairs
committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill four fifty six
introduced by representatives
Cates how to meal Chavez and
Sarnia and act making
appropriations to the board of
regents of eastern New Mexico
university the board of regents
of New Mexico State University
and the board of regents of the
university of New Mexico to
support educational broadcast
television house bill four fifty
six introduced the
representatives Cates how to
meal Chavez and Sarinana house
bill four fifty six of equipment
was by title is ordered printed
and referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill four fifty seven
introduced by representatives
how to meal and Chavez and act
making appropriation to the
children youth and families
department the fund supportive
services for domestic violence
victims house bill four fifty
seven and reduce the
representatives had a meal and
Chavis house bill four fifty
seven have been read twice by
title is a printer in front of
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill four fifty eight
introduced by Representative
Rehm an act relating to crime
providing that the penalty for a
felon and possession of a
firearm or destructive device is
five years imprisonment.
Providing that the penalty for a
felon in possession of a firearm
during the commission of a crime
is seven years imprisonment
prohibiting the transferring of
possession of a firearm or
destructive device to a felon
providing penalties house bill
four fifty eight introduced by
Representative Rehm.
House bill four fifty eight have
been read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then to House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for fifty nine
introduced by representatives
Lundstrom Sanchez Castellano how
to meal and Ezzell an act
relating to our racing revising
the distribution of funds rate
to our readers House Bill for
fifty nine introduced by
representatives Lundstrom
Sanchez Castellano how to meal
and Ezzell house bill four fifty
nine I've been read twice by
title is a reference referred
house agriculture us I guess in
water resources committee then
south commerce and economic
development committee.
House Bill for sixty introduced
by representatives had a meal
Santa Maria Trujillo Rola and
Garrett.
An act relating to higher
education requiring articulation
among higher education educator
preparation programs providing
requirements for colleges of
education at public four year
educational institutions
requiring annual reports House
Bill for sixty introduced by
representatives had a meal more
about Maria Trujillo corolla and
Garrett house before sixty
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education
Committee.
House bill four sixty one
introduced by Representative
Chasey and the pants came an act
relating to children and acting
the children's and families
Rights Act enacting the child
where for welfare innovation
center act making appropriation
house bill four sixty one
introduced by Representative
Chasey and the Penske for House
before sixty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee prevents the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill four sixty two
introduced by representatives
Chasey little Herndon and
Garrett and act relating to
municipalities amending
procedures and penalties for New
Ince's nuisances House Bill for
sixty to introduce
Representative Chasey little
turned and and Garrett.
Yes House before sixty two have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee this
is the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill four sixty three
introduced by representatives
Baca Sanchez Lara and Castellano
and and act relating to the
disposition of dead bodies
requiring counties to give
reasonable opportunity for legal
next of kin to take possession
of it claims decedent defining
legal next of kin increasing the
amount the counties pay for
cremation or burial to one
thousand dollars making
technical changes repealing a
section of the N. M. S. A.
nineteen seventy eight House
bill four sixty three introduced
by representatives Baca Sanchez
Lara and Kasiano.
House Bill for sixty three
having been read twice by title
is a reference to the fact that
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee then
it's the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill four sixty four
introduced by representatives
corolla G. Andrés Romero
Trujillo Lente and hobby and
Martinez and act making
appropriations to state
institutions of higher education
tribal colleges and the public
education department to comply
with the court's rulings and the
consolidated Martinez and Yazzie
verses the state of New Mexico
lawsuit by improving educational
outcomes for certain public
school and higher education
students and families.
House bill four sixty four
introduced by Representative
corolla G. Andrés Romero
Trujillo Lente and have your
Martinez house bill four sixty
four having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee then as the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill for sixty five
introduced Representative
Montoya lord block and receive
an act relating to medical
malpractice restoring
definitions of health care
providers removing the
independent provider designation
for moving punitive damages
providing procedures for
challenging judgments providing
limitations of claims providing
guidelines for health care
providers applications removing
the Video Conference option for
hearings of the New Mexico
medical review commission
providing hearing procedures
removing the requirement of a
third party administrator for
the patients compensation fund
removing an annual fund audit
requirement for moving an annual
action to actuarial study
requirement repealing the
patient's compensation fund
advisory board amending
repealing and acting sections of
the NM as a nineteen seventy
eight House before sixty five
introduced by Representative
Montoya lowered block and the
house bill four sixty five
having been read twice by title
is our printer referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill four sixty six
introduced by representatives
Nibert and Andrea Romero.
An act relating to ethics
clarifying state ethics
commission jurisdiction
providing procedures for
determining probable cause house
bill four sixty six introduced
by representative Nibert and
Andrea Romero house bill four
sixty six of men read twice by
title.
Excuse me sort of prints and
referred to the house government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill four sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Montoya and act relating to
pension solvency repealing the
early childhood education and
care fund and the early
childhood education and care
program fund and transferring
the balance of those funds to
the income fund of the public
employees retirement association
increasing certain employee
contribution rates pursuant to
the public employees retirement
act house bill four sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Montoya.
Four six.
House before sixty seven have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
then to house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill four sixty eight
introduced by representatives
Montoya we've heard us us and
lord an act relating to
childbirth and acting the born
alive Act requiring medical care
for all infants who are born
alive defining born alive and
infants mandating reporting
enacting penalties and acting
civil remedies creating the task
force to monitor born alive
first house bill four sixty
eight introduced by
Representative Montoya review to
assess and lowered.
Sixty seven point six eight.
The
house before sixty eight amended
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the house
health and Human Services
Committee vents the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for sixty nine
introduced by Representative
Montoya lane and I Burt and act
relating to district attorneys
providing that the annual
salaries for district attorneys
shall be established by the
legislature providing for
covered positions to be defined
by the New Mexico District
Attorney Association personnel
and compensation plan repealing
sections thirty six dash one
dash one thirty six dash one
dash twenty one and thirty six
dash one eight dash one four.
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
being laws nineteen oh nine
chapter twenty two section one
clause eighteen eighty nine
chapter fifty six section eleven
and laws nineteen ninety one
chapter one seventy five section
fourteen as amended house bill
four sixty nine introduced
Representative Montoya lane and
neighbors house bill four sixty
nine have been read twice by
title printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee then
so House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for seventy
introduced by Representative
Lujan Johnson and Senator Ivey
Soto.
And act relating to driving
while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs
creating the D. W. I. act
amending repealing and acting
and recompiling sections of the
motor vehicle code house bill
four seventy introduce
representatives Lujan and
Johnson and Senator Ivey Soto
House Bill for seventy having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer and public
Affairs Committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill four seventy one
introduced by Representative
Garrett an act relating to
health care creating the
Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias Advisory Council
requiring the Alzheimer's
disease and other dementias
Advisory Council to create and
Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias state plan house bill
four seventy one introduced by
Representative Garrett.
House bill four seventy one
minute twice by title is ordered
presenter for to the house
health and Human Services
Committee events the house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill for seventy two
entities by Representative
Herndon and act relating to
school personnel and acting the
career technical education
community educators act allowing
the licensure and contracting of
career technical education
community educators requiring
satisfactory clearance of
fingerprint based background
checks and participation in the
performance evaluation process
allowing for a termination of
contract exempting career
technical education community
educators from the provisions of
the educational retirement act
the public employees retirement
act and the deferred
compensation act house bill four
seventy two introduced by
Representative Herndon house
bill four seventy two having
been read twice by title is it a
presenter for to the house
Education Committee then the
house Judiciary Committee.
Deliverance on the face.
Mr speaker I move with the go to
that order of Business third
reading of legislation to no
objection it is so ordered is a
gentleman from the Jana Reddy
Fund supplemental calendar
number one item number one.
Mr speaker I am would you please
give me to that point that the
record reflect that election is
Sir for placing the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills to win three final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker thank you so much I
am extraordinarily proud Mr
speaker and body.
To present before you here today
the house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three.
Mr speaker I'm excited to share
with everyone here today
everybody who is tuning in today
not only the numbers in the
budget Mr speaker body as we
sort of heard today in the
gentle lady from Bernalillo was
prior but the values behind
those numbers these numbers Mr
speaker and body start at nine
point four three billion dollars
nine point four three nine point
four four billion dollars that
is a level or Mr speaker and
body of recurring investments
that this budget contemplates Mr
speaker body that's about a
twelve percent growth but I
think Mr speaker body as we all
recall the voters of New Mexico
did a convincing and strong
thing this recent election they
pass the early childhood
amendment and so a full.
Very large portion of this
increase comes directly from the
voters of the state of New
Mexico.
Perhaps even more important than
our recurring spending Mr
speaker and body our reserves.
If we're going to have a strong
budget this body is made a
commitment to have equally
strong reserves and again we're
here before you Mr speaker and
body with a thirty percent
reserve target that's a two
point eight three two billion
dollars Mr speaker and body
that's not all though.
Mr speaker body we're seeing
revenue increases driven by
massive production increases in
oil that are.
Growing the state of New Mexicos
receipts twenty and even twenty
percent and even more year over
year.
And so Mister speaker body we
came into this with a commitment
to turn now money in the future
money to generate long term
savings and so Mister speaker
body another number here is our
eight hundred fifty million
dollars that goes into the
severance tax permanent fund and
also Mr speaker and body there's
one billion dollars that this
committee in a bipartisan way
that we have set aside for our
experts to and the tax
committees and for all of us
here as a legislature to
contemplate what recurring tax
changes that make our system
more fair that build on things
like the child tax credit the
increase in the working families
tax present Credit and other
policies that support on New
Mexico families.
Mr speaker body before we get to
all of those I want us and we're
going to talk about the values
that have informed this budget
process these are values that
are familiar to all New Mexicans
values like family like hard
work I public safety and
security.
These are values lack of
planning for the future while at
the same time addressing core
needs that you find before us
their values like being good
stewards of our air and our
water.
And looking out for the
environment for the future
caring for our natural resources
and of course is New Mexicans Mr
speaker and body these values
are all about being resourceful
when we face incredibly complex
new and changing challenges
seemingly around every corner.
In one of these values Mr
speaker body that I think we as
a committee or so proud is that
we can't do our work if we don't
listen to New Mexicans and so
Mister speaker body for the
first time we opened up our
agency hearings to members of
the public to give public
comment we asked for public
comment this led in a few cases
to some very long afternoons and
evenings Mr speaker body every
New Mexico New Mexican no matter
where they live no matter what
their perspective we said that
we wanted to open up the door
and to hear from them as we
build this but.
That started Mr speaker body on
January the eighteenth that was
Wednesday of this session Mr
speaker and body the story goes
way back this year it's stretch
back to April and twenty twenty
two that's because Mr speaker
and body New Mexico one of
perhaps only five states that
where the Legislature builds its
own budget in a bicameral
bipartisan way eight senators
and eight representatives that
each month travel to different
communities in New Mexico spend
up to a week working through
with our staff experts with the
LFC working closely with our
executive partners so this year
that took us all the way from
artesian well as well sort of
the rolling plains in the
southeast part of our state up
into the mountains of tiles
twice and into Silver City and
it took us to the majestic maces
and the red rock country out in
Gallup in in western New Mexico
and we heard so many of the
priorities that you're going to
hear today Mr speaker and body
we heard how education should be
the very best for each and every
New Mexico kid.
That.
New Mexicans need health care
access and affordability that
transportation and
infrastructure are not only the
ways for us to do commerce but
to get that education and to be
whether it's down on the farm
out on the ranch or in your city
our core parts of how New
Mexicans look forward to a more
prosperous future.
Mr speaker and body this
combined with our record
revenues I want to spend a quick
moment we're going to hopefully
touch on this a lot today.
Mr speaker and body for thirty
years from nineteen eighty one
which is as far back as I could
find the energy information
administration data.
At least online add to twenty
ten.
In that there is a flat line
that flat line represents the
oil production by month for the
state of New Mexico that line it
never goes below five million
and it never goes above seven
million five to seven million
barrels of oil for over three
hundred and fifty consecutive
months that was a core part of
the revenue for New Mexico.
Now since then Mr speaker and
body and of course with that
payment a any price change meant
not only at next month things
were going to change in the
state and then things that could
change day to day.
Now Mr speaker and body even as
we see a strong economy with our
lowest unemployment and up for
ticks across all categories.
Our production especially in the
Permian basin is over fifty
million barrels a month.
Mr speaker body I talked about
the masons.
We're sorry you know how it can
be a very steep club climb up in
mesa we're just beginning the
projections show based upon
national and international
energy experts in our own energy
admin information administration
that we've got a ways to go up
this mesa that in fact
production will continue to
climb and we show that that we
get to the top of this mesa that
you know maybe right around the
end of this decade so Mister
speaker body we have this unique
opportunity that we talked about
all summer.
The chance to invest now boy you
divide the voters believe in.
Amendment number one and the
support for early childhood
education and for public
education.
We have the opportunity to make
the most long term savings
decisions putting money into the
severance tax permanent fund
that it just so happens Mr
speaker body the amounts we put
in this year and again in our
budget we say eight hundred and
fifty million that starts to pay
for itself right at the time as
we start coming down that mesa
provided the time is production
the projections show right now
that production may begin to
actually decrease.
So we have a chance to to invest
we have a quorum chance for the
first time perhaps to save in
the most aggressive and long
term sorts of ways and we have a
chance to right size to make our
structures the strongest they'll
be with the best body that we've
ever had.
This LFC those are the
conversations the entirety of
this summer and we said a few
guideposts the LFC again in a
bipartisan bicameral fashion
this year and a unanimous vote
set a few targets they sent us a
new spending target I'm proud to
report Mr speaker and body that
your house appropriations and
finance committee spent slightly
less than what that target was
so we actually came in there.
Came in under that recurring
spending amount Mr speaker and
body we said we want to set at
least a billion aside for Rick
recurring tax changes we met
that mark Mr speaker and body we
said that we wanted to set aside
an aggressive amount for the
severance tax permanent fund we
met that mark as well some
scenarios were as low as two
fifty we came in at eight fifty
that pays back more it pays back
quicker the more that you put
in.
Mr speaker body of course and so
it goes without saying that we
also sent a court reserve target
is thirty percent target and I'm
very proud to report to you Mr
speaker and body that we met
that target as well I'm going to
now Mr speaker and body
recognize a few members from the
house appropriations and finance
committee to talk through in
more detail with members before
we get into our conversation and
our debate about some of the
specific areas that really stand
out as the most evidence driven
the most data driven informed by
performance metrics for every
single agency built over two
years in collaboration with
folks all across the state in
New Mexico but first Mr speaker
and body I want to ask our house
appropriations and finance
committee members all members if
they might stand for a brief
second.
Mr speaker and body as they
stand even though we're so used
to sitting.
In room three oh seven Mr
speaker body this is a group
that met every single day and in
fact every single Saturday for
the first several weeks of our
session we've broken into work
groups we have been on zoom
we've been online we've taken
public comment for the first
time this is a body Mr these are
members who have brought an
extraordinary level of
dedication of inside being
willing to ask any questions
sometimes two or three times
because HSC is and will be a
welcoming place where questions
are necessary for public
testimony is is something that
we're excited for and the
members that we see here they
border every single state that
surrounds New Mexico we go all
the way up to Colorado and about
forty miles north of the border
with Mexico from Texas and
Oklahoma to the to the gentleman
on the the north east side all
the way down into the southeast
you know from the planes and the
production in Southeast New
Mexico to the maces in central
New Mexico and the mountains and
the incredible red rock maces in
the homelands in the northwest
part of our state this is a body
that's as diverse as dedicated
and as diligent as any that I've
ever been part of an Mr speaker
I don't know if it's okay but I
just want you to recognize them
before I yield.
Thank you for your efforts thank
you for your work we appreciate
you and I think it's appropriate
to clap for all of the.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
with that I'm going to yield to
an extraordinary vice chair the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon delay from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Mr chair I appreciate the
opportunity to give a couple of
remarks and talk about the
public safety and criminal legal
questions of house bill two so
first I do want to thank our
chairman for shepherding us
through this process I think we
all learned a lot and it was a
great opportunity I think you
know we've got a wonderful
committee and I really.
I would like to echo the
chairman statements about.
Asking questions I know I
learned a lot from hearing the
questions that my colleagues
were asking us so thank you to
all of you it's been a pleasure.
Mr speaker and Mr chair I
represent a district in
southeast Albuquerque in fact
central and tramway is a sort of
at the heart of my district and
if you live in Bernalillo county
are sort of travel through from
the east mountains to I. forty
you know that we have a lot of
crime and other issues right
there in the center of my
district so crime and public
safety are very important issues
for my constituents but I also
know that they are critically
important to all of the
constituents throughout New
Mexico Mr speaker Mr chair that
we are very concerned as parents
grandparents students friends
about making sure that our homes
in our neighborhoods are safe so
I am really pleased that House
Bill to the committee substitute
for House Bill to.
Really continues the investment
that we made last year when we
made a historic investment into
public safety here in New Mexico
and I'm particularly pleased
because it's a bipartisan
approach and I think it's very
thoughtful it's multi faceted
and shows our commitment not
just to swift and certain
justice but also to preventing
problems on the front end and
really getting ahead of issues
that can lead to crime and other
public safety issues.
So Mister chair Mr speaker and
gentleman I want to run through
just a couple of different
components that are in the
the budget that we are
presenting in voting on today.
First off
this bill represents an increase
of thirty four million dollars
in key justice and public safety
agencies and that's an increase
over last year
that includes eleven point six
million dollars for point nine
point one million dollar
increase for the department of
public safety.
And these funds also include pay
increases for our judges who are
critical to insuring that the
entire system works our state
police officers dispatchers and
other key department of public
safety personnel.
Additionally we can't forget
about the victims of crime and
so Mr speaker and Mr chair this
budget includes a recurring
increase of one point seven
million dollars for victims
services and victim of victim
advocates I know I had the
opportunity this summer actually
Mr speaker and chair to hear
directly from victims with a
number of my colleagues
Senator.
On the other side of the aisle I
don't know that I'm allowed to
name names but it was a very
Illuminating conversation and I
know after that we had some very
good discussions about how to
increase support for victims and
their families so I'm really
pleased to see that increase
here.
additionally Mr speaker and and
chairman
The budget has three thirty two
point five million dollars in it
for law enforcement recruitment
and retention and I think
everybody in the state knows how
important that is that it's not
just a matter of recruiting new
officers we need to retain our
high quality law enforcement
officers and so the those funds
are very important to helping to
make sure that we have enough
police officers on the street.
There's also seven million
dollars in this budget for
felony warrant enforcement
something that I think folks in
central New Mexico are very
interested to see happen.
the.
Budget Mr speaker and Mr chair
doesn't just focus though on our
law enforcement officers it
really looks at the entire
criminal justice system and so
there's funding in there for
judicial clerkships to make sure
that we have up incoming members
of the judiciary there is four
million dollars for a public
attorney recruitment Fund that's
going to help make sure that our
rural communities in particular
have funding to hire district
attorneys and public defenders
you know we can't have a quality
criminal justice system without
making sure that we've got
people in every position of this
process.
There are other things in the
budget you know.
I. T. you know we need to make
sure that we have good data that
are information systems are
modern and giving us the best
tools that we that we can have
there were continuing Mr speaker
and share with the crime
reduction requests we've seen
how successful those can be in
some of our communities and so
there's an additional five point
five million dollars to continue
those.
Mr speaker and Mr chair other
things that were including are
making sure that our corrections
department has staffing that our
courts are renovated and are you
know have high security systems
that work so really fundamental
components for the entire
process so I think folks are
welcome to take a deep dive into
the plethora of line items that
relate to public safety and
criminal justice but with that
I'd like to Mr speaker turn it
back to the chair of the
committee.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
eleven million thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
from Bernalillo now I'd like to
yield Mister speaker body
briefly to another gentle lady
from Bernalillo the vice chair
for the Education Committee the
gently from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett.
Gently from Bernalillo thank you
Mr speaker thank you Mr chair
really honored to serve on this
committee I have three decades
of educational experience
ranging from pre K. to post
secondary and it's just been a
really privileged to serve with
actually I I some people don't
think of us family but frankly I
feel like it's the brothers and
sisters on the house
appropriations and finance
committee
so I'm just grateful to be here
today.
Mr speaker and Mr chair in
education we're juggling having
world class teachers and world
class schools and also having
world class aces which stands
for adverse childhood
experiences and so I believe
that this budget really seeks to
honor and raise up the value of
all of our educators from
educational assistance to
principles to educational
leaders of all sorts but also
looking at the need to address
the mechanisms that can help
those children that are
suffering so greatly so want to
talk about some of the
highlights.
I rarely say all kids I like to
say each and every child or each
and every kid because we're not
looking just a groups were
looking at individual kids
we're not just looking at groups
so I believe that each and every
child in New Mexico really
deserves a quality education
quality educators that sets them
up for success from early
childhood with their families
with their guardians into
adulthood and their career paths
this budget is the biggest
investment in our children we've
ever made via the education
budget and I think that there's
no greater investment that we
can make because our children
are our future and I do really
believe every child does have
that right to a good education
and ideally and we know that
everything is ideal in our world
but ideally to a safe happy and
healthy bring a state believe by
besting in our schools and the
well being of our children the
way that this budget shows we
value
I I believe that we can really
make the New Mexico one of the
best places to grow up we have
the beauty of creation here but
we also have to have safe
healthy families and good
education so that regardless of
who you are as a child it's a
good place to be our budget
raises public school
appropriations by eight point
six percent and this amount
includes increased funding for
the salaries of education
assistants who work really hard
but haven't been recognized in
the form of salaries the way
they should be recognized.
it also recognizes the value of
extended learning time and
there's several bills passing
through the legislative process
to determine the details of that
but we recognize that that extra
learning time does help address
the learning loss in and the
social emotional consequences
that comment put us through and
which were just really no
exiting we appropriated fifteen
million for educational
assessments as you know we're
required federally to do it but
statewide it helps us understand
as families and educators where
our kids are at and what we hope
they'll grow academically we
also prove forty million for
career and technical education
the topic of major importance I
would say to every member of
this body.
With the additional funding
approved by voters last year
we're making meaningful and
massive investments in pre K.
opportunities with the sixty
nine percent increase to the
early childhood education and
care department would review a
couple other things we're
proposing an average of five
percent raises for teachers and
educators along with other tools
to help New Mexico attract and
retain good teachers building on
last year's investment of that
house bill two did previously
the budget allocates a hundred
nine million to expand pre K.
two hundred and sixty three
million recurring and two
hundred and sixty one million
non recurring more for public
schools raising our at risk
factor it targets thirty three
million of for improving the
outcomes for our students that
are most at risk in our schools
and that allows us also to
invest more in the kind of
counselors and ancillary staff
that benefits our students in
our schools no it's not just
about public schools it's about
CYFD to because you can't
separate any part of our system
or even our budget from the
other parts that works together
with so to fill positions for
case workers at CYFD case
workers that address the most
troubling situations and and as
an administrative record and
various schools I've valued the
C. Y. F. T. workers with their
caseload Center unbelievable
sometimes so we're investing US
six percent of raise increasing
the funding to see wife's.
CYFD by six percent to fill the
hundreds of both new but also
existing positions what a fund
that kind of evidence based
programs that will improve our
child welfare system and improve
the outcomes in the process of
doing that.
These kinds of investments I'm
only referring to a few of them
here will help make children
across our state get a quality
education and the supports they
need to Florida should prosper
at school at home and in the
greater community and and we've
seen what with our of future
farmers of America group I guess
I it's now F. F. eight fifty we
don't see the full thing anymore
but we see what happens when
kids are invested in their
incredible and we want to have
every child have that advantage
we're continuing also to invest
in education for New Mexico's.
People beyond high school so
currently we're investing
through this budget hundred
nineteen million for the
opportunity scholarship which
particularly targets a lot of
other adults returning for
educational pathway in a high
needs area and our state and
nearly a percent increase in
recurring funding for the higher
education department so with
that I'll finish my portion of
the budget but I think our
community as a whole was just
really committed to have this
investment in the multi faceted
areas of education that will
benefit our State Farm to the
future thank you and I yield
back to Mr speaker I yield back
to a chair a chair from Dona Ana
County Lujan thank you Mr
speaker thank you gently from
Bernalillo I'd like to going out
of the gentle lady from
Bernalillo to talk a little bit
about our health and housing
related and specific investments
in this budget the gentle lady
from earlier percent of Herndon
the speaker thank you Mr speaker
Mr chair when we began working
on this budget one of the things
that happened was there was so
many people who came and said
give voice to us help I voice to
be heard as part of this budget
and we listened on this
committee we listened very
carefully and we wanted to make
sure that we gave a voice to the
voiceless and I want to just
explain to you exactly how that
happened in the state of New
Mexico we want to ensure that
every single person has access
to the health care that they
need and to also make sure that
they have a home that is
critical to their safe being and
well being of not only
themselves but also for the
children me tell you how we made
that come true this year's
budget includes two hundred.
And eighteen million dollars for
Medicaid that that's important
because more than forty seven
percent of our population in the
state of this in the state of
New Mexico is on Medicaid and we
listen to those people said give
voice to the voiceless not only
did we get that two hundred and
eighteen million dollars to
Medicaid and allocated in that
direction I want to point out to
you Mr chair and and Mr speaker
and Mr chair that that is an
eighteen percent increase over
the amount that it had been in
the previous year but that's not
enough let me tell you the rest
of the story then the
procreation will continue
funding current programs for the
developmentally disabled and I
also want you to know that
we provided more than a ten
percent increase.
Totaling over eighty three
million dollars and ready to
reimbursements to promote the
recruitment and retention of
health care providers what does
that mean I want to know that
that's the way in which is going
to bring more doctors to the
state of New Mexico more health
care providers because we have
increased the rate of
reimbursement we listened to the
voiceless as we put together
this budget also allocated ten
million dollars for the new
health care affordability fund
and if there's one thing that we
wanted to make sure that
happened in this budget is that
people's health care was taken
care of.
A critical please critical
piece Mr speaker Mr chair of
this.
The fact that we looked out for
the well being of the people in
our state about making sure that
they had access to housing and
we worked exceptionally hard and
providing housing assistance
with this budget then let me
tell you that story and how it
plays out we provided thirty
eight million dollars in new
housing and then we provided
another ten million for local
government grants to assist with
housing infrastructure we gave
voice to the voiceless and to
prevent homelessness let me tell
you what we did we are providing
and this budget support for
individuals are leaving
incarceration when you we want
to make sure that they have a
place to live we are providing
funding for rental assistance
and we want to make sure in this
budget that nobody is addicted
from their homes we are
providing funding to ensure that
that doesn't happen we are
providing solutions for the on
house and addressing the housing
shortage.
Mexico would be a great place
for everyone to live and for
them to call home we are
expanding housing services but
not only that everybody can't
just go to a doctor we are
expressing and expanding
telehealth care this is
incredibly important when
looking into substance abuse
research and we are looking into
treatment for that and we're
doing it all with a twenty
million dollar allocation
funding from the yard Madam
Madam revenue we are listening
and giving voice to the
voiceless what tension in this
budget.
On both health care and housing
we are making sure that New
Mexico is the best place to live
and for everyone to thrive in
closing Mr Mr speaker Mr chair I
want you to know that I had a
dream that our budget would rise
up and benefit every single
person in New Mexico and we
voted to hold this budget.
As one to be self evident that
all people in the state of New
Mexico are created equal and we
wanted to make sure that their
voices were heard and we lived
up to that very aspect of the
state the land of enchantment
because everybody was heard
thank you.
Coming from Mr speaker I turn
this back over to the state of
Louisiana thank you Mr speaker
I'd like to now bring for yield
to Representative the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative seven Jana to
talk a little bit about water
and natural resources gentle
lady from earlier percent
Sariñana thank you Mr speaker I
think you kind of denim and
you've yield.
You thank you Mr chairman for
allowing me to speak on how we
have funded environment and
energy.
Today I'm proud to report that
this budget reflects our
commitment to protecting our
environment at addressing
climate change and preserving
the public land that makes New
Mexico such a special place to
live Mr speaker we have a
responsibility to our future
generations to do what we can to
address the impacts the climate
of climate change today to
support a transition to a clean
energy economy.
Mr speaker with this in mind we
have passed some of the most
ambitious environmental
protection in the country in
recent years and this budget
supports and builds upon that
vital progress it includes
funding that will allow our
state agencies to better enforce
these existing laws and
regulations and it helps us meet
our carbon reduction goals Mr
speaker we are working to
transition New Mexico to a clean
energy future that brings every
New Mexicans along as well as
protect our natural treasures
for future generations.
That in this budget includes
three hundred thirty seven point
five million investments in
conservation Climent and other
environmental protections Mr
speaker it's strategically
invests of fourteen point seven
increase in every division of
EMNRD and energy minerals and
natural resources department
enabling them into the agency to
make impacts.
Across the landscape including
millions of dollars for state
park improvements which we know
we need expanding enforcement
oil and gas regulations
continued operation of our hot
shot crews to fight wildfires
which we know will be coming it
delivers of the eleven point to
increase to the environment
department which desperately
needs money including millions
for water protection division
resource and environment
protection rural water system
projects investment
Speaker one hundred five point
two million seven percent
increase for the office of the
state engineers totals including
funds for the Interstate Stream
Commission the strategic water
reserves water resource
allocation litigation and
adjudication.
Funding for the lower Rio Grande
project to promote the
settlement of Texas V. New
Mexico and federally authorizing
projects in the middle Rio
Grande.
Mr speaker the budget also
includes smart investments that
will use this current surplus to
generate future recurring
revenue.
One hundred million will go to
status in the land of
enchantment legacy Fund a new
permanent fund for land and
water conservation.
Mr speaker the budget also
dedicate substantial funding to
ten existing but not previously
unfunded but previously unfunded
are chronically underfunded
programs including outdoor
recreation the river stewardship
program and the wildlife
conservation fund it will bring
up it will bring millions in
federal dollars through matching
funds which is very important
finally HC to allocates forty
million for recreation centers
across the state.
Mr speaker coming off the worst
fires fire season our stay in
state history it's never been
more apparent that we must be
proactive in in developing clean
energy.
Well making sure environmental
agencies are well funded and now
we're moving that direction.
They're there to protect our
land water and forest.
So thank you Mr speaker and and
I just want to say thank you Mr
chairman for your great
leadership and all your hard
work thank you Mr speaker two
men from the nana thank you Mr
speaker I now like to yield to
the gentleman from many counties
including Cibola son one
Valencia and more the gentleman
who's vice chair of tax
Representative Garcia gentleman
from all those beautiful
counties Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman with
dental yield.
Mr speaker I'd gladly you.
Thank you Mr speaker of
gentleman.
You know this year we put in the
budget for transportation one
point five billion dollars.
The rules bridges and
maintenance equipment and
salaries Mr speaker of in that
budget there is a there is a two
hundred thirty million dollar.
For state and local rules this
will help rural communities
whether local projects Mr
speaker No gentleman.
And then on top of that Mr
speaker fine gentleman a KVH and
there's ten million dollars for
aviation for rural air services
in the state of New Mexico this
will be a big help to us smaller
boards.
with their upgrades this is the
Good element.
Driver for Economic Development
Mr speaker
The department of military
affairs is here seventy point
eight seven two million dollar
thirty percent increase.
Mr speaker that as you all Moul
I am a Vietnam veteran.
Comment on backroom and this
year we
Got the visitors Department of
twelve percent increase the
increase overall budget and Mr
speaker fundamental stopped
there for just a second.
What I really would like to do
is recognize the people in the
transportation field that are
out there on the highways of
picking them up of snow blowing
the fricking oppression the side
of the highway all of the people
that are the backbone to the
transportation department let
anybody else you know leadership
is good but at the end of the
day the people that are on the
the blue to the ground they're
the ones that deserve all the
credit you know this is been a
long while trying to get this
budget employees.
And the community.
The people that really busted up
there give me a little more
recognition at all so we need to
step back a few steps and all
the people thank you you know
what they're doing could you
know to make a budget and spend
a million dollars over four
billion dollars on on highways
and bridges.
The people are doing the work
never get credit for and we
really need to step back and to
speaker gentleman two of the
knowledge of the people.
With that being said Mr speaker
and provide gentleman of.
You know there's a lot of issues
out there that we need to
address.
You know this is just the two
would just keeping up with the
ice but does bring but we really
need to but what we're doing and
give credit where credit is due
with that I yield back the
speaker.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen now Mr
speaker I'd like to close and I
like to yield to the gentleman
from the Espanola valley the
Representative Sweetser thank
you Mr speaker of.
As a Representative Garcia
mentioned we have a tough time
in a rural areas that's why a
critical piece of this budget is
the ninety three million
dedicated to rural hospitals
clinics and nursing homes it
includes funds to raise rates
for rural facilities up to a
hundred percent of Medicare
rates for equivalent rates to
help sustain the economic
viability one million is
allocated specifically for rural
health hospital contracts to
underserved areas it also has
one point five million for three
percent or greater rate increase
for rural primary care clinics
federally qualified health
centers to help recruit and
retain doctors thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
as you can see where
extraordinary proud of this
budget it saves the most that
we've been saving it keeps our
reserves at the strongest level
that we set for the last several
years and Mr speaker this budget
makes the most evidence based
targeted investments in areas
that we can all agree need those
investments in a way that we
think those investments can be
utilized in communities all
across New Mexico with that love
stand for questions there is
debate.
There is a dollar from
Bernalillo Representative role
metal.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen for for your
presentation of the budget I was
wondering Mr speaker and
gentleman if you could walk us
through kind of the process
between LESC and the LESC during
the interim thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen Mr speaker
like the LFC the LESC has been
meeting monthly co chair of
course Mr speaker gentleman by
yourself the I think we followed
a very similar process it's
being out in communities working
with folks Argall across New
Mexico trying to hear directly
from them and Mr speaker
gentleman I think the incredibly
diligent work the strong
leadership in the LFC and the
strong committee leadership
bills unparalleled sort of
similarities as we came into
this budget an agreement in ways
of investing in our educators
investing in our kids and Mr
speaker and gentleman I I I
appreciate that overview of the
interim and and it was great
cross collaboration between the
legislative education study
committee between our
legislative finance committee
and I was wondering Mr speaker
and gentleman if you could talk
about one of the issues where we
really came together that's
reflected in the budget and
that's the four million dollars
for fine arts in four million
dollars for physical education
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen thank you for those
examples those are just two
examples of where we see Mr
speaker gentleman that learning
time and that that sort of
valuable learning time for for
our kids doesn't have to be just
one form of seat time and in
fact Mr speaker and gentleman
that these are important for
kids is the gentle lady from
Bernalillo talked about for
their mental for their physical
health and to engage it with the
school for the in fine arts to
engage their creativity so
Mister speaker gentleman think
this really shows a shared
vision and commitment.
With the budgetary backing to
honor those parts of our New
Mexico kids Mr speaker and and
gentleman yes certainly with the
fine arts these especially as
we've been hearing from
stakeholders and educators for
awhile now that fine arts and
fully funding fine arts was
something that they wanted as
they monitored their students in
the progress of their students
and the wants of their students
as far as enrichment activities
so I think that's a great
example of where we've all come
together and it's reflected in
the budget one of the things Mr
speaker and gentleman I was
wondering if you could comment
on is the increase to the
administrator's responsibility
factor for our school school
leadership thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen again this
is as you this is a shared area
of priority within the L. E. S.
C. and within the LFC Mr speaker
gentleman the most important
person in the classroom is it
there in the schools in the
classroom we know that with our
educators the Mr speaker
gentleman B. Riley point out
that the school leadership those
administrators are
extraordinarily important to the
outcomes in all of our New
Mexico schools so Mister speaker
gentleman this support the
shared support between the LESC
and the LFC and reflected in H.
B. two here today shows that we
understand that that leadership
does matter we understand that
giving our administrators giving
our New Mexico educators the
tools to become better leaders
things were going to have better
schools and we're going to have
better outcomes thank you Mr
speaker and and gentleman and
like the gentle lady from
Bernalillo had mentioned in her
comments that there are
substantial increases going
towards all of our school staff
five percent average increase in
pay twenty five thousand dollar
minimum salary for education.
All systems that are so crucial
in our schools but I think it's
particularly important Mr
speaker and gentleman that you
point out the fact of our
administration at the school
site so when we seek to
implement educational policy is
that we need the leadership at
the individual schools at the
principal level in order to
carry out what their whole we're
hoping that they do the fact
that they're well trained well
informed and are able to
implement the policies that
we're hoping to have them
implement at the school level is
is vitally critical one of the
things I'd like to point out Mr
speaker and gentleman that is
also part of the budget is a
residency program particularly
aimed at school counselors and
school administrators we have a
teacher residency program and
there's a increase funding in
that and we know in the
education field how beneficial
it's been to allow.
Active educators to have a
residency and to work with a
master educator in the field
that's something that I think
will translate very well to what
we also need in our school are
increased counselors school
counselors to help with the post
pandemic.
Back into schools some of the
aces that the gentlelady from
Bernalillo brought up with our
students as well as this
pipeline to becoming could
administrators at the school
level because again we need
great educators we need great
staff we need great leadership
all at the school level and I
think this budget clearly
reflects those and I certainly
Forward to the interim in the
continued work between
legislative education study
committee and legislative
finance committee with that Mr
speaker and gentleman
congratulations on the budget
certainly putting it together
and bringing it before on the
floor today thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you there is for the
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
to the gentleman from Dona Ana
yield Mister speaker I gladly
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan Mr speaker John from Dona
thank you I know there's a
number of members on the board
so I just want to ask sort of a
few pointed questions about
specific things that are not in
the in the budget.
Mr speaker can you describe for
the body how ECECD is being
funded through this bill.
Yes thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen using CD is being
funded through a variety of
sources Mr speaker gentleman
this budget does contemplate in
a.
So we're working with the
executive for a disbursement
from the ECECD trust fund from
the early childhood Trust Fund
that is that is small that no
for even though it's it's a very
large trust fund now that will
have no impact on the corpus Mr
speaker gentleman that fund will
continue to grow that fund is
being used in addition to other
funding sources including from
the our constitutional amendment
Mr speaker gentleman and that's
to do the sorts of things
expanding pre K. slots creating
more pre K. slots expanding the
pre K. day Mr speaker gentleman
also providing more childcare
supports Mr speaker gentleman
the wraparound services that are
very important really building
Mr speaker gentleman upon a
shared point of emphasis for
this entire body which is home
visiting and looking at ways to
improve and make that services
we have twenty two thousand
kiddos in the the state every
year we want as many to be able
to take advantage of those
services possible Mr speaker and
gentleman from done and what
percentage of general fund is
being used to fund this
department verses the our early
childhood trust fund that we
created.
The trump Trust.
I
speaker gentleman two thirds
from the general fund roughly Mr
speaker Jennifer Dona ana and I.
I recall during the interment of
C. meetings.
That I believe recently received
a projection at some point of
what the fund balance is
projected to grow within the
early childhood trust fund
I I recall I think maybe by two
thousand twenty seven it's
supposed to be somewhere between
seven or nine billion Mr speaker
and gentleman from Dona and you
know what that number is Mr
speaker and gentleman that
number first Mr speaker Jim and
I want to briefly correct it's
through at three to one and
three quarters General Fund one
quarter the trust fund Mr
speaker and gentleman that
number is twenty FY twenty
twenty seven expected to swell
to ten billion dollars Mr
speaker gentleman that is a
corpus that we we want to make
sure stays very much protected
that is perhaps.
One of the biggest investments
New Mexico will have ever made
in improving childhood outcomes
and that the disbursements from
that trust fund will only
support as far into the future.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Dona Ana.
I I would encourage us as a body
be mindful of that fund balance
moving forward and and I'd I
agree that that Fund.
For lack of better words funds
important purpose and and
programs that we need to have I
think discussions about
but it's growing at such a large
right I think we should be
careful about having a practice
of using general fund to fund
those programs Mr speaker
gentleman from Dona and I think
we also need to have a serious
conversation as a body about who
should be the beneficiaries of
that fund it Madam maybe we
should consider expanding that
that beneficial classes some
point to offset the fact that it
is such an enormous Fund Mr
speaker and gentleman from Dona
Ana page one ninety nine of the
budget lines twenty two three
twenty three.
So this is in the context of
informing him of fish for
modernization efforts for
species of greatest conservation
need Mr speaker gentleman for
Dona ana can you speak to what
that means.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen Mr speaker gentleman
the many of these the as I
mentioned the beginning this
budget was built in the the end
from this is the legislative
finance committee approach Mr
speaker gentleman so the the
game and fish's expressed an
interest in making sure that Mr
speaker gentleman as they
continue to serve sportsman like
myself hunters and fishermen
that they also Mr speaker and
gentleman are able to support it
what in fact is ends up being
the fifth most bio diverse state
in the nation that here in New
Mexico so Mister speaker the
gentleman this
That coming in
in that unanimous bipartisan
vote from the LFC process think
that's what this is intended to
do.
Mr speaker Jennifer Dona and
thank you for the response I hi
and this isn't a slide of our
game fish Department but I'd get
a little concerns I look at a
state like Arizona they they
implemented in the Grand Canyon
a truck reduction program and so
I when we talk about these kind
of spaces I'd I'd it just makes
me a little nervous once we
start going in that realm Mr
speaker Jennifer Dona Ana is
there any of the money in this
budget that would support a
program for.
law enforcement limit let me
describe sort of the context Sir
when law enforcement comes in in
a contact with someone in that
that person is having a mental
health crisis
for a drug addiction crisis a
process to triage them in an
effort to sort of come back
people that maybe Mesilla
shouldn't be.
Strictly going through the
criminal justice system alone Mr
speaker German thank you so much
for the question Mr speaker
gentleman we have spread
throughout the budget expanded
substance use disorder treatment
programs Mr speaker gentleman
for instance we've heard about
them the Medicaid reimbursement
rate increases Mr speaker
gentleman for all of our
inpatient rehabilitation centers
here in the state in New Mexico
that's going to mean a twenty
five percent increase in their
receipts to make them able to
serve New Mexicans better Mr
speaker gentleman just fit very
specific area that thing very
much corresponds with what
you're describing is a million
dollars that was part of the
opioid settlement settlement
with the state of New Mexico the
brought in a very large amount
this is budgeting twenty million
dollars this year and that Mr
speaker gentleman is a million
dollars then to work with
sovereign tribal nations for
members who are undergoing some
of those substance use disorder
challenges Mr speaker gentleman
the I would go back to the
reimbursement rates because
those are for rural emergency
medical services sometimes Mr
speaker gentleman perhaps those
folks are going to be responding
to the people as you describing
crisis and if you can't get an
ambulance out there Mr speaker
gentleman then maybe you have to
get the sheriff well for raising
Mr speaker gentleman the
reimbursement rates for those
rural emergency response
services substantially through
what the gentle lady from
Bernalillo talked about this
initial eighty three million
dollar Medicaid right increase
those are a couple of examples
that apply directly Mr speaker
gentleman one I've just only had
one piece because it's such an
important question Mr speaker
gentleman the thirty two point
five million dollars that are
there.
For
law enforcement officer
recruitment and retention that
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
talked about I think we foresees
and and we should perhaps hope
that some of those dollars are
used to recruit law enforcement
members who communities decide
need to maybe we can bolster
their ability to respond to
people in crisis not necessarily
just by locking him up but
through other means Mr speaker
Jennifer Dona Ana side I would
just request a maybe maybe put a
sticky note on this and visit
this concept in the interim you
know I know my County is is is
just getting off the ground this
concept where law enforcement is
dispatch they have they make
contact with a person in a
health crisis or a drug
addiction crisis and they're
able to take him to a center
they get triage they get help
and they go through the criminal
justice system more an informal
process to get the help they
need and the ideas we need to
separate out the people that
need help on that front from the
career criminals from the
violent criminals that's a
renewed focus our efforts and
set some of the studies show Mr
speaker that if you can triage
some of those folks out in the
help they need they actually
don't reenter the criminal
justice system again but if if
very are perpetually in the
system then not only the costs
the taxpayer but I don't think
it's good criminal justice
approach either Mr speaker
gentleman from Dona Ana is there
any money in this bill to target
electric generation relief.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so Mister speaker
gentleman there are a number of
funds of the Mr speaker
gentleman for our
the Economic Development
department and other departments
the long overdue frankly Mr
speaker gentleman energy
transition Act funds are
contained in this budget Mr
speaker gentleman there are
matching grants avail for our
energy minerals and natural
resources department one point
eight million dollars in our
special appropriations that will
help them match federal energy
programs Mr speaker gentleman
there's also a fifty million
dollar advanced energy
technology item in there Mr
speaker gentleman that will help
uh expand clean energy
opportunities Mr speaker
gentleman it is technology
neutral it is just focused on
reliable affordable clean energy
leveraging federal resources
creating jobs for New Mexicans
those are a few simple and Mr
speaker gentleman we've
They're they're some of the
energy conservation and
management division ECM the
positions at the energy minerals
and natural resources department
will also help New Mexicans
lower their utility bills
through various programs whether
it's energy efficiency or
renewable energy.
Mr speaker Jennifer Dona Ana
north I appreciate discussion
about utility bill relief from
but I think frankly that is
often times just a bandaid it
doesn't get to the root of the
underlying problem
Mr speaker gentleman from Dona
Ana we are living in the state
were utility rates seem to N. B.
increasing.
at significant rates.
And part of the reason why I
think is.
We did a very poor job of having
real replacement power ready to
go when we started taking it
offline things like a coal fired
power plants.
And I understand the need to to
transition to clean sources of
energy so I I don't dispute that
point but what happens in what
is happening as a result is are
are working class families the
the poor among us they've kind
of got swept up in this move to
make sure that we are doing
everything we can to eliminate
climate change.
And Mr speaker and gentleman I I
would submit there's still
another path that can provide
long term utility bill relief in
the form of of lower rates in
the former reliable electric
generation in the form of clean
electric generation and Mr
speaker gentleman from Dona ana
I think one of those is using
natural gas as an input when
we're doing a lecture generation
Mr speaker gentleman from Dona
Ana New Mexico's fortunate we we
sit on some of the world's
cleanest natural gas existence
abundant the infrastructure is
already in place we can type it
all over the state.
and it's affordable.
And so Mr speaker and gentleman
from Dona Ana.
Mr speaker I move house floor
amendment number one to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two and three request a
roll call vote the to to number.
And I believe it's been passed
out as point two two five three
nine two point two.
I count eight hands were good
but gentleman before you go
there to make sure it's on the
website it is on the website it
has been passed out.
The gentleman to explain the
amendment so Mister speaker
during the body's attention paid
sixty nine line twenty one so
this is in the oil and gas
conservation program it keeps
their budget flat so we're not
cutting their budget and instead
it takes the additional increase
of one point one six zero
million and and transistors to
promote election generation with
natural gas.
It gentleman from you as is so
friendly amendment Mr speaker I
might have a couple of questions
to determine that but I'm I'm
don't think so at this point I
do have a couple of quick
questions Mr speaker.
There is debate on the amendment
it'll go to you first on from
going on thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman that
gentleman from San Juan would
you you.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you thank you gentlemen
thank you a German speaker
gentleman I guess for the
amendment as we looked at
increasing positions in the oil
conservation division we had a
few thoughts and I'd like to go
through those thoughts and see
if you agree or disagree Mr
speaker gentleman one thought Mr
speaker gentleman is that
the we need to make sure that
we're having the the sort of the
inspections the safety that New
Mexicans expect that we want to
keep track with our performance
measures and so Mister speaker
gentleman would you agree that
that's a good in an important
function for the oil
conservation to sort of stay up
on their inspections out in the
field this is for for wells for
example Mr speaker Jennifer Dona
Ana my understanding is that
there are sufficient resources
for the department to do that
already thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman I I think we
we and we I think we we share we
agree on that but Mr speaker
gentleman in our in our volume
one in our
for this year when we turn to
page one forty nine Mr speaker
gentleman.
And and a few pages there in the
performance measures show that
actually the regulators are
falling behind they're only at
forty seven percent as they
close out quarter to and Mr
speaker gentleman even more
alarmingly we've only plugged a
small fraction of the wells the
abandoned oil and gas wells that
we actually have funding to plug
because Mr speaker gentleman
what we heard is they don't have
enough people so that's one
thing the speaker gentleman
though another question I would
ask do you think that it's
important that we process
permits applications do you
think it's important that we
work with industry in a timely
manner make sure that we're
meeting our mark for what they
need in the field when it comes
to whether it's rights of ways
permits to drill permits to do
you know to dispose everything
in between would you think that
that's important.
Mr speaker Jennifer Dunn and I'd
the issue is not financial
resources the the issue in the
slow permitting process is the
regulations themselves that's
that's the heart of the issue
and so it's not a funding
problem and so throwing more
money at the problem is I'm
gonna solve that in my opinion
so onerous burden that we placed
within the regulations
themselves thank you Mr thank
you gentlemen I think in in that
case who one of the things Mr
speaker gentleman we've actually
heard from industry right now we
said a performance target and
ninety five percent in those
rounds were below that Mr
speaker gentleman at eighty
eight percent Mr speaker
gentleman last year the oil
conservation division filled
every single one of its funded
vacancies that is they went all
the way they feel every single
vacancy and they're still
falling behind Mr speaker
gentleman and as we Mr speaker
gentleman I'm sure we all know
this is the body we've been it
between a hundred and a hundred
and five rigs in New Mexico for
goodness at least the last six
seven months roughly we go over
we can we get a recount every
week we are falling behind not
only on the health and safety
piece Mr speaker gentleman were
falling behind on being that
good private sector partner to
get the best most efficient
clean this development so I I
appreciate you answer my
questions Mr speaker gentleman
on force I do think it's on
friendly but I very much
appreciate the question.
Sir for the debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Sarinana thank you Mr speaker is
a kind gentleman from estate
kill someone yield Mister
speaker I died to yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you I'm so kind of a miracle for
exactly is this money can be
taken from.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo on page sixty nine
it's lines line twenty one what
is going to Mr speaker kind on
what is line twenty one Mr
speaker gentle lady so it's this
is the the PS any within the oil
and gas conservation program.
Thank you Mr the bank and and so
in the interim Mr speaker we
heard from EMNRD and they were
they were saying we do not have
enough people to do the job we
need to do we may I have have
filled our quota but we need
more people to do everything we
need to do and to take from
employee benefits that's kind of
an incentive for them it's it's
a wrong place be taking money
from EMNRD needs everything I
can do to to fulfill the job
we've asked him to do which is
beyond their capacity they are
killing our people to get the
job we wanted to do and they
can't even do it so to take it
from employee benefits to take
it from here it's just the wrong
place to do it we need to be
giving them more money which we
did this year in the budget in
order to do what they need to do
in the oil conservation to.
So Mr speaker Mr kind of and I
just think I don't think this
quite friendly amended because
EMNRD.
Again the last couple days of
our our meetings asked us for
more money to do everything they
need to do.
and as a legislature I think we
need to listen to them and
and we can take it from here so
thank you kind and.
There is limited only from tiles
Representative Ortez thank you
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from San Juan please yield
Mister speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from tells County
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the the league the
young lady from Bernalillo asked
my main question which is what
part of this budget and this
department we do funding to meet
this ammendment I'm not gonna
ask that again
I want to understand what you
mean by Mr speaker gentleman to
promote electrical generation
with natural gas.
How would.
The department do that Mr
speaker and gentleman Mr speaker
generated from Travis county so
I would envision them being able
to work with industry to see
what the needs are in our state
for infrastructure to promote
again using natural gas as a
source of elector generation.
Mr speaker and gentleman has the
department asked you to make
this change.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
health Canada they have not.
Mr speaker German have you
talked to the Department about
what this amendment would would
do to their budget.
Mr speaker joy from Travis
county I have not.
Thank you Mr speaker a
gentleman.
I want to really understand this
or promotion of the electrical
electrical generation with
natural gas how.
How is that conflicting with the
law we have on the books
regarding the Energy
transitioned Act Mr speaker
generated from Travis county
natural gas is not defined as
renewable underneath you today.
Mr speaker gentle and so we
really can't.
We can be promoting this is the
source of just electrical
generation.
Mr speaker tonight from Travis
county we can.
Mr speaker Jim McKee tell me how
we can.
Mr speaker generated from Travis
county so there's a date from
which the ATA plies.
and so I would submit that we as
a body need to revisit the TA.
Again I understand the need to
address climate change but we're
doing so on the backs of the
poor and working class and so I
think we need to revisit that
and refocus our efforts to make
sure that we're providing clean
affordable and reliable
electricity Mr speaker generated
from Travis county one of the
ways I would submit that we are
able to do that as a state and
very well positioned to do so is
through natural gas.
Mr speaker gentleman I I agree
that we need to promote the
clean affordable electricity and
other utilities for New Mexicans
especially low income New
Mexicans and I I don't think
that this is the way to do it
this budget shows a lot of
support for energy efficiency
supporting the OCD which we'll
get those permits per UC out
faster which I know is what I I
assume Mr speaker and gentleman
you you support
I don't think this is the way to
do it.
So thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen.
As for the debate on the
amendment.
Delete from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
The motion to table house floor
amendment number one.
There has been a request for a
roll call vote.
Will.
Your board is ready.
We're on a motion to table house
floor amendment number one.
To house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three a vote
of yes the amendment will be
tabled.
It would have no we're back on
the amendment yes the amendment
disabled able to know.
We're back on the amendment.
The vote is now open.
About.
This.
What is now closed level of
forty in the affirmative twenty
five in the negative house floor
amendment number one to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three has been
tabled.
Generals and one of the floor
thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I I just want to
finish with source sure the body
why can't totally support this
bill I do recognize the hard
work that's gone into it I know
there's been a lot of
contribution from many people
both sides while I'm I'm
appreciative of that I think
that's important part of the
process but Mr speaker.
The the the one thing that I
have the most heartburn with is
the fact that this grows our
budget twelve point three
percent on the back of last year
which was somewhere around
roughly nine percent I believe.
And that's fine if we have a
stable source of revenue
but Mr speaker we we live in a
place that is wholly dependent
upon
of the extractive industries the
fund this budget but too often I
feel we do what we can to try to
at the same time make life very
difficult on that industry and I
just don't think that model of
relying on oil and gas with one
hand in the other hand having a
sore towards the same industry
is sustainable long term.
And so if that's the approach
the body's gonna take which I
think historically we have at
least the last few years.
Then I think we had any to have
a disservice discussion about
continued to grow grow
government such right.
there's many important programs
that we do fund are you know big
supporter of of public education
and economic development of
criminal justice reform these
are all important things
but when we make decisions that
put renewables over extractives
and I think we need to
understand that there's
consequences those answers a
decisions including revenue
consequences so thank you Mr
speaker.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from us on the bus
and the fan tells Representative
editor.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman from Dona Ana
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from those
northern counties.
Thank you so much I rise today
in support of this bill thank
you very much for your
leadership and I rise to talk
about the subject of early
education and and and the
commendable the commendable
resources and research that
we've done to bring about this
budget I find this committee for
their work.
And I'd like to go back.
Two twenty five years ago.
when we started something called
the Los Alamos National
Laboratory foundation and a
group of leaders at the lab
including the lab director the
deputy director high levels
scientists at the lab and then
leaders in the community got
together for a first foundation
meeting.
But there was a buzz in the room
that day because a man by the
name of George Palin had decided
to join this foundation.
And for those of you who don't
know.
I he was really a leader in
early childhood education and
early childhood research and he
he was an extraordinary man.
During the during World War two
or pre World War two he was a
graduate student at the
university of Chicago his
girlfriend was Helen she was a
list off to a place called post
office box sixteen sixty three
to work on a secret project.
she see the wrote a letter to
George her boyfriend and said
you need to get out here
subject would tell you later on
in his years and he he was at
the Trinity site he was active
in the in the in the the making
of the the nuclear bomb he was
very active in that he said he
spent the first forty years of
his life.
building more weapons of mass
destruction and he spent the
last forty years of his life
atoning for this guy us started
the something called the Los
Alamos National Bank the Santa
Fe institute which is the
primary Institute and one of the
premier of scientific institutes
in our nation he started
K. he he was he was instrumental
in starting a lot of things in
Los Alamos and in the state he
started the UNM campus up there
he started a lot of things so
what I want to say is he did the
early research and early
childhood education about brains
in babies and how how they grew
and in nineteen
Eighty he put ten million out to
six universities all over the
country and that's for the early
research on brain development
for early childhood came from
all that all that really
reserves that we had came from
that point and when he came on
this board he walked in the room
and he walked up to me and he
said I'm not going to do I'm not
joining this board unless you do
something for birth to three and
I stood back and said okay
that's what we'll do and that's
when we started looking at
programs model programs that
would that would help develop
kids and we came across this
beautiful program in Silver City
called the first foreign program
and we spent a lot of money
researching that in implementing
that I raised a million dollars
from private foundations we came
to this body got another million
to private to to do research
over a five year period looking
at the implementation of a home
visiting program why is this
important.
Because parents don't know what
they don't know it's it's really
that simple and we fit and they
had built they had built a home
visiting program where over
thirty five visits a year they
were going to home safe work
with moms and dads they'd work
with first point families and
teach them about how a baby what
you should expect from your baby
and helping them to develop
and that was.
I guess fifteen years ago when
we did that so so home visiting
hi is really a cornerstone of I
think what we need to start with
in early education in the state
and and yet fifteen years later
only one into a twenty children
are getting this service and
building upon that are are you
know it's affordable daycare and
its pre school and it's it's all
the early education step
planners that we need to create
a smart child a child ready to
to go into kindergarten ready to
read ready to do all the things
that they need to do and and
it's building this foundation
and early childhood that is that
is so very very important
I want to say today only one in
six children have access to
sliding the child care and if
you gain access to high quality
care we need a lot of money to
to to invest in these programs
so that we have the kinds of but
it's one thing to have a day
care program it's another thing
to have a quality day care
program that's really what we
need we need quality at all of
these different levels for
children in our state if they
are to grow and thrive what we
want our children that thrive in
ours.
So I commend this I commend this
Committee
kind gentleman of what they have
done is the general fund
appropriations in early
childhood and educational care
department are up a hundred and
thirty five million or sixty
nine percent that's what we
think we need to really
improved educational systems for
early childhood as we know it
it's vital that we do that and I
appreciate the committees work
in that also.
Also we need to improve the
general fund at CYFD by a six
percent again investments that
we we had promise but really had
not funded that's the the all
these programs have been under
funded over the years so I think
it's really time for this body
and this committee to step up
and say really how are we going
to invest in these children how
are you going to make a
difference in their lives Harry
going to really improve families
in this state.
So today we have a historic
opportunity to create
educational system that builds
of the off the strings of
children built off the strength
of families and built at early
age and that's we're trying to
do so in closing kind gentleman
thank you for your leadership
thank you from the children of
the state thank.
Thank you gentleman there is for
the debate.
The gentleman the jobs are the
gentle lady from Katrin
supported a well and Sierra
Sierra Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Dona yield Mister
speaker I gladly yield to the
gentle lady with the largest
house district in the nation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind gentleman I I do like to
brag about that
I do have a couple questions Mr
speaker kind gentleman I was
curious if you could tell me a
little bit about aging and long
term.
And what we've done for them and
you know there's one thing that
there's three things that I
think we should be taken care of
and that's children seniors the
seniors and veterans so can you
talk a little bit about what
we've done for aging and long
term absolutely Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you so much
for the question when we had our
agency here are hearing with
aging and long term services it
was clear gentle lady that
there with the seniors in the
room from our committee members
there was a clear sense that
more support was needed so
Mister speaker gentle lady the
most important part of the
senior of aging long term
services there
the triple A.'s the aging that
works we said that there needed
to be a million extra dollars
one of the larger increases so a
million recurring new dollars
going into aging and long term
services this supports are
triple a networks all across the
state Mr speaker gentle lady as
folks know you know we
oftentimes take a lower REC
recommendation within the
committee process but there is
such a clear call the agency
that we ended up adjusting that
number and adding a million
recurring dollars to the triple
a network Mr speaker gentle lady
there was also going into the
session there was a conversation
about a permanent trust fund in
in to build into the key piece
of age of fun Mr speaker gentle
lady
there was the proposal to be at
a forty million dollar trust
fund however Mister speaker
gentle lady with the extra
Nishant is and the energy that
the secretary and the agency is
bringing and that this committee
really matched it was clear that
just having a small percentage
of that forty forty million
dollars every year would not be
sufficient to meet the
department's needs some
therefore Mr speaker gentle lady
we added an eight million dollar
special appropriation that will
be available immediately for the
department giving them a very
substantial increase this year
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman so the
forty million dollars wasn't
given but there was an eight
million dollars that was giving
in recurring Mr speaker gentle
lady currently that's not the
the eight million dollars is not
recurring it is available
immediately Mr speaker gentle
lady the overall
we had a we're up at about a
almost a twenty percent increase
Mr speaker gentle lady just with
that million dollars recurring
that doesn't count the.
Special so I think Mr speaker
gentle lady
this is a very very strong
increase we want to make sure
that the department which we
have confidence is able to
utilize it effectively and I
think there there does look like
there's the ability to do more
work into the future and Mr
speaker gentle lady this eight
million dollars will be there
and available immediately to
support the department during
that time.
You Mr speaker kind gentleman I
just really it's hard for them
to start programs and then stop
and look for money so I would
really highly encourage that we
take a really close look at that
and and possibly we can add some
more money if we could if the
Senate's listening on on another
note Mr speaker and gentleman
the triple a whole situation
here in the state of New Mexico
Mr speaker kind gentleman is
been a sort of an issue with
different
reimbursement rates for
different areas of the state and
I really think that it would be
really good for us to take a
look at that and possibly during
the interim Mr speaker kind
gentleman
See I I wanted to to make a
couple of of comments
and and then I had one last
question so Mr speaker kind
gentle and how much money again
did we put into kept the career
technical education thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
this year we are dedicating
forty million dollars in one
area so twenty million dollars
of general fund twenty million
dollars from the public
education reform Fund a full
forty million dollars going back
to the conversation with the
gentleman from Bernalillo
matching the L. E. S. C.
recommendation we know the
career technical education is a
huge opportunity it's overdue we
made we we went up to the very
highest level we could the Mr
speaker gentle lady there is an
additional hundred million
dollars going through the public
school capital outlay committee
of which a significant portion
of that is also dedicated to
career technical education we
had an imac could be anywhere Mr
speaker gentle lady from another
fifty to seventy million dollars
for just from that capital
outlay fund so all told we are
that that making available well
over a hundred and twenty
million.
I guess well over a hundred
million dollars this year alone.
Thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman that the I think that
touches every area across the
state in New Mexico and and I
really appreciate that because
college is not for everyone and
it's a big deal in my community
and my districts that I
represent that I.
They have that option so I do
really appreciate that part of
the the a budget the other one
one little thing that I wanted
to touch on was the settlement
Medicaid provider rate increase
Mr speaker kind gentleman you
know I pushed really hard wrote
a letter to the governor and
others asking for an increase
because I had people in my
district that were.
About to go out of business
because they couldn't afford to
stay at the rate that it was so
can you just talk just a little
bit about that please absolutely
Mr speaker gentle lady this
although.
This with Mister speaker gentle
lady is one of the absolute
points of pride in the speaker
gentle lady thanks to your and
other leadership I think we're
now understanding that this
reimbursement is a core part of
how we help retain our health
care professionals now recruit
more health care professionals
in the future so Mister speaker
gentle lady we heard the amount
it's eighteen million dollars of
general fund Mr speaker gentle
lady we know that that gets
match at least three to one when
because it's part of the
Medicaid system so this is
generating it hundreds of
millions of the is generating
vast amounts of of funding for
New Mexico practitioners and Mr
speaker gentle lady for instance
if you are a
a radiology or a look laboratory
or pathology physician or other
practitioner Mr speaker gentle
lady at the rate that we the LFC
this budget contemplates you're
going to be getting a twenty
eight percent increase in your
reimbursement Mr speaker gentle
lady the committee again in a
bipartisan way prioritized a few
areas maternal and child health
care behavioral health care to
actually go above the Medicare
reimbursement and so Mister
speaker gentle lady in that area
with maternity related
thirty one percent increase in
reimbursements when it comes to
child health forty one percent
Mr speaker increase in
reimbursements Mr speaker gentle
lady as we go down this list the
very highest goes up to almost
fifty percent increase in
reimbursements at the very low
just ten fifteen so this is the
biggest investment for health
care providers that they're
going to see as soon as we you
know passes budget and
ultimately as it goes for the.
Process it's signed by the
governor if we keep these
reimbursement increases in their
thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind gentlemen I I was looking
at those rates the other day and
I know a lot of the the people
especially some of the
transportation increases I think
it was eighteen percent for non
emergency in forty two percent
firmer emergency that to a.
That increases that is really
going to make a difference in my
community for sure and I would
assume across the state in New
Mexico Mr speaker kind gentleman
by I wanted to make sure that
people knew that there was three
and a half million dollars for
local tourism departments and
that also.
Goes across the state it helps
rural New Mexico a lot of my
constituents in in my area some
of the cogs and others were
saying that really does help
promote their area and so I was
I was anxious to see that number
as well Mr speaker kind
gentleman I do have an
amendment.
Not sure if it's passed out Mr
speaker
I don't believe it is it was a
minute and it'll get past
gentlelady.
Gentlelady can you read the two
to five number please yes Mr
speaker it's two two five three
six nine point one okay that's
one I have and it is now being
passed.
Because it appears the
amendment.
Us being passed out couple more
back there in the corner.
The tension I number is point
two two five three six nine
point one.
Good movie amendment thank you
Mr speaker I move house
amendment number one for house
bill two and three of do I need
to say the number.
We
the generally moves house floor
amendment number two House
revisions finance we substitute
I'm sorry number one apologies
house floor amendment number one
to house appropriation finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three the
gentlelady to explain her
amendment thank you Mr speaker
basically what this ammendment
is doing is putting two million
more dollars into the early
childhood education and care
department to provide
reimbursement to prekindergarten
programs that are serving five
year olds who are not quite
ready to go to kindergarten.
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
What happens right now in a lot
of schools Mr speaker kind
gentleman is that if they turn
five by a certain date.
They get kicked out of preschool
because they're not ready to go
to kindergarten and they can't
stay in preschool Mr speaker
kind gentleman happened to my
granddaughter.
The school didn't figure out but
they didn't get reimbursement
the school did not get
reimbursement.
For having that child there and
that's what this ammendment does
Mr speaker kind gentle and and I
stand for questions from the
as a friendly amendment thank
you Mr speaker I very much
appreciate that was very much
the amendment is brought however
it is on friendly.
We have an unfriendly amendment
Is there debate on the amendment
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from all of those
counties yield yes Mr speaker I
yield thank you
Mr speaker gentle lady
This your amendment
is regarding specifically what
type of children at what age.
It would Mr speaker kind gentle
lady it is regarding children
that are four years old that
start preschool that turn I at a
certain time in preschool.
And cannot attend preschool
anymore because they don't fit
into that box.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that does seem
somewhat counterintuitive to
our long term goals here in the
legislature and particularly in
LFC Mr speaker gentle lady as we
continue to talk about the
benefits of pre K. and how it
makes.
You know just a long term
difference in the opportunities
for our youngest Mr speaker
gentle lady what we're exactly
is the statute that says that
these providers would have to
kick out the four year olds.
Mr speaker gentle lady I was
right that the four year olds
who turned I.
One moment please Mr speaker.
Mr speaker kind gentle lady
we're looking for the statue
right now I don't know exactly
where it is I just know that my
the superintendent and my
principal at my local school
district says there is one and
when they report out the ages
and and so we're still looking
for that statute but it is.
It's something that happens and
not only in my district but
others thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady and if they want to
continue to look for that I can
proceed with sort of where I was
going if that's okay okay Mister
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady that's fine.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and so if it is.
I guess my understanding Mister
speaker gentle lady is that
maybe it's not in statute and
maybe this is something Mr
speaker gentle lady that could
be changed administratively.
and so I'd be interested if
perhaps Mister speaker gentle
lady we might get confirmation
of that.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
we're we're usually looking.
Mr speaker kind lady ultimately
whether it's in statute or rule
or what wherever it's at what
this is doing is giving that
introduce the money to be able
to reimburse the school because
ultimately.
With ECDC and pre K. E. and and
public education or private
education we are trying to serve
children and we should be
serving all children and so
that's ultimately what this will
this amendment will do.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and you know just to remind
the body we are putting a
hundred and thirty two million
in two pre K.
My point Mr speaker and gentle
lady is that rather than this
being a budget issue and I think
it is a very important issue and
as a parent time very
disappointed to hear that this
may be a practice that occurs in
New Mexico Mr speaker gentle
lady what I would like to
recommend is that ECECD perhaps
adjust their administrative
rules to fix this or rather if
it is in statute somewhere
Potentially the pre K. act that
we seek to amend that.
Thank you Mr speaker kind lady
it is in statute
by expert witness here Dr John
Courtney found it it is three
two eight dash two three dash
three.
And in eighty it says
prekindergarten means a
voluntary developmental reading
this program for children who
have attained their fourth
birthday prior to September
first.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and.
That statute Ben doesn't say
that the student needs to be
kicked out of pre K..
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
They just don't get the
reimbursement.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and once again I
think this is a fabulous issue
that needs to be addressed but
following back to the fact that
it's more of an administrative
problem that ECECD should
rectify particularly in light of
the hundred and thirty two
million that's going to pre K.
so with that Mr speaker gentle
lady thank you.
There's further debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker
doesn't gentlelady yields I
yield so I'm wondering of Mr
speaker gentle lady who decides
or how is it decided that a
child is not ready for
kindergarten.
Mr speaker kind lady their
parents.
Mr speaker and gentle gentle
lady that that could be
problematic IDC and also do you
have a data sheet where did that
two million come from Mr speaker
kind lady I don't have any data
I just wanted a place to start.
Mr speaker gently I agree with
that that that this is something
that needs to be but we can't
just start what state you know
he's too little he's to this I
think there needs to be some
professional involvement Mr
speaker gentle lady about need
to meet some people just want
their kids to stay babies
forever and so they do they're
they're heartbroken when they go
to kindergarten so I think
letting the parents decide is is
that yes Representative local
that we don't want to but I
agree with your with your idea
and I just think we need to find
a little more out about it and
and as the gentle lady from
Bernalillo said
Have ECECD look into it to see
if it's common to see what's
going on so thank you Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker the in
response to that Mr speaker I
would say this child is third of
six from of my daughter who is a
high school science teacher.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
On house floor amendment number
one to house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills to end Mr speaker
I'd like a roll call vote.
Senator.
Were on a table in motion on
house floor amendment number one
for house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three.
A vote of yes and the amendment
is tabled a vote of no and we're
back on the amendment.
The vote is now.
Open.
It's about to lose.
The vote is now closed with a
vote of forty four in the
affirmative twenty five negative
house floor amendment number one
to house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills to win three has
been tabled.
The lady back to you thank you
Mr speaker thank you for a for
listening thank you for taking
note we should be serving all
children and parents should have
Mr speaker in my opinion the
ability to say my child just not
quite ready
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
You know with thirty percent
reserves the lower the LFC
framework.
I've I've been on the
Appropriations Committee Mr
speaker kind gentleman for quite
awhile and
I went to every interim I think
I missed one and that was during
the county fair for my
grandkids.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I I
just want to make sure that if
if I was in charge I might have
done things a little differently
if I was completely in charge
but I'm not I'm one vote at the
table I'm I'm the important
thing Mr speaker kind gentleman
is that I'm at the table and
then invited to make some
decisions and have input I would
put more in savings I would put
more in transportation I would
put more in seniors I would put
more in the case of a major fund
right now for the plethora of
money we have hard choices Mr
speaker kind gentleman and when
I came in we had a hard choices
we have no money we were
sweeping every nook and cranny
we could for money we had no
capital outlay.
Those were tough times.
These are tough times whether
people realize it or not Mr
speaker these are tough times
because you have to make certain
decisions.
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
I want to make sure that
The issue of of ECDC is brought
up again and with the sixty nine
percent increase that we can do
some certain things like that so
Mister speaker kind gentleman.
put my big girl pants on.
When we sweet budgets and I'll
put him on when we pass buzzers
this thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady thank you gentle
lady there's further debate the
gentleman from.
Representative Scott.
Will the gentleman from Donna
and.
I gladly yield to the gentleman
from the.
Speaker and gentleman.
We're about to spend.
Nine thousand four hundred and
thirty million dollars.
Of taxpayer money here are.
To look.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Where the lion's share of this
money is going.
Seventy four percent of the plus
or minus is allocated to three.
Engines.
The first would be.
That.
Six.
The first would be Medicaid
which is being allocated to
issue one point six billion
dollars about a nineteen percent
increase.
The second would be our public
school system.
Four point one five million
dollars and almost nine percent
increase in the third.
Hi you education system.
Over a billion dollars.
Expenditures education
components.
Particular interest to.
Mr speaker and gentleman
remember from just a few years
back to term I'm shocked.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
was.
Representative two.
To the whole education system
with significant dollars.
Public schools have in fact
received almost fifty four
percent increase over the last.
Six two.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Last.
In national rankings with our
public education system Mr
speaker and gentleman.
It's time
to really think.
Not be the answer.
Mr speaker.
Just a question if you can help.
Explain to the body the
disconnect between performance.
And phone.
And before will blame COVID.
Should should realize that all
fifty states were affected by
the COVID how old last this.
Thank you
for COVID.
COVID.
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
explain to me.
We're getting our money's worth.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I believe there is no
more important areas than our
New Mexico kids education Mr
speaker gentleman I think we've
seen a lot of work in this body
recognizing that it starts
before kids are in public
education really prenatal to to
prenatal now to pre K. A. that
those are unique opportunities
because Mr speaker gentleman I
think we also heard including
from the gentle lady from
Bernalillo that New Mexico's
children through not there are
no fault of their own have
sometimes some of the highest
regionally maybe even nationally
adverse childhood experiences or
aces Mr speaker and gentleman
that's why Mr speaker and
gentleman going back to the
importance of the previous
conversation why pre K. is so
important because Mr speaker and
gentleman pre K. for New Mexico
kids there are now called our it
first started in two thousand
and five their outcomes are
extraordinarily better than
those who at the same time
didn't have that opportunity Mr
speaker and gentleman since
twenty nineteen it is true we
have made very substantial new
investments in education Mr
speaker and gentleman in some of
those cases.
Very large amounts over a
hundred million dollars year
over year has ended up in the
public education reform Fund
because the gears weren't quite
aligned because that sort of the
policy it just wasn't quite a
line Mr speaker and gentleman I
am confident that this budget
does much much more it is more
evidence based it is built Mr
speaker gentleman as we heard
upon an entire year's worth of
bipartisan statewide work from
the LFC from the L. E. S. C.
from New Mexicans all around the
state who I think of come
together and said this is how
you align the different parts if
you have more resources and so
Mister speaker gentleman I am
confident in this budgets
approach to education I think we
can see some very important
signs of progress Mr speaker
gentleman we have dramatically
reduced our teacher vacancies
since Mr speaker gentleman re
raise registered wages for
teachers Mr speaker gentleman
will be doing more of that as we
talked about in this budget will
be picking up Mr speaker and
gentleman insurance costs have
been unfairly borne by educators
around the state for now
bringing educators to parity
with other
with other state workers so I
could go through a litany Mr
speaker gentleman but I think in
area after area there is more
alignment and it is not a
partisan thing Mr speaker
gentleman we when we talk about
career technical education CTE.
Something that we funded last
year in a few different ways
including through
apprenticeships Mr speaker
gentleman when I talk to folks
in Los crucis about career
technical education they tell me
about Hobbs in the facility
that's in Hobbs and so when we
heard that Mr speaker gentleman
through as we've described this
process of listening we went to
that full forty million dollars
that is in this budget for
career technical education we
added the amount in the public
school capital outlay fund.
Just one more example of which
we've talked about Mr speaker
gentleman the importance of
leadership we have to find ways
for alternatively licensed
teachers to to start in this
profession to be able to make
progress to have that invented a
professional work time and to be
able to have that time to
collaborate with their other
peer teachers that's built into
this budget for the first time
in a way that it's bringing
folks together so
the the administrator Mr speaker
gentleman we know school
leadership and administrators
are vital vital Mr speaker
gentleman and I speak of that as
a son in law of a former
educator there is no more
important person for the overall
health of that schools in the
administrators for making a
targeted seven million dollar
increase.
The you get the sense Mr speaker
gentleman I do have confidence
that this budget will yield the
best return for New Mexico's
kids in there for New Mexico's
future that we've ever
contemplated.
Mr speaker
and gentleman I would submit to
serve the.
Our troops.
To to to to read at the third
grade level inspired.
Early childhood expenditures ten
years ago from going from
basically zero.
To millions of dollars in this
budget.
Much of the needle to third
grade reading level which is
critical.
For success in school going
forward.
Madam Mr speaker I would like.
To introduce for consideration
House.
One to house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three.
Gentleman earlier in the two to
five number please as a cause
of.
We're gonna surpassing it out
and please can you read the two
to five number.
The numbers point to trouble I
two point one of the amendments
being passed out.
Okay folks it looks like
everybody's got the amendment
I'm gonna read the number once
again a gentleman it is point
two two five three eight two
point one.
Everybody got it.
It's on the website gentleman to
explain the amendment thank you
speaker this one is relatively
complicated but basically we
purposes a little over a hundred
and forty six million dollars
to.
programs.
Agencies that or not.
Currently considered or perhaps.
Consider the lower level the
first
five hundred thousand dollar
contract.
For higher education for the
management of the next
generation film academy.
Second eliminates a hundred
million dollars for the
conservation legacy permanent
fund and just because of the
bill is contingent on the
passage of this bill nine which
only asks for seventy five
million dollars was only
recommended for funding to forty
five million dollar level I see.
When returns for forty two
million dollars to fund transfer
to the severance tax permanent
for.
We eliminate five hundred
thousand dollars for starting to
expand Medicaid budget.
Finally we eliminate the time
half million dollars to develop
and implement actions related to
climate change.
One million dollars to special
appropriation for law
enforcement programs for a total
probation of a hundred and
twenty million dollars the
governor's request who was a
hundred million.
What.
The law enforcement seventy four
million dollars for workforce
capacity building forty four
felony warrant enforcement
statewide we just heard from
representatives from some of the
consequences of that.
Let's say your furniture from
the department of public safety
form for support of projects
related to.
One so local cannabis seven
dollars five hundred thousand
dollars for enforcement
projects.
Related to fentanyl heroin legal
cannabis ten million dollars to
the.
the rather to promote
educational freedom.
School choice of the State Farm
for the owners for special
permission for the office of
military affairs to Cheryl hello
Sir.
The.
To increase state reserves.
Mr speaker all will stand for
questions to you before we go to
debate is is a friendly
amendment Mr fret that Mr
speaker and
Mr Mrs Mr Mr speaker I was I was
gonna say on friendly in that Mr
speaker and gentleman from Lee
and fortunately this is an
affront on friendly amendment Mr
speaker and gentleman I think in
many of the areas the committee
has worked very diligently in
order to make sure that the
amounts that have been dedicated
including Mr speaker gentleman
the forty million dollars for
for law enforcement in the
thirty two point five that which
is for
recruitment retention that the
uptake for that can be done
effectively efficiently we don't
Mr speaker German want to leave
things that are that are going
to be used Mr speaker gentleman
think it's greatly concerning to
reduce our transfer to the
severance tax permanent fund.
As we keep our reserves time Mr
speaker gentleman
our severance tax permanent fund
investment every dollar that we
put in there is a incredible
cushion that will bear the in
yield benefit far into the
future for the state so for
those and other reasons Mr
speaker gentleman it is
unfriendly.
Is there debate on the amendment
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative role metal.
Thank you miss the gentleman
yield.
Will you jump Mr speaker I'm
looking at your amendment and
Fund items six you're striking
the film academy can you tell
the body with the film academy
is please.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
you repeat the question please.
The gentleman you have on item
six of your amendment page one
ninety seven you're striking the
film academy could you explain
to the body with the film
academy is.
Mr speaker.
The state of New Mexico has
further and furry furry generous
film tax credit estimated in the
revenue stabilization and tax
policy.
Meeting last fall the state was
going to write checks four
hundred and fifty.
Point four.
Dollars which represents
approximately twenty percent of
the gross expenditures of the
film industry this.
The state.
It's a very generous benefit not
just to resist refundable so if
there is an insufficient tax
liability.
That could.
Come check.
State of New Mexico back to the
industry.
The industry was truly
interested.
A permanent home in New Mexico I
would certainly think that they
would be able to come up with a
four million dollars to provide
training.
Four workers.
Mr speaker and gentleman I hear
what you're saying but if I
could reinforce what the film
academy does and what this money
would go toward is providing
internships for our youth young
people students in order to
break into the film industry so
while you're saying we find
these sorts of incentives I see
this as a cut to our students
that look to be able to make it
into the film industry which we
do give tracks credits for but
also as a training ground to get
are you and the people of the
state of New Mexico to work and
break into the film industry so
it's not just people from
elsewhere into the states so I
see this is as very problematic
if you're looking to to cut
funding for students breaking
into that industry Mr speaker
and gentleman you also have on
your amendment propulsion of
educational freedom could you
elaborate on what that means
please.
Mr speaker Jim.
The the body have advocated for
awhile now for more access to
school choice for Children.
That is.
Allocated would go to trial
rather than the school and this
is an effort I believe to
promote.
A.
A greater awareness of that.
Opportunity.
Mr speaker and gentlemen however
public schools funded.
Public schools are funded.
Four point one five dollars of
taxpayer money.
You Mr speaker gentleman when we
look at a particular school a
public school how is that school
funded how do they get their
funding.
I would answer the same way from
the four point one five billion
we are allocating to public
schools in this budget.
So Mister speaker gentleman and
I appreciate that answer but
it's not getting to the to the
school level so we have the
state equalization guarantees so
if we have students moving from
our public education schools a
school to move to a private
school Mr speaker and gentleman
what would happen to the funding
along to that school.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
funding for that school would
prevent employers is provide.
Appropriate and adequate.
Service students.
Is loosening.
Mr speaker gentleman I have to
say that I I find that an
accurate if you have students
that are leading the public
school it's going to leave the
school that public school with
less funding because it's funded
on a per student basis and if
you Starpoints from that public
school used are decreasing the
funding that's going to that
school and all of a sudden
you're on a slippery slope to do
funding those public schools and
that school in general and I
think that's the flaw with this
sort of ideology of educational
freedom is that your gradually.
Pulling resources from your
public school when we have a
constitutional mandate to
provide a sufficient education
to all students in the state of
New Mexico which is very much in
line with the Martinez Yazzie
ruling and if we go down this
road I see you many many more
educational lawsuits to come
down the line if we follow the
route your settings so I find
this very anti student very anti
public school very anti school
children in general Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you.
There is further debate
degenerated from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Lee.
You'll.
Traditional.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
Your amendment a particularly in
the public safety section which
is the items on page one ninety
two.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you tell me
the first change that you would
like to make is to increase the
law enforcement officer
recruitment and retention is
that correct.
Region eight that is correct.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman did you
realize that that sixty one
million is contingent on the
passage of the house bill.
To repeat the question please
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I just wanted to
confirm that you are aware that
the sixty one million would be
contingent on the passage of
house bill three fifty seven.
Gentlelady centers correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman can you describe for
me house bill three fifty seven.
Speaker gentle lady to take me a
minute to find virtually I could
I don't have that in front of
me.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
do you know how much the funding
did the city of Hobbs applied
for.
Through the department of public
safety last year for the law
enforcement officer recruitment
and retention.
We don't have that number.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
know how many additional law
enforcement officers the city of
Hobbs was able to hire.
From that funding.
The lady I do not.
Mr speaker and gentleman one of
the things that I think is
particularly important in
crafting a budget is to know
exactly how many positions would
need to be filled and how much
this would cost over the time
Mr speaker gentleman as the one
of the sponsors last year for
the fifty million dollars that
was allocated to DPS for law
enforcement officer recruitment
and retention.
I was very disappointed that the
process was not a particularly
well managed in the disbursement
of those funds and so.
While I think sixty one million
dollars sounds lovely Mr speaker
judgment I'm not convinced that
that's actually an effective use
of that money and so I'd be
interested in some figures that
might support that.
What is.
Talking about money for
additional law enforcement
officers and our communities or
just for us for.
This.
Mr speaker and gentleman but do
you know how much money is still
available to those law
enforcement agencies from the
fund from last year.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and I
just wasn't a lack of financial
management rather statutory
provisions to prevent that from
being fully expended.
Mr speaker and gentleman of well
the last I'd heard forty two
million of the fifty had been
allocated I'm not necessarily
spent because I don't believe
that we receive those figures
back but.
My concern is that.
We don't have the figures on how
many people of that forty two
million dollars that was
dispersed.
This fiscal year has been put to
use so you're.
Mr speaker gentleman interested
in adding another sixty one
million dollars on top of forty
two million dollars when you
have no results that you can
speak of in terms of how many
people have been hired and the
difference it is making so my
concern is that I'd like to know
the efficacy of the previous
program before adding that large
a sum.
This is a result of our budget
somewhere around six point five
billion nine point five billion
dollars thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen could you
please describe for me what the
programs on page one ninety two
line eighteen you're interested
Mr speaker and gentleman in
increasing from five hundred
thousand to thirty two million.
The amount of money that DPS
would have for enforcement
projects related to fentanyl
heroin and illegal cannabis.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
projects or programs you have in
mind for thirty two million
dollars speaking gently homes.
Plans for the state police
department.
To develop programs and
violinist.
The local school districts thank
you for programs are becoming
epidemic so I don't know
exactly what programs might
develop the budget believe so we
have a serious problem that
needs to be addressed more
dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman do you know how
much money is being used in
house bill two the seven the
committee substitute from the
opioid settlement fund.
Twenty dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman and you know what
that twenty million dollars is
being spent on.
This bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen I will definitely
consult that list I actually
know it but Mr speaker and
gentleman I think that your
intent is admirable with making
sure that our law enforcement
officers are fully funded and
have all of the tools that they
need I disagree with the process
through which you came up with
the figures but I appreciate the
amendment thank you very much.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
torrents Representative Lord.
Mr speaker I just have a quick
question
thank you Mr speaker
The gentleman from Lee County
please yield your time I will
choose.
Thank you I got sidetracked for
second I just want to say
something that.
On this section they have in the
department of military affairs I
just read that Fenton all as the
single deadliest drug that we
have in America hundred six
thousand people have overdosed
professional.
wanted to the D. EA dot gov
website and it says that.
China is a leading builder of
our leading maker of Sentinel
and it sent to Mexico crossed
over the border of Mexico.
And I just want to be aware
that.
They just did the biggest drug
bust ever in the history just
eighteen hours ago in New Mexico
with drugs we're gonna come over
the border there was a half a
million
of federal bills two hundred
eighty pounds of fat now and two
hundred twenty pounds of meth
confiscated so I just want to
bring awareness to one of our
leading causes of death this fat
now I think it's very important
that we address this issue that
our border needs far more
security than what ever happened
would house right now so I
wanted to thank you for that
Representative thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Is Mr speaker I move to table.
We're on a motion.
To table house floor amendment
number one you've got the roll
call.
Mr room cold please.
This.
The motion to table house floor
amendment number one to house
appropriations and finance
committees substitute for House
Bills to win three.
A vote of yes the amendment
disabled it would have no and
we're back on the amendment.
The vote is now.
Was about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty three in the
affirmative twenty four in the
negative house floor amendment
number one to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills to entering has been
tabled.
When you have you still have the
floor.
The gentleman from the use of
the floor.
Thank you drop as we can we.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from don and the yield
Mister speaker I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Santa thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman.
I want to first thank the
legislative finance committee
staff and legislative education
study committee.
staff of putting the budget
together is a ton of work and
I guess I could say I know
having carried an alternative
budget for many years how much
work it takes to put this
together and also having spent a
couple years on LFC myself
it's a lot of work and I just
want to thank everyone for for
that
this budget
It has some great coated it also
has some things I'm a little
concerned about
and I want to share a couple of
those with the body here and and
members you should have gotten
placed on your desk right before
we started to graphs and if you
turn to page two many of you who
have been here before.
will recognize this because this
is a a graph that we started
sharing back in the day and this
is one that I thought about is
one that I shared with the body
back in.
Twenty twenty.
And as you can see.
From from this plot.
There's a red line which is what
the actual budget that that was
passed was in the Green Line is
kind of a baseline right we
start way back in ninety five
and we say if we're just
increasing the budget based off
of population growth and
inflation nothing else what
would it look like.
And speaker and gentleman and
members of the body but I've.
Said many times over I feel kind
of like a broken record but is
that.
You see these huge it makes
enemies charge crashes.
Federals crashes it's just it is
so painful right I mean one time
we were sweeping money from
public schools.
Which was just awful right to
the to make the the because we
we lost what we were expecting
and we had to come back in
special session and try to fix
the budget.
And so.
There's actually a whole field
of science in chemical
engineering we take something
that looks like also waiting
like this a new flat out.
The head of the speaker and
gentleman I really well I just
want to point out here that.
If we were a little more
disciplined.
During the good times.
Would have to feel so much pain
during the bad times.
Now of of sure that in the past
sure this one plot in the past
but if you don't flip to the
first page.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Those earlier bonds kind of
looks like a.
it was the those earlier peaks
and valleys look more like speed
bumps and we are just really
skyrocketing
and so I just I just want to.
The state
You know I just try to be
intellectually honest here as we
you look at the last for three
or four years that grain one is
popping up now and that's not
because of population growth
it's because of inflation.
Right and so now.
Looking at the correct
percentage to grow the budget
goes up from about three and a
half percent to eighty four
point six percent.
It is kind of the safe number
you can raise the budget by
without having to come back in a
revenue cut.
and maybe during the good times
you raise a by a little bit more
so I guess my my first big
concern is looking at this plot.
Mr speaker and gentleman is that
we are increasing our spending
by I believe it was twelve point
four percent total.
that is almost three times the
state for value.
and and just looking back where
I started here eleven years ago
our budget in twenty twelve was
about five and a half billion
dollars and now we're looking at
nine point five billion dollars
that's almost double in eleven
years so I just want to say I.
I'm a little concerned that will
be coming back here.
Maybe not next year I don't know
when but
the Piper will eventually have
to be paid.
And then just the second concern
all mentioned that I'm gonna go
into some good the second
concern I have.
And I mention this because I
watch the revenue generation
side of the house very closely
I'm just concerned because.
In honor statutes we keep
adding.
Items that grow with inflation.
And we keep adding indexing to
items that they automatically
grow with inflation
I'm sorry about some of the the
recent things we've done in the
tax department I'm also thinking
about education which makes up
two thirds of our budget I'm
also thinking about Medicaid
which makes up a six of our
budget.
So all together that's about
eighty three percent our budget
and those things grow faster
than the rate of inflation and
yet we have hot from our revenue
stream of those things that
don't grow with inflation but
I'm a great example as food and
so as we continue to increase
for paying on what we what we
appropriate to anti that to
inflation and cut those things
that do not grow with inflation
I just don't see this is
sustainable for we have to be
cautious this could lead to
problems and yet so those are my
those are my concerns.
the speaker and gentleman
there's also a lot of good in
this budget.
and I'll just mention a certain
percent reserve I think it's a
great hedge against issues to
come what would I be happier
with the thirty five percent
reserve sure but thirty percent
reserve is right so I really
appreciate that we're not
spending every single penny
we've got a a healthy reserve.
Also.
Some great changes to education
that really help kids and
teachers and I know speaker and
gentleman and you know members
of LFC and LESC of listen to the
concerns of my in my district of
made great changes there and I'm
very grateful
for that the career technical
education changes are great the
fixed income of the issues with
the density factor org
wonderful.
the extended learning in the
professional hours and we're
doing a lot of good things there
that really will help teachers
and kids are grateful for that.
One that I'm just so grateful
for is that eight hundred fifty
million dollars going to the
service tax permanent fund.
That is huge when I started here
eleven years ago that fund was
dying.
It was projected to die because
it was getting no inflows.
And we were taking out every
year about four and a half
percent and so we were what
relying on the market to keep
this permit for the life.
And and was dying and we've made
some changes in the last decade
to try to help but it's still is
nowhere near the health of the
land grant permanent fund
support so again having some
discretion not spending every
dollar not to be bonded as our
severance tax dollars this year
but actually putting eight
hundred fifty million into that
fund that is huge.
and then the other thing I'll
mention of course it's pry not a
surprise to all of you but I am
just so grateful for the one
billion.
Recurring dollars for tax
reform.
And we've been talking about
this for eleven years that I've
been here and I'm just at this
point I'm like are we just
talking the talk.
if not now we had.
And we have that in here and I'm
so grateful for that and I
really think we can do some
meaningful reform with that with
that billion dollars.
So that said Mr speaker and
gentleman I want to again thank.
The legislative finance
committee.
The members who worked all
through the intro to help put
this for more together I want to
specially thank you sure
Lundstrom for her incredible
work over that last year putting
the framework together.
So we could build this budget on
so grateful for speaker for you
madam chair.
And I want to again thank what
is general I think the members
of the current house
appropriations and finance
committee the current chair and
I want to get in sync the LFC
and LESC staff for their
incredible work it really means
a lot.
With that Mr speaker I yield.
There is a debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Diana you.
I yield to the gentleman from
someone.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman first off I would also
like to
Compliment the staff staff works
hard and as you stated the
committee of the committee works
hard and Mr speaker and
gentleman I I would say the LESC
interim committee works very
hard
and and Mr speaker and gentleman
I I too like Representative my
from the representative from
Sandoval Representative Harper I
also agree there are several
provisions in this budget that
are worthy of support Mr speaker
and gentleman that
We have I don't know exactly how
this is going to turn out but
there are a billion dollars set
aside for tax cuts I hope Mr
speaker and gentleman they don't
end up being targeted tax cuts
to encourage behavior that some
members might want to encourage
but.
To all of our taxpayers as
broadly as possible I would I I
hope that that that there is a
something that benefits all New
Mexicans instead of very few but
the potential for
Tax
cuts to the hard working men and
women in New Mexico I think is
is is worthy and I'm glad that
it's not specifically spelled
out what those are but that is
built into the budget and I know
that it's coming so I appreciate
that Mr speaker and gentleman I
also.
as as Representative Harper
because like I was reading from
his notes because I have several
the same things that thirty
percent reserve that is
currently built in the budget I
hope it comes back from the
Senate that way I don't have a
high degree of confidence that
it will but as it's going out of
this out of this chamber and it
has that that in there I do
appreciate that
and Mr speaker and gentleman I I
would just a.
I like to think you and the LFC
staff for working with be on
trying to make sure that unlike
a couple years ago when we put
increase in place increases for
Medicaid providers.
That this time that those
dollars don't get swallowed up
at the NCO level but would put
language in there and I
appreciate you working with me
on that to get that language in
there and for director Abbey for
working with the on that
that being said Mr speaker and
gentleman.
They're they're provisions.
In here that are really.
Not for the of support and I and
I think once again some of the
points that Representative
Harper made
the the.
I believe he is the
The number of.
The budget almost doubling in
eleven years.
Speaker and and gentleman
This budget increased had quit
with this will have increased
forty eight percent in just five
years.
This budget is a hundred fifty
percent of the budget of two
thousand and eighteen.
That is concerning this is that
it's really just not sustainable
and I to as was previously
mentioned that as previously was
mentioned I would rather have
seen instead of year over year
commitments increasing at the
rate that they have over the
last five years I would prefer
to see more money going for
infrastructure more money going
towards roads things that are
critically needed that I I would
definitely supported
the Mr speaker and at this time
I I really talked about one
provision.
In the budget that that I have a
hard time with because a.
In reality something is taking
place and we're funding in this
budget that the legislature had
little to no input on as
benefactor so we were just told
by the administration how
thirty five point seven million
dollars was going to be used to
change our social studies
standards.
And and Mr Baker and gentleman
Hi during the interim was able
to question
now the the the the.
Secretary of PED did not make
the the presentation that I
attended but the that time it
was the W. secretary who made a
presentation about the changes
to the social studies standards
and a curriculum that was going
to be put in place Mr speaker
and gentleman had a very caught
that candid conversation with
the W. secretary at the time.
that I was very concerned.
Of
elements of what are known as a
critical theory and critical
race theory for.
Going to the predominant as part
of the that curriculum change
some speaker and gentleman I'm
gonna ask you just a just a
couple questions and I know
that's not specifically on the
bill but it's on this provision
and I and I'm just wanting to
take the time to explain through
our questioning what those are
some of speaker and gentleman
critical theory do you know what
the definition of what critical
serious.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
and as it relates to our public
education department this is not
been part of any of the
conversations that I've been
part of any of the HSD hearings
yeah in fact any of the
questions that were raised so
Mister speaker as it relates to
this budget that's not been part
of any of my interaction and all
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I believe that's
correct and I was in that
meeting I I did not see their
that interim critical theory Mr
speaker and gentleman as it
relates to the curriculum that's
in place basically critical
areas is critical it's a story
that is presented that is
critical of western civilization
so the norms of western
civilization including
capitalism.
And there are elements as a
question the W.
secretary at the time that those
elements were going to be
present in that curriculum
minimum move this quickly so I
can get to my amendment Smith
speaker and and gentleman
also part of that was elements
of critical race theory.
and out through that questioning
of the of the
Representative from P. PED that
day it was also apparent that
elements not all but elements of
critical race theory we're going
to be a you we're going to be
part of that social studies
standards change so Mister
speaker German do you know what
critical race theory it's.
This gentleman I really it's
going to be the same answer as
it relates to the budget that
the speaker gentleman in all of
our sort of interactions when I
talk about the LFC and HSC
hearings and we've had hearings
in multiple parts of the state
those have not been any elements
with speaker gentleman it's been
much more focused on giving our
educators the tools they need to
teach supporting our kids into
the classroom so Mr speaker and
gentleman same answer basically
no thank you mistaken and I and
I understand that and miss and
gentleman the critical race
theory as it is presented is
basically that there're that
society itself is inherently
inherently picks winners and
losers and.
That there is basically an
advantage for different segments
of population.
based on their their race for
family origin so speaker and
gentleman that once again was
discussed as part of this social
studies standards change Mr
speaker and gentleman what was
interesting is it was it's not
traditional critical race theory
in the standard that was going
to be introduced it really was a
standard unique to New Mexico.
And it is not like what's
nationally known as critical
race theory Mr speaker and
gentleman it was I would like to
determine creek critical Raza
theory.
it was really more about how
Hispanics who have been in the
state for multiple generations
for that they've and they had a
a.
And natural advantage and that
staff through years of.
brutality and things that happen
four hundred five hundred years
ago which we know which I
learned in New Mexico schools in
history classes that those
atrocities took place we know
they took place in the speaker
and gentleman
and that was against native
Americans and misspeak or
jealous personal to me because
as most of you know I'm Hispanic
my family goes back.
Hundreds of years in New Mexico
from Rio Arriba County.
And.
My great my grandmother on my
dad's side is yes pueblo.
But my wife is is a Navajo
Indian.
My children are mixed my kids
went to school on on
On the chief annually to
scholarship for those of you who
know what that is it's a very
good it's one of the best
college of to the state for the
Navajo tribe.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Of what I've taught my kids and
and most of the has Hispanic and
native Americans in New Mexico
who live now.
Have to go we.
Quite frankly we love each
other.
There is a good relationship
between native Americans and
Hispanics in New Mexico there's
shared culture that goes back
five hundred years yes there is
and the history that I learned.
Was that the case the doors and
some of those folks that came
through were very brutal.
And it's the history of the
world it's not unique to.
Erica it's not unique to New
Mexico Mr speaker and gentleman
the problem with the standard is
it doesn't just teach history
facts things that happened
speaker and gentleman it teaches
one group of people.
To feel guilty for something
they had no control over
hundreds of years ago.
And it teaches another group of
people who had no control over
it.
To feel as if they're they have
no personal agency that because
the system is in place you can't
succeed in in in in your
environment in New Mexico and
that and that's just not the
case and by the way my story is
not unique if you look at the
the pueblos across New Mexico
and the speaker gentle and so
many of them.
our our the names of just they
treat the tribal officials are
Hispanic names many of them we
are so intermingled.
It's almost impossible to get
one group.
To feel guilty and another group
to feel oppressed yes was that
happened the speaker and
gentleman yes and once again I
learned that.
Through history as it exists in
New Mexico some speaker and
gentleman I am going to
introduce an amendment right now
and that amendment is to
reduce the funding to eliminate
the funding that would go
towards that new should be
social studies standards.
and Mister speaker I believe you
have that and then I use at this
time I'd like to move house
floor amendment one.
To House.
The Appropriations Committee for
substance the substitute for
house bill two and three
gentleman will you read the two
to five number while the
amendment gets passed out please
speaker of the two to five
numbers two two five three six
zero point one and Mister
speaker I would request a roll
call vote.
You get the roll call vote.
It's online school give it a few
seconds here to get this passed
out and then you can explain the
amendment gentleman.
The amendment.
Yes No yes we're getting not
statement explained amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker the
amendment is to remove thirty
five point seven million dollars
out of the budget which PED
estimates would be the cost for
instructional materials relating
to the new social studies
standards.
Mr speaker and gentleman
the.
What I'm trying to get to Mr
speaker is.
Just continuing the standard
that has existed that does teach
New Mexico history.
The good the bad the ugly is how
it exists today without trying
to make some children filled
guilty for things they have
nothing to could no no control
over and for other kids to feel
as if they're the victims of
something they have no control
over Mr speaker.
Gentleman is this a friendly
amendment thank you Mr speaker
thank you I this is an
unfriendly amendment as I've
explained this these
conversations were not part of
any of the process at any time
that that I've been part of an
Mr speaker gentleman this seems
to be doing too much really
putting us as has as legislators
into the classroom so therefore
it is and family.
It's an amendment is there
debate on the amendment the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero thank you
Mr chairman the gentleman yield.
I yes Mr speaker I yield to the
the the gentleman from
Bernalillo speaker and gentleman
could you clarify again exactly
what the aim of your amendment
is aimed at and and what
information you have about the
instructional materials from the
public education department
please.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
the the.
Money the that it that PED
requested which
it's in the act report by the
way if you want to know where
the number came from for the
week ending September twenty
third twenty twenty two this is
in the lead up to the the budget
process.
And PED estimated that the cost
for
Creating a new social studies
standards would be thirty five
point seven million dollars of
the speaker and gentleman that's
the amount that I'm looking to a
to
remove and the speaker and
gentleman once again
through that discussion trying
to find out what the intent was
from PED.
And asking about the specific
provisions in PED
with these new social studies
standards it did it was
confirmed that.
there were elements of what
we're stated to be outcomes.
For different races in the state
of New Mexico that it goes back
to things that happened years
passed and the speaker and
gentleman but there's no denying
that those things happen in
years past but mistaken and also
there's no denying that from
that time moving forward
we've not have we've not had the
kind of racial tensions that
have existed across the country
which have been more black and
white issues rather than
Hispanic and native American
issues and respect and gentleman
I I.
Well I like so many others and
and constituents that I've heard
from I don't want to start
trying to teach native American
children to be have animosity
towards Hispanic children or
have Hispanic children to feel
guilty or have animosity for
native American children for
things had nothing to do that
was Mr speaker in that
discussion what the social
studies standards it was going
to include that language so Mr
speaker and gentleman so I don't
have the ability to go and
specifically so all of those
elements out of that standard
I'm looking to do fund the
effort
of the cost of what that would
be to re re vamp the social
studies standards and Mr speaker
and gentleman
How all our materials funded for
public education.
Mr speaker and gentleman
primarily from oil and gas
revenues.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
just about the source of the
money but rather the process for
adopting new materials.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
exactly sure all I know is The
presentation by the department
was and what the goal of the
department was was made clear in
that meeting.
Speaker and and gentlemen so
they're funded in cycles so the
money you're proposing pulling
is the cycle for
social studies which are
correctly identifying
and then do you know who gets to
make the decision about how that
funding is allocated.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman the local school
boards get to make that
determination as to how this
speaker and gentleman it has
also become clear in the last
several years when local school
boards or superintendents I
don't necessarily comply with
the directive from the PED
superintendent we've seen
funding removed we've also seen
Mr speaker and gentleman we seen
board members replaced or or
removed some a speaker and
gentleman a suggestion from PED
that does not come without a
carrot or a stick as a matter of
fact it comes with both.
Mr speaker and gentleman so
while that money is allocated
for the.
Use of social studies there
isn't anything that prohibits
the local school boards like you
identify from utilizing that
money in other places that they
may need to fill gaps in their
curriculum in order to update
and I'm afraid with your
amendment that you are looking
at taking not only resources
from our local schools and
school districts but you're also
taking away that local control
and flexibility from our school
districts which if you've been
in the Education Committee is so
vital to many of our
superintendents and school
districts is providing that
local control to best fit their
school districts and the
individual needs of their
students so I find this very
counter to that and again trying
to deprive our school districts
of desperately needed funding
for materials
with your amendment and so in
that I have to stand opposed to
your amendment thank you Mr.
There's further debate the
gentleman from million
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
Diana.
Thank you.
What what is the Mr speaker Tom
and what is the intent of this
what what we try to call the
chair.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The intent.
Is to try and make sure that a
political objective.
Isn't forced on our school
districts.
Mr speaker and gentleman pantry
to what was just stated to me.
I was contacted by
superintendents and I was
contacted by school board
members during the period where
you get to comment on the
standards and they were very
very nervous.
Of this new standards because in
reality I they've gone through
other mandates that say that
some had not complied with and.
And so and members were removed
by PED.
And I had to go to court.
To get them reinstated some
speaker and gentleman the the
what I'm trying to do is two
things one remove.
Money from an effort that was
specifically stated for the
purposes I've described.
And then secondly to keep.
Of
non compliance because I did
send after.
Mr speaker and gentleman a
leadership.
and members of the of the of our
caucus sent three letters to PED
telling of our fear of
what the standard was proposing.
once again just to remind
everybody that the standard was
going to propose things that
were against our capitalist
system.
It was going to put that down in
favor of of of more socialist
systems.
And secondly it was.
What that we were very upset
with a very concerned with was
how they were gonna treat race
relations and in New Mexico even
our pledge talks about our unity
and our among our different
cultures and speak well we're
very unique New Mexico has been
unique we are different than
anywhere else in the effort was
to try and preserve that you
uniqueness to trooper trying
preserve what is generally a
lack of animosity between to to
any greatest extent among the
the different races in New
Mexico not to say racism doesn't
exist it does exist.
And as a as a minority believe
me I face that on my own and my
faith differs so my parents face
that to.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What we see is relative harmony
not not utopia not suggesting
that but there is relative
appreciation of all the cultures
here in New Mexico.
And the effort is to try and.
Maintain a and not allow
government to to go and poke us
and try to make us feel as if we
need to fill animosity towards
each other and secondly Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Is to keep what we've seen as a
stick that is used by a bit
Munoz by PED before to to keep
from giving them that sticks so
the the thirty four.
Thirty five point seven million
dollars was specifically.
For the purpose of.
Changing the social studies
standards as they exist and
then.
Of course there's a little bit
Tommy by the local school boards
but once again big they used too
much of that economy and they
are afraid of retaliation and
that was expressed in the by
school board members and by
superintendents.
Thank you to all of them Mister
speaker so you believe by
removing this funding this is
going to solve the problem.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman and
if and if the a true revamping
of social studies standards were
to take place as they have in
the past I think New Mexico
students would continue to hear
like I did about.
The long walk the trail of
tears.
The committee said our and some
of those atrocities that took
place we were here as we have
always heard about slavery in
America and the atrocities that
took place there.
Once again replacing actual
history.
With how we should feel about
that history Mr speaker and
gentleman that's what I'm trying
to keep from happening is once
again.
My family I'm looking at my own
children and my grandchildren
who are Hispanic native American
and English.
That is New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe for the most part.
New Mexico has had at least over
the last hundred years a much
much more growing interactive
cultural our diversity is
diverse but we enjoy it and we
enjoy each other's diversity.
Thank you so much Mr speaker so
then removing this amount of
money from the budgets the from
the from the proposal will
affect school districts have.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
would leave the standards in
place for now and we wait till
the next to to for PED to go
back to the drawing board and re
introduce standards that are not
that they don't have a political
and.
The thank you thank you
gentleman would also Mr speaker
so if this amendment were to go
through and we remove the
thirties five point seven
million or whatever the amount
is if we remove that from the
formula.
Then that in essence would
create the that would put place
a burden on the school districts
to purchase of materials anyway
Mr speaker German and in essence
that would create unfunded
mandate what are not.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
would keep in place what they
have they don't have to that I
think that's a misnomer in this
in this legislature and we don't
have to spend money sometimes if
we have something that's working
we can keep it.
Mr green gentleman there was
nothing that forced the change
just a mistake and gentleman all
this would do is delay that
change thank you gentleman
Mister speaker the web but you
know
Is for commercials as my
business this is what I do back
home so it Mr speaker to amend
the if we were to remove this
funding that in essence the
school districts would be pretty
much still be forced to use
operational dollars to purchase
these materials anyway and that
really concerns me gentleman and
Mr speaker and and just based on
that fact alone I I am I'm not
gonna be able to support this
amendment thank you Mr thank you
John.
To lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
We are on a motion to table
house floor amendment number one
to house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three and a
roll call has been requested.
A vote of yes the amendment
tabled a vote of no and the
amendment is we're back on the
amendment.
But ready.
The vote is now open.
Foods amount to close.
Forty five in the affirmative
twenty four in the negative
house floor amendment number one
to us provisions of an as we
substitute for House Bills doing
three has been tabled gentleman
from someone.
Thank you Mr speaker
I appreciate the debate
I would hope that it.
If some of our school districts
decide that the.
are not going to use these
instruction materials uh that
include what I believe is very
very harmful language.
That we would support them and
that we would not allow PED to
do what is done in the past
which is to
the beautifully go after them
for not following following
exactly their directives speaker
and gentle and and.
Amber's
Once again I I do believe there
are several things in this
budget that are that are very
good Mr speaker and gentleman
just like the standards the the
the social studies standards
that are are going to be pursued
by PED I think a lot of this
budget is harmful.
speaker the the year over year
spending
I have brought this up over and
over and is one of the reasons
why in on Appropriations
Committee I could not support
the budget.
I do not believe that it is good
to spend money that we know we
should be saving.
the A. fifty a fifty percent
increase in the last five years
that is not that is way past
inflation.
And we are passing that cost on
to our families
Mr speaker I appreciate the
debate and I appreciate chairman
for allowing a debate in
committee.
The debate the gentleman from
Chavis and one in San Juan
Representative Lente they have.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from.
Rio Arriba San Juan and
Bernalillo.
Thank you I I thought we were
done.
But but I'll stand up anyway and
then I want to stand up at least
that to applaud and appreciate
the work from the LFC during the
interim degree this budget.
Would also like to applaud and
appreciate the work from the
appropriations committee that
helped to create this budget.
And apply to you as the chairman
for your.
Appreciation and willingness to
want to expand.
A great transparency and
communication.
And your vision in regards to
how you want to transform this
committee.
And it's process.
I see that because I stand.
As the.
Made of American.
This chamber one of the many
reasons.
Mexico in this chamber one that
has seen the appropriations
process.
Through the past six years of
being part of this body as one
that I only have a view from the
outside in and and that's fine
if if that that the process that
we can all accept that's fine if
that's all of a process that we
have been given but I think at
the end of the day all of us
regardless of your ethnicity
regardless of your.
Geographical location regardless
of the for you and who you
Representative have access to.
This process in a way that's
more robust.
In a way that's understandable
in a way that we can all get
behind from the day we passed is
budget until we pass the budget
in twenty twenty four meaning
that the we should all have a
say so or be included in some
way somehow during the interim
process to LFC on this is how it
budget is passed this is our
budget is created this is how we
should do things Mr speaker and
gentleman but all ages that
could not come in during a
sessions and expect to have
things in the budget or see
things in the budget and just be
at a loss for words knowing that
you're coming to with a session.
The budget has already been
baked and cooked and it's done
and there's no way in to
infiltrate that budget and make
inroads on behalf of your
community.
I'm excited.
I am hopeful Mr speaker and
gentleman at the upcoming
transformation evolution of how
this process may involve for for
for the greater good of our
communities.
And then the day Sir I am just
simply proud of the work that
you have done to help
communities.
This this this this budget at
this point so Mister speaker and
gentleman thank you for your
work thank you Mr speaker and
once again thank you to those
appropriation members that help
to make this budget possible
thank you Mr speaker you do
thank you gentlemen generated
from earlier present Chasey Mr
speaker this matter having been
under consideration for three
hours I moved to close debate in
motion includes obeyed all those
in favor signify the state line.
Those needs the eyes have it
committee report on.
The S. seven is closed.
The motion was sold gentleman we
are now of the closure of this
bill and you have some time to
close to make a motion thank you
Mr speaker body thank you so
much I want to say thank you to
each and everybody who has been
in here who is part of this body
today I want to say a very big
thank you to all the LESC
committee members from both
chambers of bills the court sort
of structure for the product we
see today Mr speaker I want to
say a special thank you to the
committee members we've we've
built upon strong structures we
have added new and important
elements that Mr speaker we
believe ensure every voice that
wants to come and have a say in
our budget has that opportunity
in these critical conversations
around agencies Mr speaker body
this is a moment in time the
projections that we see we are
on the low end of the highways
we're a little ways up that mesa
however we want to think about
it Mr speaker and body what we
have is sort of a one since
statehood time period and so
what we've heard about here
today Mr speaker and body is
that we're saving aggressively
not just in in a a question that
we can go into whenever we need
it.
But the most aggressive saving
Mr speaker body with the
severance tax permanent fund
investment of eight hundred and
fifty million dollars we see
more alignment in the most
important areas whether that's
getting reimbursements to our
health care professionals or
teaching our kids and supporting
our educators so down I think
this is Mister speaker body we
can stand very confident that
this is a fiscally prudent
budget that saves more provides
a good pathway forward if an as
there is likely to be more
revenue and more production over
the next few years we follow the
same structure we've discussed
here today which is saving at
least at least a quarter if not
a third of that in long term
savings accounts like the
severance tax permanent fund and
Mr speaker and body using
another fiscally prudent ways
while we respond to the will of
the voters which make up a
significant amount of this
budgets recurring appropriation
rules so I'm very proud I'm very
grateful and with that Mr
speaker I move that the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three do now pass
or on final passage of house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills and three the vote is now
open.
Who's.
Fifty two the affirmative
seventeen negative house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills to win three because the
only passed this house.
Gentlelady from all those
beautiful counties are you ready
and item number three.
Yes Mr speaker will you give me
to that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
placing House Bill two zero five
of final passage has been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Thank you Mr speaker.
wanted to make sure it introduce
my expert witness Dr Hanisch and
House Bill tool I really is
relating to food and acting the
meat inspection act authorizing
New Mexico livestock board to
conduct meat inspections to
ensure the safety and quality of
meat for human consumption
creating the office of the meat
and poultry inspection director
providing the inspections.
stamps and establishments.
And with that Mr speaker stand
for questions.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
to close thank you Mr speaker I
now move that house bill to all
I do now pass.
Final passage of house bill two
or five the vote is now open.
It's about to close.
Sixteen affirmative during the
negative house bill two zero
five as soon as is house.
Gently from Bernalillo Mr
speaker at eleven fifty nine AM
I move the house adjourned till
twelve or one PM house account
order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules we
suspended in the journal show
that all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's a
judge's order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended at the record show
that the journal has been read
in full and approved subject to
revision or and approval of the
rules in order of business
committee.
If there's objection it is so
ordered.
Deleted from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker it would be eleven
fifty nine in the journal till
twelve or one PM I was going to
order Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session
there's intention is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
business committee if there's no
traction it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I move again about
order of business introduction
of legislation.
Same objection so ordered.
House Bill ten introduced by
representatives Matthews naiburg
how to me Dixon and so Penske
and act relating to children
specifying to whom and under
what circumstances information
that is held by the children
youth and families department
the pertains to children may be
shared describing a penalty
house bill ten introduced by
representatives Matthews divert
how to meal Dixon and Sapan ski
house bill ten have been read
twice by title is our printer
for to the house health and
Human Services Committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill twelve introduced by
representatives taxed Rubio Ford
has small and Lundstrom an act
relating to economic development
connecting the advanced energy
technology act allowing public
partners to enter into public
private partnership agreements
to facilitate development of
advanced energy technology
projects establishing criteria
for approval of advanced energy
technology projects including
advanced energy technology fund
authorizing grants loans and
revenue bonds specifying powers
and duties of the New Mexico
finance authority required
reports adding exemption to the
procurement code from the the
economic transition division of
the economic economic
development department amending
the title of the division of the
economic development department
and revising its duties creating
the economic transition funded
revising membership of the board
of the technology research
collaborative amending and
enacting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight declaring
an emergency house bill twelve
introduced by Representative
Dixon Rubio Cortez small and
Lundstrom house bill twelve have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee then
south commerce and economic
development committee.
House bill thirteen introduced
by representatives Lara and
small an act relating to border
development amending the border
Development Act changing the
composition of the border
Authority providing professional
qualification requirements for
the position of executive
director making technical and
clarifying changes amending and
repealing sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight house
bill thirteen introduced by
representatives Lara and small
house bill thirteen having been
read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house commerce and economic
development committee then the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
House Bill fourteen introduced
by Representative Lara an act
relating to crime and acting the
unlawful private paramilitary
activity act creating the crime
of unlawful private pyramid to
paramilitary activity providing
exceptions providing criminal
penalties providing civil
remedies house bill fourteen
introduced by Representative
Lara.
With the number fourteen.
House Bill fourteen have been
exposed by titles are print in
front of house government
elections and ending Affairs
Committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill three ninety seven
introduced by representatives
Duncan redeem Matthews here ball
Malia and Vincent and act
relating to crime creating the
crime of organized residential
theft imposing penalties House
Bill three ninety seven
introduced by representatives
Duncan cream Matthews here ball
Malia and Vincent House Bill
three ninety seven having been
read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then House
Judiciary Committee
House bill four seventy three
introduced by Representative
daylight Cruz and act making
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration for Bernalillo
county to repair roads in county
commission district two in
southwest Albuquerque house bill
four seventy three introduced by
Representative de la Cruz house
bill four seventy three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill for seventy four
introduced by representative
Armstrong an act relating to
higher education connecting the
veterinary loan repayment act
house bill four seventy four
introduced by representative
Armstrong.
House bill four seventy four
have amended twice by title is a
representative for to the house
agriculture us again someone
reserves committee themselves
rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee.
As bill for seventy five
introduced by representative
Armstrong and act really
relating to recreation
transferring the New Mexico
outdoor recreation division from
the economic development
department to the tourism
department requiring the
development of an anti littering
campaign providing for the
creation of rate of partnerships
with outdoor recreation and
businesses house bill four
seventy five introduced by
representative Armstrong house
bill four seventy five having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee says the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill four seventy six
introduced by Representative
Ferrary Thompson Kate's ends of
Penske and act relating to vital
statistics allowing physician
assistants to certify the death
of a patient house bill four
seventy six introduced by
Representative Ferrary Thompson
Kate's and Sapan ski house bill
four seventy six seven minutes
was by title is ordered printed
and referred to the house health
and Human Services Committee
events House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill four seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Lord and act relating to public
health requiring the department
of health to develop a universal
prenatal substance exposure
screening tool house bill four
seventy seven introduced by
representative of lord house
bill four seventy seven have
amended twice by title is our
printer effective house consumer
Public Affairs Committee
themselves health and Human
Services Committee.
House Bill four seventy eight
introduced by Representative
Lara an act relating to the
environment and acting the clean
fuel standard act providing for
the establishment of the clean
fuel standard for transportation
and died of fuels directing the
environmental improvement board
to promulgate rules to implement
the clean fuel standard act
implementing the assessment of
an annual registration fee
creating the clean fuel standard
fund making appropriation house
bill four seventy eight
introduced by Representative
Lara four seventy eight of
amended twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Judiciary Committee
then so house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill for seventy nine
introduced by Representative
Matthews and act relating to
state agencies requiring state
agency websites to include staff
and organizational information
House Bill for seventy nine
introduced by Representative
Matthews house bill four seventy
nine I'm amended twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee then so the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
House bill forty introduced by
representatives Elaine Townsend
to access Representative Allen
Martinez and representative
Duncan an act relating to
education and acting the
education freedom account act
legislative powers and duties
providing for education freedom
accounts providing allowable
uses providing procedures and
application requirements for
parents education service
providers creating a review
commission making appropriations
house bill four eighty
introduced by Representative
lane Townsend to get us
Representative Allen Martinez
and representative Duncan house
bill four eighty having been
read twice by title is a printed
and referred to the house
Education Committee then said
house appropriations and finance
committee.
As for eighty one introduced by
Representative lane and act
relating to public education
amending the reading materials
fund to fund elementary literacy
materials aligned to the science
of reading making appropriation
house bill four eighty one
introduced by Representative
lane.
House Bill for anyone having
been read twice by title is a
representative for to the house
Education Committee then so
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Yes I guess.
House bill forty two introduced
by Representative Harper and
Senator Brandt and act relating
to real property amending the
homeowners association act to
require amendments to governing
documents and limit the time of
declarant control house bill
four eighty two introduced by
Representative Harper and
Senator Brandt.
House bill forty two minutes was
by titles are print in front of
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee then
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill four eighty three
introduced by Representative
Trujillo Sapan ski Lara at a at
a and Syriana an act relating to
public schools imposing
requirements on school districts
offering gifted education making
appropriation hospital forty
three and introduced by
representatives Trujillo said
Penske Lara and at a and
Syriana's house bill four eighty
three having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee then it's the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill forty four introduced
by Representative Rehm an act
relating to driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor
or drugs prohibiting driving
with controlled substances for
metabolites in the blood
providing that the ignition
interlock requirement only
applies to offenders with
alcohol concentration in their
blood or breath Hospital for
eighty four introduced by
Representative arena house bill
four eighty four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill four eighty five
introduced by representatives
read Castellano Kareem and
monoid an act relating to sexual
offenses against children
increasing penalties for certain
sexual offenses winning the
defense for criminal sexual
communication with a child
amending the definition of a sex
offender house bill four eighty
five introduced by
representatives read Castellano
Reem and mine Toya house before
any I have amendment twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
and public affairs committee
vans the house Judiciary
Committee
four eighty six introduced by
Representative McQueen an act
relating to wildlife renaming
the department of game and fish
as the wildlife Department
renaming the state game
commission as the state wildlife
commission amending the
statutory policy expanding the
management of wildlife adding
definitions providing reporting
requirements providing for
transfers amending licensing
fees providing discounts for
residents and family members of
residents who receive
supplemental nutrition
assistance program benefits.
In section said seventeen dash
to dash to NMSA nineteen seventy
to bring laws nineteen thirty
seven chapter twenty three
section one hospital for eighty
six introduced by Representative
McQueen House before any six
seven minutes twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee then
so how succession and Revenue
committee.
Four eighty seven introduced by
representatives Montoya Zamora
more about my Representative
Allen Martinez and
Representative block an act
relating to public education
prohibiting the teaching of a
critical Raza the record
Hispanic cancel culture in
public schools and within
instructional materials used
within the classroom house bill
four eighty seven introduced by
representatives Montoya some
Samora about million
Representative Allen Martinez
and Representative block house
bill forty seven hundred minutes
was by title is ordered printed
and referred to the house
Education Committee advance the
house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee.
School for eighty eight
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and representative
Thompson an act relating to
unfair practices amending and
enacting sections of the unfair
practices act prohibiting the
dissemination of the NMED of an
individual's health data mental
health data quarter location due
to except in certain
circumstances providing
definitions providing a penalty
hospital for eighty eight
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and representative
Thompson house bill four eighty
eight having been read twice by
title is our printer defer to
the house health and Human
Services Committee advance the
house Judiciary Committee.
This bill for eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and act relating
to broader changing the
qualifications of the position
of state engineer house bill
four eighty nine introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero.
House bill forty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house agricultural seconds
and water resources committee
then Stallis government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee.
House bill four ninety
introduced by Representative
Spock one twenty a Vincent
Representative Allen Martinez
and Representative Townsend and
act relating to health care
requiring parental consent for
the provision of gender
affirming procedures to minors
hospital for ninety introduced
by representatives block Montoya
Vincent Representative Allen
Martinez and Representative
Townsend house bill four ninety
having been read twice by title
is our printer food to the house
health and Human Services
Committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
As for ninety one introduced by
representative for echo.
An act relating to crime.
Providing that multiple
violations of unlawful taking of
embezzlement embezzlement of
fraudulently obtaining or
receiving or transporting stolen
vehicles were mode for motor
vehicles applied toward
sentencing regardless of which
section of law was violated
previously providing penalties
hospital for ninety one
introduced by Representative for
a go house bill four ninety one
having been read twice by title
is that are printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
As for ninety two introduced by
representatives Montoya thank
Representative Allen Martinez
and representatives and send
to Duncan and act relating to
sports and acting the women's
sports protection act providing
for designations of athletic
teams based on biological sex
requiring schools to prohibit
biological male participation on
female athletic teams requiring
schools to prohibit biological
male presence in female
restrooms and locker rooms
prohibiting adverse action
against schools complying with
the women's sports protection
act providing for civil causes
of action house bill four ninety
two introduced by
representatives Montoya block
Representative Allen Martinez
and representatives Vincent and
Duncan house bill four ninety
two have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee vents
the house Judiciary Committee.
House bill four ninety three
introduced by Representative
Lujan certainly on a Kate's how
to meal and Lara an act relating
to cannabis regulation requiring
a seed to sale tracking system
requiring website dashboard that
includes reports on enforcement
of the cannabis regulation Act
and supply chain activity is
performing the three introduced
by Representative Lujan Syriana
Kate's hi to me and Lara House
Bill for ninety three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee examines
the house Judiciary Committee
aspen for ninety four introduced
by Representative Castellano an
act relating to liquor control
amending sections of the liquor
control act to allow persons at
least eighteen years of age to
deliver and stock package that
Oklahoma compare bridges house
bill four ninety four introduced
by Representative Castellano
house bill four ninety four
having been read twice by title
is or printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
Four ninety five introduced by
Representative Lujan Hernandez
Rigo and onion nor New and act
relating to public safety
providing disbursements to
firefighters for out of pocket
health care costs creating a
fund has been for ninety five
introduced by Representative
Lujan Hernandez for Rigo and
onion or new house bill four
ninety five have been read twice
by title is our principal
referred to the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee to dance the house
health and Human Services
Committee.
Has been for ninety six
introduced by Representative
Castellano an act relating to
criminal records providing
expungement of the person's
nonviolent felony record upon
petition to the court and the
court's finding that the person
has no subsequent criminal
conviction has no other criminal
charge for proceeding pending as
for for all court ordered
restitution and either thirty
years have passed since
completion of the sentence with
the persons in the sixty years
of age and ten years or more
have passed since the person
completed the sentence house
bill four ninety six introduced
by Representative Castellano
House before ninety six amended
twice by title is ordered
printed in front of the house
Judiciary Committee.
Ninety seven introduced by
Representative on the morning
and act relating to public
finance connecting the
legislative homes and
residential buildings
improvement act providing
blighted homes and residential
buildings improvement loans for
certain persons and businesses
requiring the New Mexico finance
authority to administer the
blighted homes and residential
buildings improvement act
providing powers and duties
establishing terms for blighted
homes and residential buildings
improvement loans and contracts
requiring repayment establishing
reporting requirements making
appropriation hospital for
ninety seven introduced by
Representative onion or new.
House bill four ninety seven
amended twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Judiciary Committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill four ninety eight
introduced by Representative
Harper and Senators diamond and
serve on days and act relating
to water amending sections of
chapter seventy two NMSA
nineteen seventy eight providing
for expedited determination of
water rights expanding right to
the right to do novo review
providing for District Court
venue providing for appeals
house bill four ninety eight
introduced by Representative
Harper and Senators diamond and
serve on to his house bill four
ninety eight having been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house
agriculture a second some water
resources committee themselves
appropriations and finance
committee.
As for ninety nine introduced by
Representative Harper and
Senators diamond and serve on to
days and act relating to water
amending sections of chapter
seventy two NMSA nineteen
seventy eight to ensure
administration of the prior
appropriation doctrine of the
constitution of New Mexico
hospital for ninety nine
introduced by Representative
Harper and Senators diamond and
serve on days house bill four
ninety nine having been read
twice by title is are printed
and referred to the house
agriculture seculars and water
resources committee vents the
house Judiciary Committee.
Five hundred introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil and
act relating to insurance
establishing a program to
provide medical malpractice
premium assistance for certain
health care providers creating a
fund making an appropriation
house bill five hundred
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil House Bill five
hundred have been read twice by
title is a representative from
the to the house health and
Human Services Committee demands
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
I am one introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil and
act relating to health care
amending the end of life options
act to clarify that health care
providers are able to refuse to
participate in medical aid in
dying for reasons of conscience
declaring an emergency House
Bill five oh one introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil
house House Bill five one half
minutes went by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee vents the house
Judiciary Committee.
I know to introduced by
Representative Sapan ski and al
cone an act relating to public
employees reducing the period of
employment appropriations for
public employees from one year
to ninety days prohibiting an
additional probation period if
an employee let's to transfer
transfer or move to different
states service assignment.
House Bill five oh two
introduced by representatives
said Penske and al cone House
Bill five oh two having been
read twice by title is our
printer for to the house local.
Use me house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
thence the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill five oh three
introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero and Herndon and
act relating to law enforcement
and acting the independent
review of force act establishing
a process for the independent
investigation and prosecution of
deadly force cases creating the
deadly for citizen review board
establishing a special
prosecutor database from which
to a point And prosecuting
attorney in the deadly force
case allowing the appointment of
a multi agency task force or
separate law enforcement agency
to conduct investigations
empowering the into the Attorney
General to review and prosecute
deadly force cases have declined
by an appointed special
prosecuting attorney providing
for citizen review of deadly
force cases and recommendations
for disciplinary action making
appropriation House Bill five oh
three introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero
and Herndon House Bill five oh
three having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Judiciary
Committee then is the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
I for introduced by
Representative Trujillo an act
relating to public assistance
requiring the Human Services
department to create a free day
per program House Bill five oh
four introduced by
Representative Trujillo.
House Bill five oh four amended
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then South
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill five oh five
introduced by representative
Lente and act relating to
capital expenditures authorizing
expenditures from certain funds
and balances establishing
conditions for the reversion of
Anne unexpended balances making
it appropriations declaring an
emergency hospital I I
introduced by representative
Lente.
I will I.
I will I get it I will for him
for the final five.
Senator titles it'll printed
food.
To the house taxation revenue
committee this House
appropriations and finance
committee.
I six introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero
and act relating to public
education defining ethnic
studies requiring ethnic studies
that meet Public Education
Department academic content and
performance standards providing
for an ethnic studies counsel to
assist the department with
curriculum development House
Bill five oh six introduced by
Representative Roybal Caballero.
House Bill five oh six seven min
read twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the house
Education Committee then the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill five oh seven
introduced by Representative
Harper and Senator Diamond an
act relating to courts creating
a district water court providing
for an additional judgeship in
the thirteenth judicial District
Court making an appropriation
House Bill five oh seven
introduced by Representative
Harper and Senator Diamond.
Of the seven.
Will I will seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee thence
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill five oh eight
introduced by representatives
Rigo and Lujan and act relating
to higher education and acting a
section of chapter twenty one
and MSA nineteen seventy eight
providing that the children of
first responders were employed
by state agencies educational
institutions counties or
municipalities shall be deemed
to be in state residents for the
purpose of determining tuition
or fees at state institutions of
higher learning requiring that
we're making providing a
definition House Bill five oh
eight introduced by
representatives echo and Lujan.
House Bill five oh eight min
read twice by title is our
printer referred to the house
Education Committee then sows
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill five oh nine
introduced by representatives
cream read Matthews and in the
cruise an act relating to pre
trial detention establishing a
presumption that the prosecution
has proven by clear and
convincing evidence that
defendant is dangerous and no
release conditions were
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community along the presumption
to be rebutted in an adversarial
hearing declaring an emergency
House Bill five oh nine
introduced by representatives of
redeem free but Matthews and
daylight crews.
House Bill five or nine amended
twice by title is that are
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then as the
house Judiciary Committee.
I tend introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero
Representative Lane
Representative how they're
Martinez and representative
Nibert an act relating to public
affairs declaring a state Chile
song House Bill five ten
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero Representative
Lane Representative Lujan
Martinez and Representative
night Burt House Bill five ten
minute twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house rural development and land
grants and cultural affairs
committee themselves government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill five eleven
introduced by representatives
Montoya Jones denies us Millia
and block and act relating to
women's health care establishing
standards of care House Bill
five eleven introduced by
representatives mon twenty a
Jones take it as us one million
and block.
House Bill five eleven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee vans the house
Judiciary Committee.
Five twelve introduced by
Representative Lara an act
relating to public property
exemption counties from
requiring from requirements
applicable to local public
bodies for the sale or other
disposal of public property
maintaining the ability of
counties to receive donations of
public property from state
agencies and other governmental
entities House Bill five twelve
introduced by Representative
Lara House Bill five twelve
minutes went by title is are
printed and referred to the
house government elections and
the Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill five thirteen
introduced by representatives of
Joan ball my thing to us toria
and lord an act relating to
health care requiring the
department of health to license
inspect and regulate abortion
clinics has been fined thirteen
introduced by representatives
Joan ball my Terrazas Montoya
and lord House Bill five
thirteen having been read twice
by title is are printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee advance
the house Judiciary Committee.
I fourteen introduced by
Representative Jones read and
read and act relating to
firearms prohibiting an
undocumented person from
receiving transporting or
possessing a firearm or
destructive device House Bill
five fourteen introduced by
representatives Jones read and
read House Bill five fourteen
have been read twice by title is
are printed on the front of the
house consumer and public
affairs committee spans the
house Judiciary Committee.
Folks on house bill I will I I
made a mistake it's capital
outlay bill should have won
Committee referral to House
excision Revenue committee not a
second referral to House
Appropriations hello I am I
which is our capital outlay bill
so all have the record show that
house of of five is been ordered
printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
The house bill's fifteen sixteen
and seventeen introduced by
Representative hardware
Martinez.
And act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare.
House bill's fifteen sixteen and
seventeen introduced by
Representative hadir Martinez.
House bill's fifteen sixteen
seventeen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed.
And referred to.
The house.
Rules in order of business
committee.
It was built in eighteen
nineteen and five fifteen
introduced by Representative
Chasey an act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare hospitals eighteen
nineteen and five fifteen
introduced by Representative
Chasey.
House bill's eighteen nineteen
and five fifteen having been
read twice by title or role are
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules.
And order of business committee.
House bill's five sixteen five
seventeen and five eighteen
introduced by Representative
Sapan ski an act relating to to
the public peace health safety
and welfare house built of five
sixteen five seventeen and five
eighteen introduced by
Representative Sapan ski House
Bill five sixteen five seventeen
five eighteen have equipment was
my total order not printed and
referred to the house rules in
order of business committee.
Spells of five nineteen five
twenty and five twenty one
introduced by Representative
lane and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare hospitals five nineteen
five twenty five twenty one
introduced by Representative
lane.
House Bill five nineteen five
twenty five twenty one have been
read twice by title or ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules in order business
committee.
Five twenty two five twenty
three and five twenty four
introduced by referred
Representative night proved an
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
hospitals I twenty two five
twenty three and five twenty
four introduced by
Representative Kanai bird.
House bill's five twenty two
five twenty three and five
twenty four minutes was by title
or ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules in
order of business committee.
Five twenty five and five twenty
six introduced by Representative
at a at a.
An act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
hospitals five twenty five and
five twenty six introduced by
Representative and a half.
House Bill five twenty five and
five twenty six and equipment
was by title order printed not
printed.
Not printed.
I was ignoring what.
And referred to the house rules
in order business committee.
Five twenty seven and five
twenty eight introduced by
Representative small act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
hospitals of five twenty seven
and five twenty eight introduced
by Representative small.
House Bill five twenty seven
five twenty eight having been
read twice by title are ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules.
In order business committee.
Five twenty nine and five thirty
introduced by Representative guy
Ecosse and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare of burns five twenty
nine and five thirty introduced
by Representative a guy a ghosts
house bill's five twenty nine AM
five thirty have been read twice
by title or ordered not printed
and referred to the rules in
order of business committee.
Has built five thirty one and
five thirty two introduced by
Representative Ferrary and act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
hospitals five thirty one in
five thirty two introduced by
Representative Ferrary House
Bill five thirty one and I agree
to having been read twice by
title order not printed and
referred to the house rules in
order business committee.
That was built five thirty three
and five thirty four introduced
by Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
And act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare
hospitals five thirty three and
five thirty four introduced by
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
House Bill five thirty three AM
five thirty four have equipment
was by title or ordered not
printed and referred to the
house rules in order of business
committee.
Five thirty five and five thirty
six introduced by Representative
McQueen act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare house burns I thirty
five and five thirty six
introduced by Representative
McQueen House Bill five thirty
five and five thirty six a
minute twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house rules in order of business
committee.
House bill's five thirty seven
and five thirty eight introduced
by Representative Johnson and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
hospitals five thirty seven and
five thirty eight introduced by
Representative Johnson House
Bill five thirty seven and five
thirty eight have met twice by
title or ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules in
order business committee.
Five thirty nine and I forty
introduced by representative
Thompson and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare hospitals five thirty
nine and five forty introduced
by representative Thompson House
Bill five three nine and five
forty have been a twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules in
order of business committee.
Five forty one and five forty
two introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare hospitals five forty one
at five forty two introduced by
Representative Chandler House
Bill five forty one and I wanted
to have equipment was by title
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules in order of
business committee.
Five forty three and five forty
four introduced by
representative Paul Cohn and act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
hospitals I forty three and five
forty four introduced by
representative L. column house
bill's five forty three and I
would for a minute by title
ordered not printed and referred
to the house rules in order
business committee.
Five forty five and five forty
six introduced by Representative
Ortez and act relating to the
public peace health safety and
welfare Constance I forty five
and five forty six introduced by
Representative Ortez House Bill
five foot five and five forty
six have been read twice by
title or ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules in
order of business committee.
Has built five forty seven and I
forty eight introduced by
representative Lente an act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare.
Bills for five forty seven and I
forty eight introduced by
representative Lente House Bill
five point seven five forty
eight have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house rules in
order business committee.
Bills five forty nine and five
fifty introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil and
act relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare
hospitals five forty nine and
five fifty introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil
House Bill five forty nine of
five fifty have been read twice
by title or ordered not printed
and referred to the house rules
in order of business committee.
Folks are at the time it lasts
call for is this.
Last call for bill.
Last call for this.
All right.
Capital outlay requests one to
seventy introduced by the
members of house districts one
through seventy requesting
funding for capital projects
House capital outlay requests
one through seventy introduced
by the members of house
districts one through seventy.
The record reflect those capital
outlay requests have been
introduced by members from
districts one through seventy.
Partisanship all day every day
Sir.
Last call for bills.
Going once.
Going twice.
And that is.
as a reminder you can still
submit joint resolutions and
memorials at a later date.
The deadline is only for bills.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business is a
business messages.
To the action is ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill twenty six as
amended Senate bill forty three
Senate bill one twenty as
amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherrie
dean on Senate chief clerk.
The message will be entered
from.
Gentleman from.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objection it is so ordered
the gentleman from Lee.
Thank you Mr speaker and for the
massive amount of members we
still have left I just wanted to
make of clarification tonight at
access to the convention center
from six to seven as for
legislators plus one.
and then after that after seven
is open to the public.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for the clarification Sir
members taking note the gentle
lady from China's current
rules about Representative rape
Mr speaker I'd like to rest for
the moment personal privilege
Steinborn thank you Mr speaker I
just wanted to explain to the
floor why excuse myself on the
of the vote for house bill two
and three there's been concerns
about potential conflicts of
interest rates and so I felt it
best to excuse myself but I do
appreciate all the hard work
that everybody worked on the
budget and I just wanted to
thank Mister speaker the speaker
and I appreciate the moment.
Thank you Julie.
Announcements the general data
Representative block thank you
Mr speaker I just rise today to
thank everyone for their hard
work on the budget and
unfortunately I wish we had more
time to debate the budget
because I had some questions
about the department of health
and around three hundred
thousand dollars that I thought
was not being spent correctly
regarding the office of gun
violence prevention it doesn't
exist at the current time so I
hope I I sort of just for a the
animus consent motion to do that
but I appreciate the time thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil thank you very
much Mr speaker I your house
transportation couple were or.
House transportation will be
meeting on Saturday at noon
we're gonna hear a couple of
bills thanks members take note.
The gentleman from San Juan
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Where we're gonna Mr speaker.
The house labor and Veterans the
committee will meet fifteen
minutes after that is out of
here House Bill to ninety four
is being rolled over thank you
Mr.
Members take note.
The gentleman from you.
Mr speaker I move that the house
any recess until eleven AM
tomorrow morning.
Thank you for the few members
that are still left thank you
for such a good day of work
incredible lift up by all of
you.
How to serve it all of you and
that the house will stand in
recess until eleven o'clock
Friday morning.
