Yeah.
Madam chair representative small
are you I agree and I realized
emissions but if we're.
Generating more emissions or
significant amount of missions.
To develop
towards the goal of just
generating one of these wind
turbines and it's not offsetting
the energy produced that I think
that's something we must
evaluate thank you madam chair
thank you Representative to be
very clear my understanding is
that there is an emissions
reduction the energy input costs
are offset
very quickly in the life of
these assets which is twenty
thirty and in some cases more
years far offsets the energy
inputs.
And that goes for solar and
other forms of renewable energy.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative small I clearly I
need to do some more research
you know like I said I only
found one article when I get
nervous.
Which you only find one article
you know on that the.
On page three yesterday we were
we were discussing down on a one
twenty the stated that the of
the cabinet department and
procreation
I I don't know if we ever got an
answer about how the
governor staff is going to have
a person to oversee all these
entities.
And do you know where that money
is going to come from and if I
remember right you were saying
that you.
Did not have an appropriation
and there wasn't anything in the
house bill two.
To cover that position is that
correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm the
executive will continue with the
current structure using current
funding and they're all of
government all of climate
response chair representative
further there is additional
funding for the climate Office
that NMED as well as the energy
conservation and management
office at EMNRD which will boost
the already on going in existing
efforts.
Madam chair representative small
also what I saw in that Here
graphite.
You know we're gonna we're gonna
have
The regulation licensee the
state land office public
Regulatory Commission
New Mexico department of
agriculture.
The board of regents of the
university of New Mexico and the
board of regents for New Mexico
State University.
What do we need from the
regents.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm the regents
of the university that they
oversee our key partners an
ongoing Climent work including
implementation energy transition
act other efforts they'll
continue and expand under house
bill six.
Madam chair Madam chair
representative small.
Are the regents do they have
degrees sin.
In climate change or related
fields like that I'm I wonder I
don't understand how the regents
would be involved will be the
people thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Rehm
this refers to the New tire
university system allowing the
university system to participate
in the ways they're best suited.
Yeah.
Madam chair and Representative
small that's what I kind of
figured so you may want to think
about taking out the board of
regents and just leave the
universities there.
you know it I just didn't
understand what the regents had
to do those
You know they typically when I
look at like U. N. M. there are
business you know people not
the.
Our engineers if you will.
Madam chair and Representative
small.
You list all the universities in
the state I was wondering why
only these two were listed.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm
days this isn't doesn't exclude
others and I don't know.
Madam speaker it gentleman I
would think maybe you want to
include.
The other universities in New
Mexico when we look at in
particular New Mexico tech New
Mexico tech
Is.
You know I believe in June
hearing.
University and
Sen I'm kind of wondering why
they're excluded.
Up until this point madam chair
representative rain
UNM and NMSU have been some of
the most involved but I
appreciate your point about New
Mexico to.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and
representative when we move to
change.
For.
I.
Greenhouse gases shall be at
least fifty percent less than
two thousand five levels and
this is by twenty thirty.
Tell me how you determine the
two thousand five levels.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm by relying
upon and an assessment of
federal state and other data in
the assessment that the energy
in the environmental improvement
board goes through.
Madam chair and Representative
small does can I can I go to
eighty.
HSD or document did come up with
what the two thousand five level
support.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm there are
the current assessments that
reference the two thousand five.
Emissions our state has those
reports there are federal port
Reports and so by working
through all of those sources
that environmental improvement
board and house bill six we'll
get an even more accurate and
nuanced picture of emissions
levels.
The M. Mr excuse me madam chair
representative frame the twenty
twenty climate task force led by
the administration has also
Generated those numbers.
Madam chair in Representative
small what I remember in our
discussion yesterday was that.
You're gonna look at New Mexico
is sectors.
Is is that correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm we're gonna
look at it it's taken as an
entire state and then
with the sector is just as how
they contribute to it.
Our our.
Madam chair representative small
is the.
Data at the that you have would
it be able to be broken down
into two sectors.
Madam chair representative green
yes.
Madam chair representative small
how many sectors Wilbur the.
Let me go to.
Mr to go the at Madam chair
representative.
it's in the report I can pull
that up here madam chair let's
go to Mr to go if please.
Thank you madam chair
representative
I would simply say that that is
something that.
Is to be determined.
In that rulemaking process that
that the ID would go through so
there's no sent the termination
of the number of sectors to be
established in H. P. six.
Madam chair and Representative
small and an expert.
What do you.
What do you foresee your what's
kind of your vision of these or
there for a while we just
provide the state and four
quadrants are for sectors Sir do
you think that is a different.
A different plan.
Madam chair representative.
Hi I would simply say that I
wouldn't want to
Make an assumption for E. ID was
going through that process but
there are you know of a limited
number of sectors that are the
largest contributing sectors to
the state's missions.
Madam chair and Mr.
Iorio
What are the largest
contributing secretary said that
you see currently.
Madam chair representative.
They all are oil and gas.
Interpretation.
Electricity generation.
Those are the three largest
madam chair representative I can
provide more detail if you'd
like yeah those are the.
In our the.
Madam chair representative fault
then with the regulations the if
you were a stricter for this
group.
Then save the rest of the
Sectors.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative the.
They the different sectors will
all have their
Capacity and goals to meet.
The limits that are set by the
environmental improvement for
and so while some sectors may be
more heavier omitting so those
those same sectors likely will
have.
Extensive opportunity to reduce
emissions through innovation and
investment.
Madam chair representative small
when
You speak about the three top.
You know yesterday we were
talking about oil and gas being
the.
You know more at our largest
single producer of income for
the state.
And and that worries me that if
we make it too restrictive that
we may need
Suffer the consequences of her
own regulations if you will
It will be well the regulations
be sensitive to trying to
sustain that income.
Thank you madam is that chair
thank you Representative Rehm
your the direct emissions
reductions definitions and house
bill six
have to be quantify it and I'm
reading from just briefly madam
chair quantifiable permanent
verifiable and enforceable these
include a number of different
means madam chair and
representative many of which so
the the leading private sector
stakeholders are already
implementing so madam chair
Representative Rehm
this is industry whether it's in
power generation transportation
energy or otherwise are
aggressively moving in these
areas and in fact more
investment is flowing to the
best
environmental stakeholders in
those industries.
Madam chair and Representative
small I think you bring up a
good point
The you know we have the ETA we
have
I move now to go ahead and
reduce the flaring up wells in
stop and I'm I'm kind of
thinking that.
we need to see how that works
first that this may be not
needed.
Or maybe to address it if you
will to
I I have some reservations
about.
about this
movie one madam chair and
Representative small one of the
things I'm really worried about.
Is are here the transportation
in these top three yeah I'm the
do you foresee it opting the
mission standards that they have
for California vehicles
California has for its own
vehicles as here in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative Rehm
I wouldn't pre judge the
environmental improvement board
and in on page eleven we can go
down to the bottom to see the
way that the environmental
improvement board is guided to
implement house bill six.
And doing that in a sensitive
way Madam chair representative
Rehm so so no I don't
I would pre judge at all the E.
I. B. process also madam chair
representative Rehm
and I know we have to be brief
and I will work to do so.
We have heard repeatedly that a
cleaner environment in some
cases on and I want to be very
clear not from all private
sector stakeholders but in many
cases from some private state
sector stakeholders we hear that
more environmental rules a
cleaner environment will be the
proverbial straw that broke the
camel's back Madam chair
representative Rehm what we see
in real time is in fact the
office at that stricter rules in
New Mexico when they're done in
a smart collaborative way can
coincide with economic growth
and madam chair representative
why house bill six is so
important is because the fifty
percent reduction by two
thousand and five of by two
thousand and thirty four Maez
zero by twenty fifty is how
we've avoided the worst
catastrophic impacts of climate
change so I don't think that we
have time to sit back and see if
our efforts to this state have
have been sufficient.
In fact I think that we need to
go where the science tells us.
Madam chair representative small
are you.
I'm I'm worried about it you
know climate change the issue I
agree your but what I'm worried
about is
we're making.
Very strict regulations for New
Mexico.
We can't control if you will the
windows world
I mean the reality is we get air
that came from China over here
at times
and like twice in the United
States.
I think the regulations need to
be.
More standard state to state.
And that that the EPA
regulations need to remain at
the Phelps.
you know we create different
Business
Ramblers for Russia models
in different states and then we
have winners and losers will.
But my next question is
Madam chair and representative
small.
We go to page four and we go to
one nine by twenty twenty twenty
fifty.
Statewide direct emissions of
greenhouse gases shall be at
least ninety percent less than
the two thousand five levels.
I I for see that we have
population growth in New Mexico
and hopefully business groups as
well.
How does that account if we're
used to the the two two thousand
five level.
Then we almost have to have zero
population growth.
You understand what I'm driving
at.
Madam chair representative Rehm
by using cleaner sources of
energy by reducing mission
emissions as H. B. six sets out
we can grow in population while
reducing our missions to meet
net zero.
Madam chair and Representative
small I would.
I would assume that.
If we went to the two thousand
five data and we broke it all
down we amortize stood out for.
Person lives in New Mexico as
that level yeah we're just
calling the axe.
that so each person in New
Mexico is responsible for
exceeding missions well if we
increase the population by some
amount and we're now the
population is why.
But if we take an applied the
same formula to them it doesn't
take into the into account the
population or business growth so
I I have a problem with that
but Madam chair representative
small.
So if we don't reach the two
thousand fifty statewide direct
emissions of greenhouse B.
ninety percent less than the two
thousand five then what happens.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm.
This is a this is not at the
individual level so that formula
would not apply madam chair
Representative Rehm the rules
that the IV will promulgate will
help us get to that twenty fifty
go in fact our neighboring
states our our nation in the
world in their own ways are
aggressively working toward that
goal and so I'm confident that
we will reach that goal.
Madam chair representative small
I would.
I would
Say that if we look at
transportation.
Would you say that the largest
contributor are individual
vehicles or the commercial
vehicles.
Madam chair representative ream
I don't have that information in
front of me but Madam chair
representative ring the beauty
of house bill six is that by
setting out what direct emission
reductions mean and encouraging.
The innovation and investment
needed to meet these targets we
will grow economically will grow
with more investment in we'll do
it in a cleaner way.
You madam chair and.
Representative small.
When I look at transportation I
think of individuals and I mean
you know the reality is that we
have multiple vehicles that are
on.
But.
That vehicle is either relying
on oil and gas or I mean you
know what words reliant on
electricity so.
Each person's.
Foot print if you will.
For just that vehicle.
Intersects.
The other
or at least part of the other
top talk to.
Yes so I have a problem with
that in particularly when we
start and I saw back here
disadvantaged people when we
start looking at disadvantaged
people which under drive older
vehicles and can't afford the
more energy efficient vehicles.
so I think that's.
I think we need to give this
area a little more order in this
legislation.
Madam chair and representative.
So if we go to one twelve and
and we're talking about the
ninety percent reduction and it
says which may be bent by using
directed mission reductions and
then we go to page two one
point.
Your graph C..
You see the definition means
quantitative quantifiable
permanent verifiable and
enforceable reductions of
directly missions.
so okay I get that some way
we're gonna have the.
Regulator who verifies that.
But enforceable reductions of
directing musicians what is that
the.
Matt go ahead Mr go ahead please
Madam chair representative.
Leave that that.
Simply classifies needs direct
emissions as
as being.
You regulated by yes.
But I can I can check back on
that get back to.
Yeah.
Madam chair representative Mr
Deoria what I'm what I'm really
looking at is just a.
The criminal violation or is it
a civil violation I mean what
we're what is.
Okay I don't I don't need that
what is going to happen to me or
my company whatever you wanna
say.
Madam chair representative Rehm
you had this is the the kind of
the clean air regulatory
structure that we have
it's in the air quality act
madam chair representative Rehm
and so it's really based upon a
compliance system for which the
there are enforcement
provisions.
Yes but madam chair and
Representative small I don't
understand enforceable reduction
that that implies that
government is going to take an
action against me or my company.
And I'm trying to figure out
what actions thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Rehm.
I'm sure that can range from
everything of being out of
compliance deadlines and or
other
Other methods of enforcement.
Madam chair and Representative
small we have regulations
currently and that I violated
the end of the EPA regulations
what would happen to me
individually or by.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm there's
fines fees and or injunctions
although of course compliance in
the investment innovation and
job creation it brings is the go
oh we see.
Madam chair representative here
I think the goal always is.
Do you know have compliance we
we try that with our criminal on
to.
And we see that but
Fine but signs of you mentioned
are they criminal fines for the
civil once.
Or both.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm this can
range depending upon
What the violation is but Madam
chair representative yes in
almost all cases their civil.
Some of.
You
madam chair and representative I
want to go back to page four.
So Representative I'm gonna
interrupt right now you know I
respect you but I'm gonna have
to go on to representative
Nibert you've had thirty minutes
almost today of questions plus
the time you had yesterday so I
think based on the discussion no
amount of time is going to
change your position on this
bill so I just want to be
respectful of others that will
like to ask questions as well so
we're gonna move along to
representative Nibert.
Madam chair thank you I so I did
have other questions
that I'd like to ask before we
up vote on this so I can make an
informed decision.
But you know I understand that
you may give others a chance to
ask questions but please could
be back in the queue for
questions thank you
Representative Representative
Nibert if we have time we had a
lot of time I wish you had
approached representatives of
small last night I think we're
there for twelve hours
and that's why we cut this
meeting short as well we were
supposed to meet at noon but I
want folks to have an
opportunity to get some rest as
well so we have time to go back
to you.
Presented Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
And I do sincerely appreciate
your giving us a few extra hours
for sleep
going home at six thirty in the
morning is is a not a usual
situation for me so I stand by
thanks and appreciation to you.
Madam chair representative.
I believe in the discussion the
other day maybe it was in your
introduction
You suggested that.
With renewables.
Going to get out.
The.
Thank you and.
I.
All right I would like to
revisit that issue because I
don't see how.
Renewables will completely fill
the gap that may exist if we of
go to a.
Actually gross zero carbon
emissions or.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
Can you restate the question
please.
Yes
I believe that that you had
indicated baby in your
introductory remarks or.
Possibly a response to a
question.
This bill.
And it's I guess intended
consequences that these levels
are what I would characterize
rose to zero carbon emissions
That renewables could could fill
the gap.
Between our current.
Somewhat reliance on fossil
fuels and are supposed to be in
the
Zero four gross zero carbon
emission goal that set up in
this legislation.
Thank you madam chair
representative Nibert Madam
chair representative Nibert in
house bill six this sets of.
Permits and carbon reduction
emission reduction limits and
brings us to a twenty fifty net
zero with ninety percent direct
emission reductions the
It's an all of the above
approach on how to get there
then chair representative
renewables present huge economic
opportunity for New Mexico in
clean energy development but
this is this isn't a an
emissions
piece of legislation
not a not solely focused on one
form of energy or another.
Little bit we're we're gonna
visit a little bit about that
but I I I bring that up because
it seems to me that if I read
the headlines yesterday in the
Albuquerque journal
We had a piece of legislation
that we considered a couple
years ago.
That.
Is.
Presenting maybe as early as
this summer.
Some pretty our.
Drastic problems and concerns
that that we may have to deal
with even before we we exit on
Thursday and.
And I am.
Concern that we're headed down
the same road with this
legislation.
As may be we are finding
ourselves and with respect to
the legislation a couple years
ago so
I I appreciate your statement
that.
It's an all of the above
approach and and I thank you as
we go through some of these
questions are are.
I hope that that is the case the
words I see on the paper may not
lead me to that the.
result
Mr or madam chair and and
Representative.
I noticed do we have any of the
secretaries are they your expert
witnesses today.
Madam chair representative there
they're not with us today but
we've been working very closely
with the administration.
Are they still are engaged on
this issue.
Madam chair representative yes.
Well I saw a solve newspaper
article of on line
I think it was two days ago
babies yesterday compare all run
together at this point but
We're secretary Cheney.
Are indicated.
That.
Yes Representative for.
Well.
It's B..
Thank you.
This legislature did not find
and I'm paraphrasing did not
provide adequate funding sources
to begin the implementation of
the fact that thank your your
testimony Madam chair
representative was the budget
there are I have one point nine
or two million dollars did I get
that number about right.
Thank you madam chair
representative that New Mexico
Environment Department
specifically has ended up with
probably about a seventeen
eighteen percent increase.
When the investments in house
bill two and house bill two
junior are told of the.
But but I think
if I saw the number in the paper
correctly he was he was stating
that there was.
Maybe one point a one point nine
million dollars for this.
Effort and that he needed.
Basically tens of millions of
dollars so was woefully short
and I think I have a twelve year
From here on.
The.
It basically.
So.
Are your long that the.
You basically stated that it
was.
Somewhat disingenuous for us to.
Thanks.
This type of legislation that is
a very heavy left for his agency
have not adequately funded and
and.
That that experts may be more
regularly about that and we
would like to add that but that
that is a concern about five
for all of bring that up.
Madam chair and representative.
Because of the shift to
renewables.
Do we also need to revisit the
New Mexico mining that and
possibly
do some things there are to
encourage the exploration and
okay.
Some eight or it could.
Thank you.
R. do we need to.
Look at the money that and make
some changes to the mining act
to encourage exploration and
production of state Rohrer
minerals that exist in New
Mexico to help.
Make this transition to more
renewable energy.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert that
that's not part of house bill
six house bill six just sets the
emissions
the emission standards.
Madam chair representative you
stated that the.
Okay a.
Right part of the ability to
fill the gap of and I presume
you were intending to shift from
fossil fuels to renewables
is going to get us there and.
I don't think we can make that
shift without.
Significant.
Supplies of.
With the
Cobalt.
Are you know we have copper
mines in the state of and
they're doing.
Better than they have in decades
but.
We have the presence of many of
the rare earth minerals that
that exist in our state yet we
do not have other than copper I
don't believe we have any
significant mining of those
those sources and so it seems to
me that we're headed down that
road one thing that we ought to
do is to visit about what we can
do to encourage
The development of that activity
which would also bring.
Resources on the downside.
If we expand our industrial base
in mining would certainly be an
industrial base then you
contribute to the of
rainouts destination issue as
well so it's very be what we
were setting ourselves up for a
catch twenty two.
Why did I I I did find secretary
Jennings Sir what.
you said that.
House Bill to
is insufficient and funding very
and this is a quote is
absolutely disrespectful to
Senate policy agenda that.
raised and now the legislature
isn't willing to pay for.
That's what.
You know we're if we're going to
embark on this I think you
called it a bold initiative
early on that if we're going to
embark on a we're going to have
to provide the resources for
that as well and I believe that
the sector is probably right.
the effort.
That is called for in this piece
of legislation is substantial
not only with respect to his
agency but also a sister agency
building energy minerals and
natural resources department
and I suspect that the we
probably did not applaud them
sufficiently good bargains as
well.
You were asked about how other
states have dealt with this zero
hi legislation.
And.
Madam chairman Representative
are you familiar with
Colorado's law this point.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
I'm somewhat familiar
house bill six is very focused
on New Mexico including the
areas working closely with
disproportionately impacted
communities.
Some of our tribal nations but
our neighbors to the north have
have done some of these efforts
also.
Well there bill was eight two
thousand nineteen bill and that
bill became law.
And it required the state to
work with state agencies as does
ours.
Stakeholders disproportionately
impacted communities large
emission sources.
Workers and communities
dependent upon industry.
To help chart their path forward
to mitigate greenhouse gas
pollution
of more state.
As a consequence of that.
Representative builder and wall.
Colorado then embarked on a
yearlong.
he gave process we're.
Stakeholders with the the very
people that were going to be
impacted by the potential of
rules and and restrictions that
came about from that
to to help them.
navigate their choice and I
think they also use two thousand
five as a base for our so first
question is because New Mexico
this legislation in Colorado use
two thousand five thirty
significant social Y. two
thousand five is being used as a
baseline in both New Mexico and
M. and Colorado.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that's the foundation for
all of this administration's
actions and as I understand it
for some of the national and
international scientific
consensus on emissions levels Mr
go ahead you want to add
anything to that.
Madam chair representative that
that's correct those are the
baselines used internationally
and for that reason the baseline
that the governor has chosen to
use
In in some in committing to
these instructions.
And was that decision to use two
thousand five was it because of
any particular your you have
sore economic activities or or
or was it just a point in time
where maybe there is more data
that was gathered to determine
what was occurring in two
thousand five.
Madam chair representative on
need to get back to you
regarding the specific
historical reasonings for for
use impact on.
That base that here is the best
time.
So if I if I understand the.
The testimony correctly up Adam
chair representative two
thousand five we're not just
simply trying to copy Colorado
there's a bigger reason why two
thousand I was being considered.
Madam chair representative Rehm
yes.
Okay.
It is next to me but
Madam chair representative of.
One thing that I notice our and
are legislation that may be a
stop president Colorado
legislation use.
Our instructions in this bill is
to engage.
HSD involvement.
Whereas the Colorado are
statute.
Choir that engagement with the.
Affected communities industry
sources and and so could you
tell me why we're focusing on
yes agencies and and not really.
Earning to the table in a robust
fashion are those that would
primarily be affected by this
legislation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert
that the environmental
improvement board products
process in the promulgation of
rules is that collaborative
stakeholder driven
process that you described
further.
We
are making sure that the
environmental improvement board
is going out to
disproportionately impacted
communities foods on the ground
but the E. I. B. processes
stakeholder driven and very
inclusive of private sector and
other stakeholders.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative all
for that so even though the
statute may be as broad as so
For you on that point you're
stating that because of the rule
making process Representative
that would be a ticket up and
and require that type of
Stakeholder engagement if you
will.
Madam chair representative
Nibert exactly.
You know one thing that does
concern me what will we
we went up to the agencies to
determine that stakeholder
engagement and don't find.
Some direction.
it's my experience in many areas
of.
Rep stakeholder engagement.
Occurs on a limited basis and
what I mean by that is we've
had.
Significant issues facing the
oil and gas the street are most
familiar with.
And it seems that stakeholder
engagement often times results
in.
Meetings in Albuquerque Santa Fe
Los crucis.
And maybe occasionally we'll see
one in Farmington or or maybe
across the but it's awfully
difficult to get agencies to go
our.
Good down and all of the
Carlsbad we're we're of these
activities are are you know
really
occurring in in a very our
robust fashion and so you know I
think that.
And I would certainly encourage
you to look at whether we
should.
Find some direction that that
engagement not just be a rogue
agency
rulemaking process but that we
force the agencies.
Really do a good job in.
Talking to those.
Who are.
Right we affected by by the
rules that would benefit suit
and that means talking to the
very people that.
Live in those communities
talking to the very people that
are employed in those industries
talking to the industries
themselves and coming to to the
places where thank you they are
located.
madam chair and representative
of.
You know following the.
Signing number Colorado law your
two thousand nineteen very very
engaged in that you're lost
study here I hold in my hand a
fairly significant Dr.
This document is
Colorado greenhouse gas
pollution route reductions
roadmap that was published in
January twenty twenty one.
And it's so it's a substantial
document.
And
It's rather interesting of and I
hope that people who are
looking at this recognize there
this is not just the oil and gas
industry issue.
This is not just the electric
generation of PNM at Xcel energy
are now also elector issue.
This issue will affect every.
Senator.
With Sam in our state what I
found interesting is that.
Madam chair and representative
do you know what the number one
right House gas a better
Is in the state of Colorado in
two thousand twenty.
I do not madam chair.
Its transportation it's so.
Private cars running up and down
there highways it's the the
Diesel trucks.
We're a little bit railroads but
if its transportation.
That was the biggest emitter of
greenhouse gas emissions the
Colorado two thousand twenty so
for people to think that this is
not.
Something that's going to affect
them or maybe it directly
affects the because there's
higher cost here there.
No if you're going to achieve
the results that are.
Intended to be achieved.
And I would suspect that are.
situation is not vastly
different than Colorado
It's going to affect the
virtually every person in this
state.
Anyway getting back.
To the all still.
In section four in this this
is expected in stakeholder
engagement.
Section for the bill.
Of you know good does talk about
state entities are going to
report to NMED at the
natural resources department
this call match resources
departments that energy minerals
actual resources
But I do think that the
They should also be reaching out
as I stated to to the other
stakeholders of the ball and all
right I certainly hope that
you're correct that they will at
least do so through the rule
making process but I think I
thank you I'm going forward
there needs to be that constant.
Interaction because the agency
needs to understand.
How things are not working or
things are working very well and
and how that affects their
overall goals that you're trying
to achieve in the legislature.
The environmental group of
boards.
In section six is branded
reported to a draw to adopt
rules.
Establish the proportionate
share of greenhouse gas emission
reductions to achieve these
targets that in the twenty
thirty at twenty fifty dates.
And
I would just simply note that
the at E. I. B. the department
refers to the environment or.
Yes.
In section four
The natural resources department
and the environment department
are supposed to work together to
create the the baseline so
How how is that going to occur
in and it does it just mean that
one has primary authority over
that issue or are they working
in concert or do they both come
up with
Their own rules the to to
achieve the savings are walking
through how those rulemaking
process will work since the
birth to agencies well we passed
to agencies to do this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert the
interagency collaboration that
you think described well is on
going it's the foundation of of
work in the methane rule and
other work from the
administration and so we foresee
and this legislation will allow
that continued collaboration in
the way that it's working now.
And.
This collaboration with that
result in creating this two
thousand five baseline.
For real enemy do create the
baseline on that so.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I work that
environmental improvement board
is tasked with with that
actually adopting and doing that
work to create the baseline
Madam chair representative
Nibert they'll be
Yes the NMED and EMNRD will be
closely involved in shepherding
that process but the E. I. B..
Public process where anyone can
intervene where Madam chair
representative Nibert we do
insure that he I'd be goes at
least three other places around
the state in this rulemaking.
That's where the assessment will
be done in the baseline.
Okay Madam chair representative
so.
I would just.
Request that you look at
sections four and six.
It may be given some attention
as to whether or not those two
sections make containing either
a conflict or some
Maybe unclear direction in my
mind that you may want to type
that up a little bit to to roof
what what what the real intent
as and if it's Mr B. that's
primarily due of every left in
there.
Maybe rather.
Reflect that better terms
in section six we are being used
to adopt rules for the emissions
reporting and and disclosure.
Are you familiar with EPA and
support W..
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative a
little I'm sure that Mr to go
that is as well in in more
granular fashion.
Madam chair representative.
I'm not an expert at please go
ahead.
Okay.
Madam chair representative Mr to
go yet all.
EPA requires that reporting
under subpart W. already and so
my question is.
Yes that reporting has already
required on the federal level.
And we are happy yeah I'd be
adopt rules for reporting.
Should we not just simply state
director of the reporting that's
already being done
maybe we we sent a copy to be
I'd be are.
It and this this issue is
concerning because.
I suspect be I'd be dropped
rules that
depart the reporting
requirements that are already
are subject to EPA rules
regulations and.
One thing that industry.
Are very concerned with our are
having multiple.
Are requirements from different
agencies that essentially
reformat the data that they have
to take time to reformat it for
the other the HSD had that
happen so.
Sometimes even within state
agencies at.
it's always this concerning war
we have to reformat things to
just meet somebody else's
requirement a doctor based data
use is a sign so you might want
to look at the.
At six of six and CEO of the
data that you're interested in
if it's already subject to
reporting by yep PPA
maybe R. E. I'd be should be
directed to create a rule that
accepts that part that data or
have a very good reason why
additional data is required
yes I I do think that we are
putting.
An additional regulatory burden
on
Many.
Many industries and average that
the that of course takes more
people increase their costs
which costs get the house farm
to we the consumers
So I guess the upshot of that is
I would hope director of the
reporting the reporting
requirements to be I'd be I
would simply more of the subpart
W. requirements and not there
are be in conflict with the the
federal rules regulations are.
What's the.
If I read this legislation
correctly.
Madam chair representative there
are.
New permits required is would
that be accurate.
Four meters.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Nibert there the
the emissions reductions are
required to be quantifiable and
verifiable so madam chair
representative it is possible
there would be new permits but
that's not.
Within
all within HB six there could be
new permit requirements but
madam chair representative
Nibert using the best available
data as you just pointed out
earlier regarding EPA certainly
would go into that.
Well.
While working graph is the point
two words and I I know you're on
a point three point of the I was
looking at page eleven.
Our graph.
Three B..
Line fourteen on on the report
to version this rated to your
it says.
It's to adopt rules to achieve
the one that's goes on.
And greenhouse gas emissions
permitting limits of reduction
requirements so that but
indicated to me that there would
be a separate
permitting.
requirement.
That would be authorized in
the statute and then and in the
apple many of regulations of I
just wanted to of all verify
that that wasn't deterred chat
that we would be creating
another format.
Instead of amending may be.
Current permitted statutes.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert we want to
provide flexibility and tools
this doesn't require additional
permits but it would allow
allow for them.
permits them if certain
criteria.
Yes the
Required a new permit the court
so.
Further delays projects and and
yes yeah there's always a
concern.
Where.
There's a potential that
permits.
I don't know why but they are
inconsistent with one another
and get just to give you an
example of Madam chair
representative.
I suppose one could obtain a
construction permit that would
require.
A source to eliminate CO two.
What the same time allowing.
Representative Eli to be
produced.
And that would be within our
NMED's ozone precursor will.
Now we have.
Another permit that may be
required but yet be that we
could require that that same
source eliminate its methane
output.
So in that case you would have a
direct conflict one would allow
methane.
While the other would pre vet.
methane from being producers.
And so that would create a
problem for the permit do on the
one hand they're authorized to
do something and all the other
they're not authorized to do so
at and and that's always the.
For a problem and that's
particularly true where
agencies sometimes don't talk to
each other so
Would you have any response to
to the potential for those types
of conflicts to occur for
required new permits.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert I think
the interagency process that is
in place now that we put in
statute here
Willow.
should avoid the the sorts of
duplications you outline and in
fact Madam chair representative
seek efficiencies that will make
sure that these.
Emissions guidelines emissions
limits that we're setting are
attainable
verifiable all the things that
are part of part of the bill so
I appreciate very much your your
expertise and understanding in
the area and what we want to do
is to provide the tools that
clearly set important standards
Madam chair representative
standards that are critical for
us is New Mexicans both in an
economic sense but also to avoid
the catastrophic impacts of
climate change that we're going
to be feeling especially this
summer in some very real and
scary ways with drought wildfire
and other things and we
definitely want to madam chair
representative provide the tools
flexibility and support so that
the agencies and the I'd be in a
stakeholder process can have
these clear
limits and standards but to make
it as efficient to tame obtain
those and meet those standards
as possible.
Thank you and and.
You know are having.
Having spent almost forty years
of my life dealing with Larry
and industry that sometimes
finds itself in these
predicaments were.
One entities saying yes you can
have a the other saying are you
cap.
I can tell you that those the
resolution of those issues are
not the.
very quick and nor are they very
pleasant and by Archie of
resolution of those conflicts
are expensive industry are very
so why
The ability to to engage in
business which means people are
being employed at other so
if we're going to do this I I
would hope that we will
provided some direction as to
how
those concerts could be.
Resolved in a timely and a a
reasonable fashion and I don't
see that the Representative here
The other concern I have from
the regulatory front here is.
If I look at this legislation
correctly.
The legislature's handing over
tremendous amount of of forty.
To match resources department as
well as the apartment apartment.
we're would you agree with that
Madam chair representative.
You need to and more
Representative small sorry I
apologize madam chair
representative Nibert I don't
think that we're handing over
undue authority I think we are
madam chair representative
setting very clear and strong
standards and.
As we've done recently in this
body in some other areas
charging the experts were
responsible for the health and
safety of New Mexicans in those
agencies giving them the tools
and the authorities so madam
chair representative I would
agree that we are providing more
authority were amending the
clean air act.
In doing other setting the
strong in clear standards.
Maybe we I don't madam chair and
representative I don't believe
we're giving undue Authority I
believe we're gearing clear
direction strong step and then
giving the the tools in the
flexibility to implement those
policies.
Yeah I'll just read you the we
language in the bill of unity
and I'm looking at the point two
version but I don't think there
was change in the point three
are in section five it says
And take any action authorized
by law that is deemed necessary
or appropriate I you Secretary
the respective department for
the state to meet the greenhouse
gas emissions about establishing
section three of the future at.
there's no side boards on that
We are authorizing them to to
basically consumers feel the
licensing conflict with with
other walls
that to me is is
wide sweeping delegation of
four.
and again.
That.
Once that abilities granted in
the agencies are respectively
after all that a forty of their
rules in essence become.
Just like our statutes they
become law and people have to
abide by by so.
The in my mind this so this is a
a broad validation Authority of
spotted women to tell their
ability.
Having the that.
There's always always of concern
to to those who that are subject
to of that delegation reported.
Well.
Is there any mechanism member in
the legislation to deal with the
potential for regulatory actions
by the respective agencies.
Our.
That create conflicting
provisions as to the resolution
of those populars.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative.
The.
The the coordination that's in
statute that would be in statute
and H. B. six
is one way of mitigating that a
hypothetical so harm that you
outlined Madam chair
representative and
In existing you know in the
existing process the ability for
the public to participate
intervene except for a
as well as the.
The foundation of the I. B. as
well as the agencies thank
mitigates against that but again
madam chair representative I do
want to really appreciate and
thank you for your nuanced
understanding
you know as this body considers
strong clear enforceable
standards it's important that we
make those.
You know we give the New
Mexicans a clear set of tools to
reach those standards if we
think those standards are
important and in this case
obviously the standards roly
connect back to having a safe
livable New Mexico as we go into
an uncertain future Madam chair
representative.
Briefly on page eleven line six
we do want to make sure.
That's the key I be in their
rule making.
get down there you know we do
want to make sure that they're
Considering the requirement in
reductions achieved or.
Required pursuant to other
applicable laws rules or federal
regulations
So we want to make sure that
that these other both statutory
and by rule requirements are
being taking into account.
Madam chair representative
that's applicable to the ERP
years.
Madam chair representative yes
and the I. B. is the
Implements HB six while the
agencies
the agencies are charged with
with helping bring forward the
draft rules and in much of the
work within their the I. B. in
this case is they they are the
entity charged with creating
that rule so therefore it Madam
chair representative they should
be the ones responsible for.
you know taking into account all
of the other applicable rules
regulations and laws.
Representative Nibert we have
two more hands up still so we're
going to get moving along I
encourage you to reach out to
Representative small on the
floor.
We might have some more late
nights I'm thinking that's the
case so I think you'll have some
time.
But I appreciate your comments.
Representative Ortez.
I thank you madam chair I move a
do not pass on House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill six and if you
pass on house government
elections and ending Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill six we protest.
Thank you Representative Ortez
that's a proper motion and
seconded that motion
Representative neighborhood we
still do have discussion for
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora.
You think I'm gonna ask that you
limit your questions to to we've
had a lot of discussion
Representative two days now.
And I'm gonna respectfully
request that you limit your
questions to to again I
encourage you to reach out to
Representative small during the
floor we had a lot of time last
night I'm sure that's not going
to be the only time we're going
to have long nights during this
week and back to Representative
Zamora.
Thank you madam chair and
Due respect madam chair the time
was limited to the last
discussion that we had on this
and then it's it's real limited
today I think members of the
public are.
Should be respected and well
informed us to these bills that
we're we're voting on and and we
have a lot to learn on this bill
also it's.
I see a lot of statements that
are pretty brought to me and and
I'll get to the first one real
quick great thank you thank you
madam chair and and the madam
chair and and Representative.
On the page three of the bill on
the regulated sector I see for
agriculture and the.
Then the.
So is assumed by older.
So so I will turn the in that
pertains to the growing to trees
so.
When I when I see that as a
regulated sector can can we get
a little bit into that and and
In a little bit what that means.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Zamora following
all of the other sectors that
part of this legislation now
goes through the same process
that we've talked about with the
environmental improvement board
stakeholder participation
and so they'll follow the same
process.
So then what do you what do you
foresee in the agricultural
business that would
What effect.
The clean air futures act
When when I look at agriculture
I I think because the carbon
capture machine there and
apparently we're looking at it
as a.
As a possible secretary that's
the meeting emitting.
Carmen what what can you get
into that a little bit.
Briefly madam chair
representative amada.
As both the source of emissions
and a source of direct emission
reductions Madam chair
representative on what a.
Actor culture has a key role
there it is a very small
emissions the matter but has a
potentially very large role in
reducing emissions so act I'm
more investment more opportunity
and strong growth potential.
And then could you could you
give me some kind of the
numbers or statistics as to how
where New Mexico lies.
Across the you on on the.
On the.
Madam chair of the greenhouse on
greenhouse emissions on I'm
sorry Representative no not up
thank you madam chair
Representative Zamora
eat the house bill six only
refer only refers to New Mexico
so it's it's not concerned with
what's going on outside New
Mexico.
And madam chair and
representative maybe I can
restate my question can you tell
us where we rank on clean air in
the state.
Compared to the you know we are
we said like to me we're one of
the cleanest air states that we
that there is in the union is am
I wrong in that.
I'm Madam chair representative
I'm not a
there are parts of the state
that have significant air
quality ozone and other
challenges there are parts that
don't Madam chair
representative.
That however how that compares
to other parts of the country is
not part of of HB six H. B. six
is all about how we
reduce emissions and then get to
net zero using all of the tools
the innovation investment that
are part of house bill six.
And my last question madam chair
with respect to the committee in
our time.
Or or this is more of a
statement madam chair and
representative.
So that the public will know.
Understand what these.
Elation are gonna cost is I care
to build a.
H. B. one sixty nine and that
was pertaining to the mandates
by the executive
To make some changes at the
southwest cheese plant and the
some of the very facilities
around the state and we were
asking for twenty six million I
believe in that bill.
And that's just a small.
Start and so you can see how
expensive these things are going
to be.
And the.
And following that.
Hello.
I want to ask Representative
small if.
A lot of these
Sectors have they already
started this process and will
they get credit for that.
Man man.
Representative the motor doesn't
just.
Madam chair and and
Representative I you were
cutting out real bad and I
couldn't understand what you
said madam chair that answer to
your question is is yes and yes.
Okay in in thank you for your
answers and and thank you madam
chair for give me a chance to
ask a few questions and I would
have a lot more questions we
could have more time on the
bill.
Thank thank you Representative.
And we do have a motion on the
floor the clerk to call the roll
place.
Madam chair quarter.
State your point.
Representative.
The representative bring more
myself and apparently
Representative Zamora have
finished questioning the witness
you can not close debate until
we are finished with our.
Bility to to ask what.
I'm sure.
The motion all.
Your at this time because we're
not through with debate.
Madam chair.
On that point yes we can move
the previous question if you
prefer.
Representative Chasey be elected
to do that.
Okay the previous question.
Gray and a second.
Representative Ely is in my
office.
Thank you Representative Chasey
Representative Nibert the clerk
to call the roll place.
Representative Chasey yes in the
previous question.
Representative Eli.
Why are we are we are now.
Moving do passed is it as
amended I can't handle it
question is about other people I
got and so I will yes I just
want to clear it up I want to
make sure there's a proper
motion now there is a proper
motions.
Representative day goes yes.
Representative Nibert.
No ma'am.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative green.
No ma'am and under protest.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair blue.
Yes.
So that pass
and we will go back to the
proper motion please call the
roll on that.
Representative Chasey.
Yes misspelled.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy goes yes.
Representative Nibert.
No ma'am.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm madam chair
I'm no and under protest.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you Representative you
have a do pass on the committee
substitute for house bill six
and with that we're adjourned
thank you everyone.
