Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews.
She.
Representative small.
Representative small.
Representative Zamora.
Your.
Representative Allison.
Mr Chairman.
Here.
We have a quorum ladies and
gentlemen thank you all and I'm
glad that we were able to
accommodate those that are on
the house appropriations and
finance committee and thank you
for your work in passing our
budget for for this year we
really appreciated we understand
that you've been under a lot of
the pressure and and
responsibilities and we thank
you and and thank you for
joining us and this delayed
start to our meeting this
morning we do have a few bills
to go over that are budgetary in
nature and I want to be able to
allow us to go to the house bill
twenty four house bill forty one
house bill sixty six first on
our agenda is house bill twenty
four and that is represented by
Representative Andrea Romero G.
isn't that the panelists here
with us this morning good
morning Representative Romero
the floor is yours maybe once
again good morning Mr chair good
morning members of the committee
thank you for the time to
present house bill twenty five
today it is basically solely a
budget bill I would like to
introduce our three at
decisional
experts if they could help me
with this process at this time
Mr chair it's norm long he's the
former director of the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission commission now
retired Hannah recently white
deputy director of the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission and then my cam and
who I know this committees
familiar with these are senior
water adviser I'm in the office
of the governor and I would love
for them to help me out this
bill is is essentially a twelve
million dollars appropriation
that was approved by our interim
committee
water natural resources for
approval to help this
HSD get the sufficient funding
it needs to be able to do its
work a presentation by then
secretary separate and junior I
Office of the engineer head.
D. Antonio presented this with a
long list of important needs
that we had in order to be able
to to manage our water resources
which is what the office of the
state engineer does I would like
to invest our experts are here
I'd love to
have them speak starting with
norm qualm
If you could go ahead and gonna
excuse me if you could go ahead
and and talk about the need for
this bill thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Mr gong
the floor is yours Sir.
Thank you Mr chair a good
morning chairman Lente vice
chair Allison and committee
members I'm norm Gaume and I'm
fortunate to be in the Mexican.
I've lived all over southern New
Mexico.
And after college should have
lived in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque my spouse and I now
live in rural Santa Fe County.
I'm a professional expert in New
Mexico's water service
Albuquerque's water resources
manager and after that director
of the New Mexico Interstate
Stream Commission for six years
I'm now president of the Middle
Rio Grande water advocates
incorporated New Mexico
nonprofit corporation that
advocates that we face our water
future rather than continue to
turning our back on it.
New Mexico's water quantity
agencies need funding for
planning management and
governance of New Mexicos water
resources.
And no funding for the office of
the state engineer and the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission is about forty
million which is fifteen million
less than in twenty sixteen
authorize staff numbers are much
lower retirements and
resignations particularly
retirements of.
Have struck a huge blow to the
institutional knowledge of the
agency said it's essential that
that knowledge and capacity be
rebuilt.
The national news this morning
describes a fire at a fertilizer
plant in North Carolina.
Calling for six thousand five
hundred people to flee from
their homes due to the risk of a
huge explosion the fire chief
said.
Wait for something to happen.
Something already has happened
now is the time to get out.
Regarding water I ask you please
don't wait for something to
happen something has already
happened now is the time for the
legislature to take serious
actions to face acute water
problems they are not chronic
they are cute and they go in
slow motion but getting a handle
on them requires that we begin
early because otherwise we for
close many future options the
situation is deteriorating
annually.
Uncontrolled over use of water
is draining aquifer's throughout
the state uncontrolled over use
of water in the middle Rio
Grande will cost another Rio
Grande compact violation unless
emergency actions are
implemented.
Over use of water in the middle
Rio Grande is depriving New
Mexicans downstream of elephant
Butte dam of their full legal
entitlements Water.
When I was appointed director of
the Interstate Stream Commission
in nineteen ninety seven.
The state engineer assigned as
my most important task coming up
with a permanent solution.
for New Mexico's compliance with
the amended to create following
the US Supreme Court litigation
on the Pecos river over that
compact.
And as I assess the situation I
became convinced that the
paper's river was indeed New
Mexico's third most urgent
problem the lower Rio Grande was
New Mexico's second most urgent
the most important to problem in
the middle Rio Grande was first.
You know water advocates wrote
to the water and natural
resources committee last June we
pointed out that New Mexico has
not learned from its lessons
it's essential that we have
right now this money is badly
needed please voted DO pass for
this.
Yes needed increments of funding
the agencies will put it to good
work for the benefit of all New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you Mr gong Representative
Romero would you wish for us to
have on hand originally white of
promoted there she is great
go ahead and.
Good morning Monday and
committee members thank you for
your time this morning I also
just really want to thank
representatives Tara L. Lujan
and Andrea Romero for
introducing this bill and others
the session in support of water
management for the state of New
Mexico and also the committee
members and interim water and
natural resources committee who
really rose to the challenge
this fall and trying to figure
out how to support Interstate
Stream Commission and the office
of the state engineer and ended
and properly managing the
state's waters
as far as this bill goes HB at
twenty four you know initially
this fall we were very concerned
about our ability to move
forward given the challenges
that the state is facing and I
think this committee heard
pretty clearly last week from up
my canon whose here's a
panelists this morning as well
but also acting state engineer
John Romero and our director
Rolf Schmidt Petersen about the
numerous challenges that we're
facing in New Mexico related to
water and I need to prepare for
them and as Mr gong just add
prepare for them now
and so fortunately ultimately
the executive budget
recommendations came through for
us and a lot of ways however the
budget that's currently moving
through the session still has
some gaps and that's where this
particular bill would be very
valuable for us in terms of
meeting the needs and the
challenges that we're facing I
think as you heard last week
given the work that we're doing
currently related to the
governor's fifty year water
plant we're looking at
increasing scarcity and our
water supplies across the state
and as you all know we're
already experiencing severe
drought we're going into the
third year of of a drought that
we're dealing with right at the
moment and given what the
experts science scientific
panelists all together as part
of the effort organized by New
Mexico bureau of geology and
mineral.
Sources renters the rate in over
the next fifty years
approximately a twenty five
percent decrease in our water
supplies across the state and so
that's where it's really
critical that we get out in
front of those challenges now
and work with communities across
the state prepare to increase
resilience to the planning
necessary as provided for in
this bill and plan for
administration including short
for short ensuring into the
future and so I think with that
I will be happy to answer any
questions that you all have been
thank you again Representative
Romero and Sheryl and thank.
Thank you for your presentation
Representative Romero would you
like my candidacy yes please
thank you Mr Hammond the floors
here Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
this committee
I I stand in in support of this
bill on behalf of the office of
the governor for all the reasons
that you heard from Mr
and this reach the White.
In addition the governor and set
some of the major parties at the
beginning of return one of which
was the completion and
implementation of the fifty year
water plant and where we are now
coming into the home stretch as
of that as far as the completion
goes but the implementation will
carry forward
into the future and and and this
funding will will help in that
regard also another major
commitment she made to the try
to tribal leadership across our
state was to provide the
necessary resources to move
Indian water rights settlements
forward and and I I believe this
funding which would serve that
purpose if I if I could
respectfully request
consideration.
Of two friendly amendments to
bring this bill into a good
position to date in the purpose
as outlined by the.
By the Sanchez and so
with that Mr chairman I yield to
you in the committee to a
potentially consider the
proposed amendments.
That's correct Mr chair if we
could move our amendment
forward.
Mr chair you're on you.
I apologize I don't have an less
merry received an amendment.
On this bill we don't have a
written amendments in hand so.
Excuse me I received an
amendment for all eighty three
house bill eighty three but not
twenty four no no we're
unethical twenty fourth for
house bill twenty four do we
have an amendment and had no.
Mr chair will just go forward
without worrying about that
right now that's okay.
That's fine.
Any further comments
Representative Romero.
That's it for now Mr chair thank
you thank you before we do go to
the to our committee members are
there any in attendance that
wish to
COVID in favor of house bill
twenty four all of the favor of
house bill twenty four please
raise your hand and we'll call
you in order.
We will begin with the Mr Gary
Payne Gary Payton.
Good morning Sir you are on with
this.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Gary Payton
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico a membership organization
can that consists of the elected
officers and staff of the cities
of Albuquerque Los crucis Santa
Fe Santa Fe County the Los
Alamos County.
Each of our coalition members
has comprehensive climate action
plans with key components
addressing water conservation
our coalition strongly supports
this twelve million dollars
appropriation for expanded water
planning and resilience in the
face of current and future water
shortages we urge you to pass
this bill thank you very much
for your time this morning Gary
thank you for joining us this
move then to steep.
Steffi you're on with us good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members thank you for
this opportunity to speak I am
representing three fifty New
Mexico rural advocacy and the
deep PNM rural at at sorry
bro
caucus I live in terrace New
Mexico where many of my
neighbors wells have gone dry
and us some who can not afford
to drill new ones are set
desperate enough to think that
precipitation harvesting will
serve all of their water needs
the fifty year water plan says
that does pull conditions are
already beginning to show in
eastern New Mexico sand dunes
are migrating over roads and
homes in the Navajo Nation and
by twenty fifty it may be too
hot and dry for trees to grow in
most of our state so I was very
disappointed with the levels of
the funding giving to OSC and I
just see by the house
appropriations and finance
committee we need legislators to
fully fund and staff overseas so
that it can cut collect water
data study aquifers hire the
staff it needs an update its
technology from paper reports
gathering dust on shelves to
modern computer systems I
understand that a bit more was
added over the weekend but I
just heard the I. eight S. C. C.
director state and Senate
conservation that they really
still need a lot more staff I am
deeply deeply grateful to the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward to help fill the leaks
in the OSCE and I just see
budget and I please urged the
committee to pass H. B. twenty
four thank you thank you thank
you for joining us this morning
let's go to politics the Apollo
good morning here with this.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
speak and thank you to the
sponsors for bringing this issue
forward because it's very
important of the bill seeks to
address an issue that affects
every community across the state
which is water the I. is seen
always see play a critical role
in the management governance of
our state's water and it's
vitally important that they have
the tools for water management
especially during this time of
unprecedented demands for water
and make it out of for the for
these reasons and those
previously stated we support
this bill and I'm with the New
Mexico sic Association thank you
very much Mr chairman thank you
Paula good to hear from you
let's then move to Tiffany
Rivera Tiffany good morning here
with us.
Morning Monday and members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to provide comment
to me Rivera registered
lobbyists for New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau we want to
thank the sponsor for caring
this imperative piece of
legislation The appropriation
now more than ever should
resonate with each and everyone
of us the office of the state
engineer continues to be under
funded which is something that
was recently brought to the
forefront earlier this year with
the resignation of former state
engineer John Dantonio.
John specifically cited a
persistent lack of financial
resources an unfunded mandate
this factors in his resignation.
Departure and the departure of
many other staff members from
the agency will result in a loss
major institutional knowledge
and direct experience.
The office of the state engineer
is responsible for a variety of
important functions including
defending New Mexico's Water
Rights mitigation overseen New
Mexico's water rights and
protecting New Mexico's water
resources and water weights with
such important responsibilities
it is vital that the agency is
properly funded to carry out the
duties assigned to it and for
these reasons we stand in strong
support of this piece of
legislation.
Thank you for joining us this
morning with move to Mr Jason
Espinoza Mr has been also here
with us Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico coalition of
conservation district I'll keep
it short because that Mr chair
still on my talking points but
we stand strong support thank
you.
Thank you for joining us thank
you for keeping it short let's
go to Pam Roy New Mexico farm to
table Mr Roy here with us.
Right.
That this Roy you seem to have a
bad connection.
Let's try this again.
Mr Chairman can you hear me now
that's much better yeah all of
us thank you thanks Mr chairman
and committee members camera
representing the rocky mountain
farmers union we stand in full
support of this of this bill
really appreciate the
representative and the Sanchez
bring it forward and ask my
colleagues previous me of stated
the many reasons why we just
want to let you know we stand in
full support thank you.
Thank you Mr Roy let's then
move then I don't see anyone
else.
In favor of of house bill twenty
four are there any in attendance
in opposition to house bill
twenty four.
Raise your hand above the lower
that I don't think you're
against we did well
Let's move to then our
committee.
Committee members good morning
let's go to Representative brown
Representative brown good
morning the floor is yours then.
Good morning Mr chairman
I even get I don't know if we
need to do or not as long as you
can hear me that's what's
important Mr chairman thank you
very much I guess I don't have
any quibble at all with the need
for more funding for the office
of the state engineer I I think
I understand the issues that
we're facing in the importance
of making sure that our office
is working to the Max.
the question I have is house
bill twenty four asked for a
basically one time money and I'm
just curious
why of the there's not a request
to make this recurring funding
in some form or fashion Mr
chair.
Representative Brown
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for the question
so as we discuss this in the
interim the reality of our
situation is that you know we're
hoping to actually
get many of these resources
distributed for specific reasons
that have been distributed to
that committee and I would love
to be able to get this to
everyone else but it is about
about about staffing so I hear
your concern regarding recurring
expenses we would love to do
that and I would perhaps defer
to our experts on you know how
that would work for this year
and what we're what we're
planning and how we would
distribute these funds madam
chair I'm sorry Mr chair.
Thank you Representative anyone
of the expert was to expand on
the question of why this is one
time non recurring.
Anyone.
Mr Hammond Mr a.
Well this is here.
Representative medic Mr chair
I'm just going to rip off of the
budget that we received from the
OSC when we approved the twelve
million so essentially a lot of
this goes to half of it in fact
would be going to funding for
the litigation that is currently
under way we have some
infrastructure and innovation
safety initiatives that would
also require part of this fund
so again because it is
infrastructure that would be a
one time cost and then a lot of
it would be going directly into
the trust fund which means that
would be available for
subsequent years I'm seeing norm
there to describe the way that
this would work as well and
Hannah.
Thank you nor Hannah or Mike
would you guys wish to expand on
this.
Mr chair I'll defer to Hannah.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Romero I I should
have commented in my comments
earlier our one concern with
this bill in its current form is
that it is a one year
appropriation and I think that
there has been discussion I
wasn't sure if this was what I'm
gonna put on a moment ago on a
friendly amendment to make it
across multiple fiscal years
potentially FY twenty through
three through FY twenty five
would be really helpful and
ensure that we expended in the
best that we can where there is
the greatest need across the
state.
Mr Hannity to expand on this.
Yes thank you Mr chairman as as
as noted it's it's a
nonrecurring of fund item at
this point in time but there are
there are several areas were up
the the funds can be utilized
over a little longer period the
the proposed amendment would
allow for this to be funded over
over three fiscal years but
there certainly are a large need
in Indian Water Rights the
settlement negotiations and
discussions for a contract
support and other other
mechanisms there that there
certainly some need within the
the the purview of of the water
planning area for additional
support outside of the staffing
arena and and several other
areas that the state engineer
could do in the administrative
procedures and and perhaps even
preparing ourselves for a
possible settlement issues
resulting from negotiations and
mediation going on in Texas V.
New Mexico so there's various
parts in the overall
administrative line item that
this funding could be used for
over this a three year fiscal
period.
To me clarify then are you
suggesting you would like to be
expanded over the over the
period or are you okay with just
the one fiscal year.
Mr chairman members of the
committee let my recommendation
would would be for three fiscal
years.
Thank you Sir
Representative Brown you still
have the floor then yes thank
you Mr chairman so I I think
that amendment that we don't
have available this morning is
probably going to be very
important and sure this bill
moved out of this committee
because next appropriations and
finance and that's where that
would be entertained Mr chairman
and Representative Romero I am
I just want to let everyone know
that the House Appropriations
Committee this morning finalize
the House Bill to Esther's
combined of hospitals two and
three and the there is some
money in the budget
supplementals and specials for
the office of the state engineer
some of its dedicated to that
litigation that was just mention
so I think we say we we we need
to pin this down a little better
this house bill twenty four
I I do think there would be a
problems spending twelve million
dollars in fiscal year twenty
three
and so if if the goal is to
expand the staff on a permanent
basis then
and with that I'd like to see
some
Some more analysis come out on
that but I I don't know how you
do the work without FTEs unless
you're doing contractual
services for percent of these
things so I support the bill I I
think it I I will support it
to move to the next committee
but we do need to iron out some
details Mr chair thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative brown
let's go Representative Zamora.
Your is your Sir.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for brick or word.
Representative Romero so let I
want to clarify and this is for
the elementary but I want to
clarify is the twelve million
dollars if it Mr Hannah puts the
amendment on here is a twelve
million dollars for three years
is a twelve million dollars each
year.
It good question Mr chair I
believe it would be twelve
million dollars each year.
Mr Mr chair and and more I'm
sorry forgive me I'm looking.
Going no it's over it's spending
it over three years Mr chair
representative it's it's going
to be spent out over three
years.
Okay and thank you for that
answer and Mr chair and
representative on Romero can we
can you kind of go over briefly
as to how the budget of the
state engineer is is a cent for
for them so that the committee
can understand.
Why there would even be a
shortfall.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
thank you
Representative I'll defer to
that are experts on how that the
budget structured and why it's
been and
underfunded.
Mr Mr Hammond.
Thank you Mr chair I I work
closely with the the agencies
when I came on board to to
understand the OS the Interstate
Stream Commission budgetary
requests and and and the
expansion requests that have
been submitted previous
the to to the office of the
governor and and work closely
with our office to.
To an increase.
The budget request for this
fiscal year in order to to meet
up a large part of those
expansion needs that would move
the state engineers and I just
see staffing back to where it
was some seven or eight years
ago and and and the governor
submitted a budget that kind of
met met the expansion requests
about halfway which was very
much appreciated and then there
was discussions with the with
the house.
appropriations and finance
committee relative to the LFC
request to to try this for some
of that stuff up and and the the
LFC request went forward
where were some some gaps were
still needing to be addressed
particularly in areas that I
mentioned earlier in Indian
Water Rights and and and water
rights applications and all the
all the districts statewide and
and and a lot of of pending work
necessary in water planning and
and also in anticipation of of
some I need necessary work in
the lower Rio Grande as well so
so all of those things combined.
Would would lend itself to.
Having this funding
assistant in filling those
particular aspects that that I
mention.
This is really why it may have
something to add to that Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Hammond
I think Mr Hammond answered
appropriately I would just add
there's a couple of components
and executive budget
recommendation that are still
missing from the current budget
Representative Brown is correct
some items get added back in
most recently including funding
for our taxes The New Mexico on
the lower Rio Grande but we're
still a little bit short in
terms of in particular funding
for water planning and
implementation of the your water
plant and the Indian Water it
Madam you Mr Mr Hammond mention
and I'm that's where this bill
would go a long way in
supporting those efforts
and I think that that extending
it over the three year period is
critical thank you Mr chair
thank you have a.
Mr Gandhi expand on this
quickly.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
I've talked to legislative
finance committee staff and
members over the past four five
years and I get the sense that
many people think that New
Mexico's water issues or chronic
and they're not yet urgent but
that's simply not the case
they are incredibly urgent and
it's it's very important that we
begin to tackle them because
getting started now to change
things is necessary if we're
going to have the best outcomes
in the future that are possible
thank you.
Thank you norm all
representatives of already saw
the poor Sir and and thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr gone
for that comment as as we go
forward in the future in the
state of New Mexico we are going
to have to tighten up our vocals
are built and and we will have
to face a lot of issues that are
going to get beat worse than we
are today.
we see that coming and and I
don't understand.
Why why we don't fund fully fund
the state water engineer and Mr
Hammond maybe Mr chair Mr
Hammond did I hear you say that
the governor only funded fifty
percent of what was asked for.
Mr Chairman representative
Zamora there were there was a
lot of factors involved in that
but the issues she had allies
the priorities the the the that
the governor's office phone was
important to the agency and she
took a great step forward to
moving in the right direction.
And and Mister chair Mister
Hanna was at fifty percent that
she funded is that what you said
in your first statement.
This this is a model.
I was I was Mr chairman
Representative is what I was I
was referring to the number of
FTEs of that were requests and
and she provided.
Roughly about half of those
requests in the in the expansion
budget request the.
Last August and so like that
that would would move us in the
right direction particularly in
some very key areas such as
Indian water rights settlements
and and the additional seven
percent positions for our
district Water Rights offices
etcetera so so the HSD is quite
pleased with with those
additions by the governor's
office.
Okay.
I look forward to learning Mr
chairman Mr Hammond I look
forward to learning more about
the no just the state engineers
budget this is this is very
interesting to me and in the in
a topic that is so critical as
as we go forward in.
Thank you for your answers and
thank you Mr chair that
concludes my questions thank you
Representative Zamora good
morning Representative Matthews
the floor is yours then.
Good morning Mr.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you all for the
presentation two quick questions
first
How much additional.
Budget did the state engineer
receive and wasn't adequate for
its additional responsibilities
Under the cannabis Act.
Madam chair of I'll defer to our
one of our experts to talk about
that and I I understand that
part of this twelve million was
to help with the cannabis Act
specifically I think for us for
full time
Full time employees to help with
water rates application
processing is my understanding I
don't know what ended up in the
house bill two is Representative
Brown is discussing but we can
talk about the increase one of
the experts or someone who knows
can speak to that.
Would be handed.
Chair Caroline day in
Representative Matthews I think
that I'm as Mr Hammond said the
governor's executive requests
include additional FTE ease
which will assist with water
it's administration including
can't processing cannabis
applications but back to the
discussion of extending this
particular appropriation over
three year period that would
provide us the ability to hire
staff which is a viable and we
are appropriation and as you all
know it a couple to administer
water without staff so I think
that after that you would come
in and certainly assist in terms
of that particular question
Representative Matthews and J.
Lente thank you.
Mr chair if I I see
Representative small since he is
the vice chair of probation if
we could let and time in on the
specifics.
we can we.
We that's a that's a lot but
Representative Matthews to
continue to question and then
when when you call
Representative Smalls and will
pass to just clarify that for us
please
these.
Thank you Mr chair at and thank
you for the answer
is there.
Any has there been any.
Dot or as you're actually
happened in the taking of any of
the trust funds.
To meet the budget needs for the
state engineers office this is
for the coming.
Fiscal year.
Mr chair I'll defer to our
experts.
And to share Lente
Representative Matthews so yes
the agencies will I just you
know as you will still depend on
our trust funds for a portion of
our operating expenditures I'm
not was true in both of the
budget recommendations that were
put forward however the
executive recommendation reduce
our dependency more
significantly on those trust
funds but either way
and and and the budget that's a
dancing now we will still be
somewhat dependent on those
trust funds however it is an
improvement from the past and in
several years in which we have
relied on those trust funds for
approximately a quarter of our
operating budget.
Mr Chairman at.
Thank you for the answer I'm I'm
concerned that we continue to
under apparently it appears
under fund this absolutely
critical agency.
And I would hope that we would
start to look for a long term
solution to for an adequate
funding for this agency
critically when we add new
programs that cannabis to it
But I did share that I
appreciate the presentations
thank you yield.
Thank you Representative
Matthews if we if we could the.
Ask the vice chairman small to
give us the courtesy of
answering perhaps in any way he
can Representative Matthews
question regarding cannabis that
we also.
Present a small.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr chairman the we have a twenty
percent increase slightly over
four million dollars for the
just the overall in H. B. two
I I don't have a detailed
specifically of what is
dedicated to cannabis and I
apologize Mister chair all work
to get that for you and for the
committee also Mr chairman we
increase the.
The recommend the LFC
recommendations for the
regulation and licensing
department which has a lot of
jurisdiction increased
responsibility in cannabis and
Esther pleasure Mister chair I'm
happy to speak to some other
drought and and short term water
related investments that
probably appurtenant here.
Thank you representative will
I'm so grateful that you're on
this committee now allow you to
have the floor right now if you
want to go for it.
Okay thank you so much Mr
chairman and Mr chair so there
is there is the currently there
is that four point one million
dollar increase to the budget of
the office of the state engineer
this is replacing some although
not all of the trust fund I do
want to know Mr chair and
committee.
Re flee that historic over the
past three years there's been
roughly an average of ten
percent rivers runs from the
office of the state engineer so
hopefully we're getting to a
place where we're both providing
more budget and giving the
supports needed to utilize the
budget Mr chairman committee
separate from that base budget
increase there are some special
appropriations is Mr Risley
white mentioned that includes
additional funding for
administration of the water data
act.
Leave at five hundred thousand
dollars there is a special
appropriation the support the
stakeholder work around the
fifty year water plan that Mr
Hammond has outlined and then
there's Mr chair and committee
the other really big pot and
it's a giant pot actually is
thirty million dollars
That is or or maybe slightly
over that's a short term drought
response
while this is currently going to
the department of finance and
authority it's really working in
conjunction with Mr Hammond and
other stakeholders to provide
short term flexibility through
FY twenty seven
them let me check that Mr chair
I'm.
I could of.
By thank Hey excuse me I got two
years ahead of myself Mr chair
that that short term drought
responses through FY twenty five
so twenty three twenty four and
twenty five
and that includes
over thirty million dollars.
There is a separate Mr chair in
committee about ten million
dollars that are going to damn
repairs across the state so we
are dedicating more resources
including outside of this area
there's more money for the
weather stations that have been
really important to producers is
specially in rural parts of the
state that we're we're also
supported and I can get that
rack up Mr chair in committee we
can get those numbers for
committee members but suffice to
say specially when you include
the short term drought response
that were you know we're adding.
We're adding a very significant
amount of money in including in
some of the other areas
addressing water rights and and
including Indian water rights
settlements from the
nonrecurring funds.
Thank you so much Representative
small for that the information
because you get a lot of of
answers in and comment do you
have any questions for a for the
sponsor regarding this bill.
That thank you Mr chair briefly
Hello I would ask how the bill
works
it's it's both LFC and also in
Mr Fuhrman's role as the water
infrastructure adviser and I
would ask the sponsor and
experts if they are open to
Integrating the water
infrastructure role and some of
the funding that's going to DFA
into the their legislation or if
they think that the entirety
needs to go to the office of the
state engineer.
Thank you Mr chair I'll defer to
Mr chairman.
Mr.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
Representative small and and and
and I certainly want to
congratulate you and and and
And the other members of the.
House Appropriations Committee
for for taking into account the
serious nature or of the driver
we're we're coming upon this
year and next likely and and and
the resultant need for support
for our agricultural and and and
and communities across the state
under those conditions so so and
so thank you for that and and
and I I do recognize that the
flexibility that I was referred
to earlier
that we were looking to the this
particular bill to extend across
a couple of fiscal years as well
as
allow for other
you particularly funding items
and and particularly the the
Indian water rights settlements
process that I mentioned earlier
but but but I I I believe all of
these funds should be viewed as
in an integrated approach with
to meet all the needs of the.
The New Mexico for for both the
water infrastructure
Processes as well as the
recurring expenses that you that
we've been talked about before
new for staff in interest so
completely no vote as well as a
perhaps this bill to sponsors of
the bill to to integrate that in
with the
infrastructure needs because
there there will be a lot of.
Focus on on the bipartisan
infrastructure bill that will
require cost your components for
these competitive grants that
are coming forward and things
like that that we don't really
have our arms around yet but but
having flexibility with our our
funding to help meet some of
those kasha requirements would
would be very beneficial thank
you Mr chairman and
Representative small.
Many follow up questions
comments.
Sorry thank you Mr chairman no I
think this is an incredibly
important discussion I think you
Mr chair for having it and for
the Sanchez is the Mr Hamming it
forward R. H. B. two is going to
allow a lot more work and and
and provide for much needed work
in this area
so I think it's a very important
discussion there's more funding
and more flexibility although
not completely in the way that
the bill envisions yet although
there I think thank policy and
and resources seems we Mr
chairman moving toward each
other which is something that's
very positive.
Very good thank you
Representative small looking at
the committee members
Representative of water for a
second time.
Mr chair I move into the past.
Before we get there Mr
residential or appreciate the
the offer for a or the motion
but I do want to address the
issue of the.
Capacity that that the office
would have to spend this money
one year and I'm wondering if
perhaps maybe we do want to have
that amendment drafted up.
And then because we had a very
lengthy debate on this matter
today that if if the sponsor
wouldn't mind getting that
drafted up in the way that is
suffices Mr Hammond to allow it
to be from FY twenty three to
twenty five and then come back
on Thursday morning and it'll be
our first bill for that morning
and we can.
Address it then just search it
just so that we're all on the
same page and we're not doing
something in this committee that
it is kind of setting ourselves
up to fail so Representative
what I and I know we have a
motion for a do pass but I want
to put that into the committee's
attention just as a as an option
as well but we do have a
a motion for a do pass what is
the pleasure of the committee is
their second if not then we can
move on and we can ask Miss
bonded to great that that
amendment set.
You use you seconded to pass yes
what is being.
Mr.
Mr chair just for clarity sake
are we you said we'd be coming
back Thursday to put on the
amendment well the way envision
this is because right now it
only has FY twenty twenty three
in in the bill itself and what
the sponsor and and and
apparently the the experts are
recommending is for there to be
a capacity to utilize this money
effectively prudently that they
would ask for a three year
window twenty three to twenty
five to be able to spend this
this money so my my my
recommendation would would be
for the sponsor to go to go
upstairs get distracted
presented to the committee
within the twenty four hour rule
that we do have and then because
we've had a lengthy debate on
this already come back on
Wednesday with that amendment
enhance we all see it then then
we can we can choose to pass it
up at that point because I want
yes ma'am.
I'm maybe but I have an
alternative to that being that
the amendment was already
drafted was just not sent and
time Sliq goes to appropriations
next in which case the budget is
already created the conversation
is really what we're meant to be
having at this point consistent
with what was happening today so
in order to not waste the
committee's time any longer we'd
love to see this move forward
understanding that the amendment
will be put on we'll see how it
goes in appropriations we
expected to likely died there so
in order to not waste the
committee's time any longer or
have to reschedule we've upset
just move this along and and get
its appropriations where it will
very likely be tables being that
the budget is already created
Representative Andrea chair and
chair representative Romero with
all due respect I want to make
sure that any product that comes
out of this committee has been
thoroughly vetted and we're not
just passing something up with
some with some of the committee
expected to clean up after us so
I would suggest then that at
that the pledge of this
committee
if you want to pass it out like
this we can do that there's been
a motion and it sounds like
Representative Brown was the
second that but again agreed to
the discussion of the committee
that I would rather it be.
amended drafted up brought back
willful attended this first
thing on Thursday morning but
again pleasure the committee.
Representative Zamora.
Mr chair I respect you the chair
and respect your opinion.
And I believe we are a follow
your opinion and and bring the
bill back.
Thank you appreciate that is a
more Representative Brown is
that okay with you as well Mr
chairman I agree thank you that
thank you thank you and and the
so that we're on the same page
what what the sponsor will do
then is take this upstairs have
adapted to the the liking of Mr
Hammond Hannah and and and the
experts to ensure that it is
within that window and time
frame and then first thing on
Thursday morning we will not
have a lengthy hearing on this
because we've already pretty
much discussed this debate this
but we'll we'll talk about the
amendment and then and then up
pass it out because we've
already heard and I think you
are in agreement that this is
the right step for
before we conclude this bill for
the day Mr hand one last time
Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
would like to reference the
group committee members are
small so recommendations to.
Create some of.
Hello hello this bill to be part
of the.
The utilization for
infrastructure and and and if
that's the case we can probably
expanded purpose a little bit in
the amendment if if if that
would be appropriate thank you
Mr chairman.
At this point in time the
Representative Romero and
experts I don't want there to be
a with the huge difference in
the amendment to this bill I
think we got to make sure that
this is the amendment is just on
the years itself that we will
need to have another hearing on
this and and discuss all of the
factors again.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Romero
then you will be first and your
co sponsors on Thursday morning
with your amendment in hand in
please do as soon as you get
that ascended to merry so she
can put it in our shared file so
we can all have a twenty four
hours before Thursday's meeting
at which will begin at eight
thirty.
Thank you thank you members of
the committee appreciate it
thank you Representative thank
you experts this move now then
to house bill forty one
Representative it added up.
Good morning I I I've seen you
in in the boxes full time thank
you for joining us we miss you
on this committee we realize you
have important duties as well
now in your current capacity
good morning good morning Mr
chair good morning members of
the committee I must say I
really miss being on this
committee it was set it was a
pleasure to work with all of you
and I also in presenting house
bill forty one I would like to
yes our expert witness Marquita
Russel.
If that she could join.
Okay we're we brought her over.
Thank.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I house bill forty one
it I I have I have enjoyed this
entire conversation about water
we all know everybody on this
committee knows how hello.
Really desperate the situation
is in New Mexico and.
How much work we need to do to
to really is stabilize our water
systems for the future this bill
is another attempt to to look at
a small part of our water
infrastructure and to to
appropriate sixty million to the
water trust fund us so that we
can hopefully get that one of
trust fund up to a hundred and
as it was originally intended it
will we will
slowly but surely
take all the money out of this
fund if we don't put some money
into it it was said I think the
last time we we added money to
the water trust fund was in two
thousand seven I it's so we're
taking out more than we can
build and I will stop there and
introduce my expert witness CEO
Marquita Russel at the end of.
Hey us so that she can expand on
this thank you thank you
Representative Mr Russell good
morning good morning Mister
chairman and thank you for
allowing me to speak on behalf
of this I said not only is the
CEO of the water trust board but
all the I'm sorry I see of the
finance authority but I said is
a member of the water trust
board I would mention that the
water trust board voted for the
first time to endorse
legislation and it was to
increase of funding to the water
trust fund that happened at its
November meeting so this is an
important issue for the water
trust board currently the
finance authority receives
pursuant to legislation four
million dollars from the water
trust fund annually in as the
sponsor mention this Fund hasn't
seen an appropriations since two
thousand and seven so almost
from inception we have been
dipping into the corpus of the
trust fund and that the as I see
estimates that there's a fifty
percent chance that that fund
will be fully depleted within
twenty years right now in times
of good of the oil and gas
revenues it's not much of an
issue we'll see on the usually
large appropriations from the
severance tax bond for water
projects statewide but often
that's not the case and there
are instances in which the four
million dollars that we received
represents a significant amount
of the funding that's made
available so in its over the
long term we think this is in
the best interest of the water
trust fund and ultimately than
for other water projects that
apply annually for funding from
this from the water project fund
and with that Mr chairman I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you for your for your
comment Representative anything
else to add.
Just I think this is just one
more thank you Mr chairman
He is just an attempt to shore
up all these deficiencies in our
water systems in the state
there's a companion bill
introduced by.
This makes on the Senate side so
again where we were very pleased
to get the endorsement from the
water chess boards very
important I think this is
another important issue for the
legislature to understand and
know about with the questions
thank you very much before you
go to the committee let's go to
the audience all those in favor
of house bill forty one in the
attendees list please do right
here and we will call you one by
one I will begin with Gary
Payton Gary.
If you could if you're self
employed or Sir.
Mr chairman committee members
Gary Payton representing the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico pursuant
to this excellent conversation
so for this morning please know
that our coalition of
Albuquerque Los crucis Santa Fe
Santa Fe County the Los Alamos
daily strongly support this bill
for what it can do for future
water infrastructure projects
thank you very much thank you Mr
Paine that's moved into the well
this year all of good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Paul Garcia
with the New Mexico sic
Association and we sent a strong
support of this legislation to
help shore up the water trust
fund also as a former county
commissioner I can attest of the
very critical needs of the rural
water systems across the state
and the water because of what I
trust for the really critical
funding source for for Senator
resource communities thank you
for your consideration Mr
chairman thank you thank you Mr
Garcia is going to steep steep
good morning or good.
Good morning again Mr chairman
and at committee members again
as the representing that three
fifty New Mexico real at this to
see group and the DP and am at
rural caucus we strongly support
this bill thank you very much
thank you very much this moved
to Charles Charles good morning.
You're with us.
Good morning Mr chairman my name
is Charles woman I'm the
director of communications
provided in client matters for
the state investment council we
manage our trust fund before
sending four million dollars
every year to the water trust
board.
Everybody is is the issue here
that currently the distribution
of four million is about well
we're close to ten percent and
endowment fund like the water
Trust Fund cannot survive at
that distribution setting level
so we we have been identifying
this issue that the the fund is
on a terminal passed in without
some kind of remediation either
lowering the amount that's
district distributed every year.
For increasing the corpus the
the fund will survive we've been
very lucky the last ten years
with sprint investment returns
but I don't know the next ten
years we can count on that so we
do support increasing that the.
Amount the fund and thank you Mr
chairman members committee thank
you it's going to end McCartney
and good morning you with us.
Mr chairman and committee
members can you hear me you know
yes thank you and thank you for
this opportunity.
I am the co chair of New Mexico
interfaith power and light.
Addressing climate change and
and our needs for good water
planning and projects across the
state we stand in full support
of the increasing this funding
so that these water projects can
be funded and deficiencies
across the state address over
time so I appreciate your
support in this legislation.
Great thank you and let's go to
Daniel the annual good morning
you with us resources are.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Nathaniel J. Chris not takers
also go ahead somebody's
descriptions I'm the general
counsel of the LFC and we also
strongly support this
legislation up for all the
reasons stated we would also
mentioned
some of the education work that
we perform is funded in part out
of the water project fund and
that's the statutory set aside
the the legislature has had in
place for a number of years now
and so
that you know we talk about the
trust fund the the overseas
operations are aligned on this
one doesn't get as much
attention but it is another
trust fund that funds ongoing
operations of the LFC and part
we had a flat appropriation of
about two point five million
dollars per year coming out of
the water project fund
for some for some years now and
so I so that the on going
education working continue we
would also urge.
Senator this bill to ensure the
solvency of the water trust fund
thank you thank you let's go
then now to build make at bill
good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
letting me speak to you today.
At this this bill is for many
other reasons you heard this
bill deserves everybody
supporting the state of New
Mexico water is such an
important piece to our future
that I really could not see why
anybody would not support the
bill thank you.
Thank you Sir I'm looking at my
and we can okay Mr gonna good
morning.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Infrastructure funding is
critical to our state's future
water infrastructure funding.
To infrastructure trust funds
managed by the Interstate Stream
Commission that were created
before statehood.
Have been largely depleted by
annual operate on annual
appropriations for operations
approximately a hundred million
dollars have been spent on
operations rather than
infrastructure since twenty ten
we're we're need to pass this
infrastructure funding there are
large amounts of federal
matching funding available and
it's crucial that we have state
funding to match the federal
funding to build projects thank
you.
Thank you Mr gone Mr Hammond
you're up next.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee let's stand and
support on behalf of the office
of the governor for the do pass
on on this legislation.
Rating additional intrusion into
the water trust fund it's as I
mentioned in my
My introduction to this
committee last week as well as
here today I've been tasked with
the the the process of working
through the water trust board to
provide up to thirty
and capital outlay procedures to
try to do all that we can to
support our rural infrastructure
both in the water and wastewater
arena and and having a very
strong water trust fund
available to leverage in
particular now we need lots of
us share leverage for all of the
bipartisan infrastructure bill
in relation to the various
aspects and put some money
coming in through the federal
government we we will need all
of us working together to
leverage our dollars to do all
we can to of turn the question
around for rural water systems
across the state thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr
Hammond let's go into the
attendees present that are in
opposition to house bill forty
one.
Anyone.
If not then it's come back to
the committee committee any
questions comments on house bill
forty one.
Representative Zamora resources.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Atlanta for
bringing this bill forward sixty
million dollars is a lot of
money where where does that
figure come from Mr chair and
and Representative Atlanta.
Mr chair and representative.
Thank you for the question it
was really the original intent
as I understand it to
to us this down that at a
hundred million so it's
currently at about forty three
million and in the Senate as a
fifty million so we're trying to
get pretty close to that hundred
million on our regional targets
that we set up.
Okay and and thank David Ensor
in Mr Chairman representative at
all where does the hundred
million come from.
Hundred million eight if we
choose to pass this legislation
we already have forty three
million in the Andaman as twelve
thirty one.
Two thousand twenty one if we
add sixty million that'll create
a
hundred million.
And and thank you for that
answered Mr chairman and
Representative it out.
I don't know how more how more I
could ask why the hundred
million can you maybe can you
tell me how much money this this
funding is expected to expand
and then maybe how much money's
is coming into it.
What what is Mr chair and
representative with this fund
does is really set up an
endowment that's what you need
to understand and then and then
every year we pay a you know if
you had a hundred million I
would also like the path about
five million a year that's just
town demonstrator they're
they're depleting the fund right
now and then within the next
twenty years.
All the money in the fund will
disappear so we put this bill
together because we were looking
at that they infrastructure
money coming from the federal
level you know I and and I don't
know if you can spend all that
that immediately and I think
sending money in the state
revolving loan funds that the
state has is probably a good use
of that money so that's why we
brought this legislation or
Representative somehow okay and
and Mr chairman and
Representative Lara can you give
me some examples as to what
these monies will be spent on.
Sure.
You should know Mr chair and
representative that our rural
water systems are are really
taking there isn't enough money
capital outlay will cover I can
tell you I'm getting requests
for like one point six million.
Six hundred thousand I mean
everybody that's coming in with
the request there's no way
capital outlay to even begin to
the systems back in place this
fund is part of the NMFA's whole
water trust fund.
Asians that will help rebuild
our rural water infrastructure
and and we desperately need that
we have we have septic systems
that are leaking industry not
I'm refers we have
the the the the drinking water
systems are certainly not
working I I I mean we have so
many problems with leaking pipes
and aging structure everybody
needs we need to look at
regional station what the NMFA
does that their water yes and
how city is they help local
agencies put together a plan
working with an engineering
company putting together a plan
that will that will regional
allies the small mutual domestic
water systems for drinking water
and building rural wastewater
systems and we have a.
But we need money the local
level and this will sustain this
effort to really modernize our
rural water systems for the
state.
Representative what are your
your user.
Thank you thank you Mr chair in
thank you Representative and
often when we talk sixty million
dollars it just seems to me like
we ought to have like a real
good explanation as to those
numbers and I do support the
water trust fund and can you
tell me how much comes into the
water Trust Fund in servants Tax
bonds.
Yes I'm gonna refer to market on
this one too.
Miss restaurant thank you thank
you Mr chairman so the water
trust fund which is managed by
the state investment council
only receives probation and
interest earnings so the trust
fund itself route has received
fifty five million dollars to
date back in two thousand and
seven and then it receives
whatever earnings it has the
water project fund receives nine
percent of the severance tax
bonds and then this four million
dollar distribution that's made
from the trust fund over the
water project fund annually we
use those dollars to make grants
and loans to projects authorized
by the legislature and
recommended by the water trust
board this year those projects
appear on Senate bill seventeen
thank currently heard in the
Senate today.
Representative work yes because
I just right now Senate bill
seventeen so then the.
Right.
Mr Chairman representative at
all there was a comment made a
while ago about federal monies
coming in is there any batches
can we use this to match federal
monies.
I'm gonna defer to mark you down
just to make sure the
explanation is correct thank you
thank you Mr chairman yes of the
money that goes into the water
Trust Fund doesn't get used as a
match but the money that comes
from the trust fund over to the
water project fund is used as a
match and that's actually one of
the goals the legislature set
out for the water trust board
was to prioritize those projects
that for which this would serve
as a federal match.
Okay thank you for that answer
so so I take it that there's
there's forty million dollars.
No.
Yes I take it that there's forty
million dollars in the in the
water trust fund now
Representative Mr Chairman
representative at eight hundred
and eighty how much is gonna be
expended this year and and and
of course that number that forty
thousand wind up.
As I understand this forty three
million dollars just as the end
of the year what happens is they
give a and appropriate and not
appropriations they are from the
in down they pay four million to
the to the water water project
funds and then that's combined
with the and all severance tax
at nine percent that money then
becomes a water project and
local communities apply for
money under that fund that's how
it works market in my right on
that.
Mr Chairman the sponsor has it
right.
Okay thank you and thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative it up for
answering my questions and and
look forward to see the vote on
this bill thank you.
Thank you Representative Zamora
any other questions or comments
from the committee.
Any other final comments from
representative representative of
data.
Thank you for taking this time I
deeply appreciate it Mr chair
thank you what are the pleasure
of the committee on house bill
forty one.
Secure a movie do pass.
Representative Brown a second by
the thinker Representative
Matthews and so merry would you
please call Liz there any
opposition do I see any
opposition.
See no opposition Representative
are you have a do pass on house
bill forty one.
Thank you committee thank you
very much thank you for joining
us this morning we appreciate
you let's now move to
Representative Chatfield and
Gail Armstrong for house bill
sixty six.
Representative Chatfield good
morning Sir.
Representative ability there
thank you Mr chairman of trying
to get my you to the work of god
hold down the.
Space for right now with a
friend on the bus.
Okay and I and while you're
doing that right over
representative Armstrong
Representative Armstrong do you
hear me.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Representative Armstrong the
floor is yours for House Bill
sixty six okay Mister chairman
thank you very much for your
this bill this morning Mr
chairman this is yes we have
been moving our food production
out of our state currently
eastern New Mexico well the hall
of New Mexico produces a lot of
poor yeah we we ship that.
Corner out of our state into a.
All the Texas panhandle you'd
normally and the there is said
to cattle Mexico produces a lot
of cattle.
We did we shift in LA Crosse
proselyte in there for that we
produce that our state.
In another state once their fat
they are shipped to each.
Redundantly in our area process
and then the we shipped back to
Mexico what this bill does is
enable an instate inspection in
the state of New Mexico and it
will allow us to produce R. O.
B. in New Mexico the to to.
So process it in New Mexico
salad are open Russia store if
we the citizens of the state of
New Mexico we we can bring our
food production back home we
recently saw.
Your.
The COVID crisis which some of
these major multinational be
meat Packers.
Shut down and the.
There was no immediate drop in
the process hello.
You know if they if they're not
processed out the law the law
those by your own state your
produce you know buyer cabs and
the you know by your last she is
here what she money to pay for
the right to I was always kind
of excited about we.
What we can do that secretary
got what yes I can't do that
then the right myself and many
other ranchers and New Mexico
will cease to exist so we need
it for that reason what we all
so leaders security.
We cannot.
You see the trucking industry is
is having problems sometimes you
receive the the ships out at sea
that import a lot of our.
The system is just outgrown
itself and yes this bill seeks
to bring.
The action back local.
Our illustrious.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Chatfield
ultimately committee this is
about New Mexicans feeding New
Mexicans.
This is about a way of life that
many people
hold near and dear to their
hearts.
And in the end.
This is about New Mexicans
feeding New Mexicans so I'm here
to support and hopefully answer
any questions you have and I
would like to thank
Representative Chatfield for
allowing me to sign on to this
bill thank you Mr chairman we
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative I also
want to bring in another one of
the sponsors for this bill
Representative small you have a
comment regarding this bill as
well.
Our.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
just.
I'm proud to support this piece
of legislation I want to thank
you Mr chair for
advancing these efforts yourself
in multiple ways
making a committee where food
production and value added food
production is the key part of
the work and happy to stand in
support of it I
and that's all I would say Mr
chair thank you and thanks to
thanks thanks Representative
phone representative Armstrong
they're on the ground knowledge
combined with yours as well as
understanding of how higher ed
institutions like Mexico State
University can really work
together to bring better
nutrition for New Mexicans
better returns for New Mexico
producers stronger future for
New Mexico thank the also three
it really instrumental thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative small with that
being said Sanchez at this point
have spoken Representative
Chatfield is it is it okay to go
to the attendees.
Mr chairman I have an expert
witness but we are in I'm not
sure
she's out there someplace.
I see here in the attendees list
but what we do this we can come
back to her to help you answer
any questions should there be
any but at this point in time
the let's move to the to the
attendees lists and I will ask
all those in the and these
lists.
for those that are in support of
house bill sixty six please do
right here and we will call on
you one by one let's begin with
miss Paula Garcia agency Garcia
good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I want
to thank you for for the
opportunity to speak and thank
the sponsors for bringing this
important piece of legislation
forward I I'm the executive
director The New Mexico sic
Association and many of our
members are ranchers and this
initiative to to provide state
based meat inspections could be
a game changer for economic
viability of our small scale
producers in New Mexico I myself
am a
operate a small ranch with my
dad.
And this would improve our
economic like liability
significantly by allowing us to
a direct market our beef to
local consumers local stores and
local restaurants by by passing
this I think our state would
make of important step forward
in supporting our agricultural
economy and how we stand in
strong support of this thanks
again.
Thank you Mr Stewart thank you
sticking with us that's going to
Jennifer Weber Jennifer morning.
Yes I good morning thank you
Terry land Hey and members of
the committee and thank you to
the bill's sponsors my name is
Jennifer Weber and I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce in support of house
bill sixty six New Mexico has
lost much of our agricultural
industry physical and regulatory
infrastructure over the years
and the funding in this bill
helps bring back a key piece of
our regulatory infrastructure
for protein producers in the
state restoring our agriculture
infrastructure and building out
of value added agricultural
sector is a key priority for the
chamber as well as the key
industry growth sector
identified by the state's twenty
year economic diversification
strategy we believe that
investments in our rural
communities like H. B. sixty six
are desperately needed we hope
that this is one of many new
initiatives to build on and
expand it New Mexico's
agricultural heritage The New
Mexico chamber of commerce
stands in strong support of this
bill in this effort thank you
thank you Jennifer let's move to
the antiphonary yes good
morning.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you again for
the opportunity to provide
comment if you're VAT registered
lobbyists the New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau we want to
thank Representative Chatfield
Armstrong and small for caring
this piece of legislation which
will appropriate much needed
funding to the New Mexico
livestock board for the
continued development and
implementation of the state me
inspection program this program
will benefit livestock producers
consumers and the local
communities that they live in.
Successful establishment of this
program will encourage small
business development support and
grow rural economies and allow
consumers to have a more diverse
selection of locally grown
protein this also help livestock
producers diversify their
revenue streams which helps
mitigate the risk often
associated with livestock
production we support the
livestock board in this effort
and look forward to this
definition of a strong program
in the state thank you thank you
for joining us Jason Espinoza
good morning your with the.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
Representative today the
national federation of
independent business Meghan I
click my hand quicker to go
before Mr very next time but all
the same data we stand strong
support thank you Secretary
being with this bill Metcalfe
good morning.
With this.
We'll.
Okay doesn't seem that he is
there let's go to Taylor
Reagan's.
Good morning.
The morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Taylor regions and I speak on
behalf of the members of New
Mexico cattle growers
association and New Mexico will
growers we're in full support of
house bill sixty six and we
thank the sponsors of the bill
for bringing forth this
legislation thank you thank you
Taylor let's go back to bill
let's try to get bill either.
Bill.
Okay we see we have control of
bills all those then there in
the ten these lists that are in
opposition to house bill sixty
six please raise your hand.
No bills probably not not
position the bodies and is still
up and I'm gonna I'm gonna try
one more time bill are you
there.
Bill.
Okay that appreciate a call in
and we can't hear you what we're
going to go to the committee at
this point so let's go to my
list I have first on my list
Representative Matthews
Representative Matthews the
floor is yours then.
And you are muted thank thank
you can you hear me you know
thank you.
We can hear you.
Can you hear me now yes ma'am
okay.
Trying to do this without the
headphones
Mr chairman and
Members of the committee
one of the great things about
for need for being on this
committee is I learn a lot about
industry I don't know a great
deal about so we'll ask a couple
questions about this process and
I.
I hope you all don't roll your
eyes too much because I'm sure
that you know the answers to
these but I don't.
we're talking about meat
inspections I'm assuming we're
looking at a chain of
production.
The chain obviously begins with
the the ranger and with the
cattle and then they can go to a
feedlot.
And then the feedlot.
R. D. are then connected to a
slaughter house I don't know
what to there's a nicer it with
a different word for that.
but the facility where the
animal is these kids.
And.
Then.
But
at some point this.
The the the meat is shipped off
to different places like grocery
stores and so forth.
So my question is.
Where in the process the first
what do we have all those
process all those steps in place
and maybe I've left them out.
So that this our meeting sectors
could immediately go to work and
then which part.
This process.
do the inspection sticker.
Representative Chatfield.
You're on mute Sir.
Yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for for that
question you know complicated
process and the there there was
one step usually the caps are we
from the from.
Yes we will cap producer and
they'll go on grant for all of
us to where they're your loans
and then from there they go to
the laws.
or grain and then they go to the
fact else which is.
Home of the national.
Asian right now we currently
have here the last sectors and
inspector Kapler urine's anytime
there they were shipped they're
they're inspected we're able to
do that the same thing we do we
currently have
thank you house is in state.
Small.
Use.
Most of them might.
She process.
When your last day well maybe
three.
I.
Some of these big multinationals
factors will be two thousand
five hundred per day.
Multiple accounts across states
hundreds of thousands of
employees so.
What we're trying to do is to
get that productions back or so
that we jobs in state or.
State beef and state but we're
not able to do that great as
well as shifts.
Federal inspectors are.
Somebody else.
We'll inspectors and yes the
inspector state the last I.
So.
For all my research and I
feeding court I'll restaurant
but I can also that.
In my restaurant because it has
not yes yes.
We have in the past.
Yes state inspections which
should do that same service they
inspected meat packing house and
We seek to reinstate that
program so that I can think when
Mike yes we or.
so that the local grocery store
I think you were walking.
You want to respond everybody
knows that you safe because it's
been.
Inspected by one of the Spartans
inspectors so it it gives us the
ability to.
Thank goodness food security it
brings jobs back home
Mr Chairman at thank you
Representative Chatfield for
that explanation I'm still not
entirely clear where the
inspections happen.
In that process that you
described.
I'll go ahead and jump in with
another question the same time
maybe can ensure.
at the same time and that is our
in state inspectors would have
the same qualifications as the
federal inspectors and would
they the state be paying them a
comparable amount of money to do
this work.
Thanks for the question they
would have the same
qualifications Federal or
instructors what's the the
programs up and running
not only would they be.
This will be paid by the
federal.
Because the federal government
will the most cost newest
program the inspection sticker
in the back.
Right right.
The.
To.
It thank you Mr Mr chair
Representative Chatfield and and
in.
Mr chair
For this amount of money one
point seven million dollars how
would that put is at full
capacity or how many inspectors
with that.
Would that provide for us and I
would be a recurring expense I
assume.
Mr Chairman.
Representative.
That actually.
The thank
you all
talking about this and getting
the funding put into their
budget so far yes really just
once we have conversation to
start to talk about what purpose
of this process is and the I
think you're the funding will be
considerably less it'll be like
thousand little thousand
recurring and you will.
This program.
Which is our system for one.
The.
Federal government will take
over.
Portion of us Mr chairman I
wonder what my expert witness
liked John here.
You want anything else to add to
this conversation.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield Mr chairman members of
the committee the only thing
that I would add to that is that
there are many steps that we
have to do as an agency and
order to enter into on the first
agreements with the food safety
inspection service which is
right under the USDA that's part
of they do have federal exempt.
Four thirty over the meat and
poultry inspection programs so
we do have to meet their minimum
requirements in order to
establish this program we are
currently working on that we're
setting up contacts within the
office I just we were tended
some meetings we have
established a director position
and are currently seeking a
director to begin actively
setting up this program and
we're also working on setting up
a business office position in
order to help meet the
requirements so we do look for
see this program starting out
kind of at the base which is
what the FSI FSI just really
recommends we will established
positions within the
administrative part of our
agency to support the field part
and if we get the reoccurring
funding then we can start
establishing inspector positions
so they will start out probably
custom plants those plants
basically are for home use
processing of animals and those
have to be inspected a minimum
of annually which we see that to
be probably not enough because
they have to be inspected for
cleanliness.
And then we will move also to
taking over plans that operate
for interstate commerce so in
your question of when an
inspection occurs if an animal
is to be consumed of our public
member and an inspector must be
standing in that plant from the
time the animal enters the plant
to the time it goes out and
packaging so with that in mind
with this in state mean
inspection program you really
hold the fate of this industry
in your hands you can control
how many inspectors we have out
there to support this industry
we believe what having an in
state main inspection program it
opens up opportunities for
ranchers to have more in state
the lots or confined feeding or
even there is also the grant
that industry out there as well
so you open up an opportunity
for a lot of producers out there
not just a not only the ranchers
but also the farmers who produce
grains to feed the animals so I
hope that helps a little bit
thank you right.
Thank you in the.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative
Chatfield and ms garland that
was very helpful
it it.
Do we do we have currently a
workforce available to be hired
for these positions how many
jobs are you expecting this will
create and what's the time table
for sort of implementing.
And a full program.
The gentleman you.
Representative for that
question.
You know we.
Trying to move our direction
back state groups years.
You should.
Martin right your culture this
helps.
With.
we also have several.
Thank you in the in the works
that is helping change range
so more students.
To.
This is the acting industry in
special administrative so
basically in this so.
repossessing our food chain that
we we have several.
This is a position that Mexico
State University over at Mason
lands right in place.
sent inspectors.
So.
We are there people out there
that are going to go but we're
training people to work since
our state to state
To say that we jobs where we
also are.
Thank you Representative Chapo
Mr Chairman Representative
Matthews.
Once we have the program fully
staffed and up and running we
believe that'll be about
eighteen positions you know we
hope this industry will grow and
more processing plants can come
into production which would
probably increase the need for
more inspectors to be out there
as far as the workforce I I for
see that a little bit of a
challenge like any other
industry right now through this
pandemic but we are we believe
that we're gonna pay comparable
to what other agencies are
paying in order to make the jobs
appealing so with that in mind
like I said we're gonna we need
to start with essential
administrative positions and
also some small staff of
inspectors to start moving into
meeting the line requirements of
the FSIS to have an agreement in
place with them.
Thank you Mr chairman the only
the only question I think gather
that long question I asked that
I'm still not clear about terms
of the answer is what what's so
what's your projection for the
timetable to get this program up
and running across the state at
a level where we are producing
our own meat to feed New
Mexicans.
Well let their legislators.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield Mr chairman
Representative Matthews we are
being advised by FSIS that this
could be a two to four year
process okay so if I know that
I'm going to get the reoccurring
funding in my budget then I can
start establishing positions
through the state personnel
office the director position
that we are now currently
advertising is being advertised
as a temporary position because
it's coming out of special
appropriations from last year so
I think that's limiting our
applicants at this time if I can
advertise permanent positions
within the state we think that
will increase the appeal of the
of the work force.
Thank you Mr chairman at members
of the committee is this one
point seven million dollars
already in H. B. to assist that
would require an additional it
needs to get put in at some
point.
Mr Chairman there is a little
over nine hundred thousand
Mr Chairman representative
Chatfield so the we're.
You got about nine hundred
thousand in the budget now so do
you need another one point seven
or another roughly eight hundred
thousand.
So.
Mr Chairman.
Current funding that stand out
to we are repairing.
House Bill.
Mr chair.
It is programs start.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman
Representative Chatfield I
couldn't hear all of that
answer.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative I believe the
current recurring funding that
existed house bill two is enough
to get this program well on its
way.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
Chatfield thank you
So you don't need the additional
money that's in this approach in
this bill.
Mr Chairman representative I
believe this this bill will.
Funded final resting places
where many another good bills.
House Appropriations Committee.
Probably will be tabled and the.
Recurring funding.
It's blessed by the Senate will
travel on do a lot of work for
our state.
Mr Chairman Representative
Chatfield is growing thank you
for all the information I feel
like I I'm much better educated
than when we started this
conversation and if that was the
purpose of having this bill
before the committee I
appreciate
and
I would certainly support us
having our home grown at the
packing industry in the state
with proper inspections in
property standards thank you.
If you.
That you know I I think at this
point this appropriations bill
for house bill sixty six does in
fact follow along the lines of
last year's bill Mr Chatfield
Representative Representative
Chatfield excuse me of house
bill thirty three that that that
we passed to this committee so I
I think at this point you have
the money recurring in this
budget so at this point you know
we we've already gone through
the substance policy aspect of
the bills I think at this point
we're looking just simply at the
financial aspect and and giving
the thumbs up or thumbs down I
mean I I think the program we we
all find related in but I don't
want to stifle of debate at all
I'm just saying that for
communication purposes because
it is eleven fifteen and I do
want to make sure that we can
get out of here by eleven thirty
so Representative what are your
next Sir.
Thank you Mr chair I do not have
any questions for the sponsor of
this bill I do want to thank
everybody that's sponsoring the
bill I think this is a win win
for the state of New Mexico it's
a win for that Ag community it's
a win for the citizens of the
state to be able to purchase
high quality produce beef here
in the state.
You no longer would have to.
Grow your own beef and feed your
own belief and and take your own
beef to the to the slaughter
plant and get it killed for you
personally you can have somebody
else raise a B. and and then you
can you can purchase it from
that individual already process
after this bill goes through and
we get the all this implemented
this is a win win we can we
make.
That we get the Act community
community to prosper and the
state will also prosper from
this bill this this is a great
bill I rank it up there on one
of the top ten bills for a plus
plus for the state of New Mexico
and thank you for bringing this
bill forward.
Thank you Representative Zamora
representative of brown four
years thank you very much Mr
chair I to want to add my thanks
to the sponsors Representative
Chatfield Armstrong in a small
down Sweetser right I really
think we're saying some progress
on this we've seen this
legislation into one the last
several years I Mr chairman I'd
like to just make sure right I
understand fully what's going on
so the language in this bill
house bill sixty six talks
about.
Procreation one point seven
million from the general fund to
the New Mexico livestock word
for expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty three and these
are the key words to initiate
and maintain a system
maintenance factions of me
dreaming consumption Mr chairman
and and Representative so
it looks like initiate and
maintain is referring to a
system of inspections and so
what you really do need is that
other funding for operating so
it's it's as if you have two
pieces of legislation that
really do need to fuse so this
program can can you can start to
exist
Mr chairman and representatives
so I I really hope we can we can
get you the funding that that
you need you mentioned the nine
hundred thousand and
I presume that would need to be
recurring I guess there's a a
federal requirement that you do
have a recurring budget for for
operating Mr chairman I I do
want to point out that what do
the analysts pointed out that we
may have an extraneous word in
the bill and that is if you look
at one ninety one nineteen and
twenty
it's talks in fiscal year twenty
twenty twenty three to initiate
and maintain a system of meat
inspections of meat.
In consumption and the
suggestion was made we could
take out the the word meet
online nineteen that we're seems
to me to be extraneous and just
make it say a system of
inspections of meat for human
consumption and I I hope the
Sanchez and I noticed that as
well and I'm just wondering if
if it would harm the bill in any
way if we took out the word need
online nineteen Mr chair.
You're more worried.
Warning
that.
Thank you.
Mr chair I just want to point
out the good work of our
analysts on that and so I I.
Frankly I think that we can go
out but I'm not going to I'm not
go to the mat for that and if it
were to go out it would also be
removed from one twelve the
first instance of the word me
showing up there in line twelve
in the bill title
Mr chair again thank you all for
all the good hard work and
sometimes you really have to
work over a number of years to
to get that late legislation
passed I appreciate everyone's
commitment to this thank you Mr
chair.
Senator Browne Representative
Ezzell you are up in.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I appreciate Ponce's the bill I
cannot stress to this committee
how important this is just a
beef producer in our state I'd
follow certain protocols Mr
chairman of I do have to take
this because I'm thank you a
certified.
It's garland I appreciate her
being here today.
Mr chairman and the Mr
Representative I would like to
address this question miss
garland.
Garland I am asking for what you
are doing what you're.
The bureau is doing it is
working.
In coordination with New Mexico
department of agriculture.
You Mr chairman Representative
Ezzell at this time we are
trying to participate in the
meat processing plant that they
are putting into production and
at the state university in Los
crucis but we haven't done a lot
of hands on with them at this
point our focus really at this
time has been on establishing a
director position and
promulgating rules are we are
now at that point then you can
begin working with records and
archives to advertise the thirty
days for the public hearing and
bring the proposed rules before
the board for consideration and
possible adoption so that is a
big step that we had to make in
order to start working with FSIN
aus and setting up this program.
Okay Mister chairman miss
garland.
Is garland I do appreciate your
response there.
Help.
This I'm not get tricked Mr
chairman question I have for
miss garland is I know that
there are several key processing
plants throughout the state and
there has to be inspections
inspectors there is is that
still holding true Mr chairman
miss garland director garland.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative he's he's out yes
that is true of those plants are
now being currently inspected by
the USDA the F. S. I. as per
earlier part of the USDA so once
we set up this agreement we've
met the line components that we
have to meet and enter into an
agreement with FSIS we will
began stepping into those plants
and the USDA stepping out.
Okay.
I understand where you're going
with this now Mr chairman
members of this committee as of
the processor is getting tougher
burden on these made to meet you
Sir send I'm saying that
collectively of the state of New
Mexico is there a moles a
process to.
Obviously not for general public
because of lack of inspection
services that we do have
available whenever you have a if
that's ready to go when you call
to make a reservation it can be
upwards of six months before
that animal is process my
husband would go with me to the
grocery store right before
Christmas and he was looking at
me S. as in I always do every
time I go into the grocery
store.
Comment was you know what we
have sold just for less than
what a prime rib roast cost Mr.
Chairman Representative
Chatfield.
Whenever we say this this from
all these people out there that
are warning us to have arm to
table in our state
one thing that they've always
left out is the in part of it
Mr Chairman I'm tired of our
products and I'm playing that
collectively for anybody that is
I need.
We're not able to feel that
necessary needs they're able to
go into our schools is to our
hospitals into our business if
you want to say.
Mr Chairman whenever there's
only three.
processing plants throughout the
United States.
You have a monopoly whenever we
can thank at the control of our
own if working with the New
Mexico livestock board in New
Mexico department of agriculture
who are language university
which is New Mexico state so we
can win all of the people in in
our state.
Appreciate the Sanchez bringing
this bill forward and I will
support grisly Mr chairman thank
you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative Ezzell before we
go to review as a more of a
second time that's good
representative Allison and
Allison.
Mr chair was recommended to pass
on this if.
Thank you very much for that
let's pull that Representative
Zamora any other questions or
comments on this now I wanted to
secretary of that okay no other
questions from the committee
they're being then we have a
motion by Representative Allison
a do pass for house bill sixty
six for the second
Representative Zamora was any
opposition to this to pass
motion.
Seeing none Representative
Chatfield representative
Armstrong lives in a small and
and Dow and Sweetser
congratulations you have to be
passed on house bill sixty six
thank you so much for joining us
this morning we appreciate your.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you so for committee
members of reminder that we do
have a meeting scheduled for
this Thursday we we have another
three bill scheduled for this
Thursday
and that being said our meeting
will begin at eight thirty again
really happy to be able to
accommodate those members that
are in the house appropriations
and finance committee thank you
all for your good work and for
getting us to having a budget
and Representative is not just
the rating at yes ma'am.
Mr speaker Mr chairman thank you
very much can you give us a bill
numbers right now so we can be
prepared for the meeting on
Thursday.
You know I I I will get those to
you and may when the mail is to
you as soon as we get off this
line we have been set up in in
the order they were received to
our office so we will have those
to you momentarily so I will get
those to you.
Chairman yes ma'am absolutely so
with that any other questions
comments if not we are adjourned
until Thursday thank you all so
much for the good work have a
great day.
