The to serve our communities.
through each and everyone of us
and that you open our ears so we
can hear correctly the to open
our eyes to the we can see what
you see.
do.
I pray for protection over every
single person that is
represented right here in this
chamber right now.
Mr speaker I move on to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business
intervention is so ordered
To take that the next order of
business up there is an
amendment for the memorial
and will fold will address that
when we get there
no evening session
from Santa Fe Representative
Romero who also has
tickets for snacks and what not.
morning so we will be me health
and Human Services will be
meeting tomorrow at ten o'clock
in room three fifteen thank you
gentle lady we do have some
guests introduce in the gallery
guests of Representative Natalie
the rotunda named a bi lingual
multicultural education program
excellence award school by PED
We also have a guest of
representative Armstrong spent
high school staters Hemphill
students might ADA labor.
Yes the representative made
about million in the gallery
students the the home alone you
and Holly left by it and their
Yes Representative Alan Martinez
in the gallery students and
parents from the central academy
If anyone's missing let me know
bring us no to shoot me a text.
Julie from Santa Santa Fe
percent of us thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker members of
like to call your attention to
this postcard invitation that's
on your desk Sunday is the New
arts it's going to be held at
the New Mexico museum of art and
the finalists will be competing
this Sunday the winner receives
an all expenses paid trip to
and competition at one o'clock
on Sunday and also this Sunday
all for state owned museums in
town have free admission for all
we welcome you all to join us at
those museums this Sunday thank
you.
can do those thank you Mr
speaker generated from a lesser
percent of minimum wage.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for introducing my students of
mine and Representative also
Armstrong students I wanted to
selected for their character in
scholarship they have to a they
have a minimum of three point
five grade point average that is
thanksgiving meals and thirty
days of non perishable foods for
up to seventy to seventy five
families in the flint area over
the years they've help organize
campus activities and many other
community service efforts so
members are eligible to attend
but New Mexico boys and girls
honor society members so they
are truly the representatives of
the future leaders in New Mexico
and the world.
Thank you gentle lady and
welcome to the house I was
district school it's very
important to me.
Today from the Santa Catalina
bilingual education all I have
Jackie Rodriguez the principal.
In the the Honda Rodriguez sixth
grade teacher.
gentleman from some of our
percent of it on this thank you
I would also like to
Representative recognize a few
of the staff from Solvay I ten
What was really cool that you
brought your Frank with you.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I know you you get the same
In announcements delivers on the
face Mr speaker ask unanimous
consent that house memorial
deleted we're not quite there
yet thank thank you Mr provided
international day to celebrate
all the world's wild animals and
plants and the contribution that
they make to our lives and the
house of the planet this year's
Mr.
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial no number be
removed from the speakers table
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker it is my
the year this is terra Hughes
our Santa Fe teacher
And with that Mr speaker I'd
love for the memorial to be
read.
House memorial seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero Lujan set up so as
whereas the New Mexico teacher
of the year program annually
recognizes one teacher nominated
by the eighty nine school
districts charter schools and
United States bureau of Indian
education and prekindergarten
her teacher at night early
childhood center with Santa Fe
public schools has been named to
the two thousand twenty three
teacher of the year and whereas
two thousand twenty three
teacher of the year Terry Hughes
has advocated for the importance
of high quality early childhood
opportunities for peer to peer
learning and whereas two
thousand twenty three teacher of
the year Terry Hughes has
represented the teaching
profession and amplify the
where as Terry Hughes has
supported and elevated families
to help them understand that
families are children's first
teachers and their voices are
powerful and whereas two
parts of for lessons in English
Spanish and American Sign
Language and whereas Terry
Hughes serves New Mexico schools
their journey I wish for their
love of learning to grow as
inspire curiosity and be
creative thinkers they have the
power to be catalysts for change
using the strength of their own
and deserves special honors and
whereas two thousand twenty
three teacher of the year Terry
Hughes brightens every room she
walks into with the latest
the country and the world now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico that Terry
Hughes be recognized and honored
as a recipient of the two
of the year day in the house of
representatives and that
teachers across this great state
be celebrated and appreciated
for their tremendous efforts in
such important and challenging
of night early childhood center.
Is there debate on the memorial.
C. innovate the gentle lady to
trans something that is a I
would love to keep in touch with
as Terry continues on her
journey we are so appreciative
to you and your family for all
the sacrifices that you've made
with that hi I move.
That house memorial seventy
seven do now pass.
I asked you at unanimous consent
house memorial seventy seven the
vote is now open.
What is now closed with a
seventy eight in the affirmative
Members and I do also recognize
guests in the gallery of
Cassell's early childhood
superintendent welcome to the
state house representative thank
you.
It also we have visitors from
Gentleman from you
Representative Lara.
Committee on item.
Number thirty three.
And just for the members
that all elections are placing
House memorial forty seven on
final passage is has been taking
it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the
That is fine gentleman.
Okay Mister speaker
I'll explain why she's here.
V. Martinez tribal president up
in front would you stand up
And president Ryan Johnson from
eastern New Mexico university
all explain you know.
years and I'm honored to get to
do this memorial form today
before I start to Mr speaker I
would like to move that the
day that's all that there was
amended in to two to five number
on the bottom.
Yes Sir Mr speaker point two two
five eight eight zero point one
I see none is objection to
adopting the amendment see none
do have an amended bill back in
the bill gentleman.
You Mr speaker and if if I could
House more house memorial forty
seven inches by Representative
of Representative Vincent.
Whereas the Mescalero Apache
Indian reservation was
established by president you
And we're as the regional
boundaries of the Mescalero
Apache Indian reservation
spanned as far north as forced
fort Stanton and the current
Apache people is located
partially on the Mescalero
Apache Indian reservation and
we're as the Mescalero Apache
tribe represents the Mescalero.
New Mexico their home since time
immemorial.
And whereas live in Apache were
forced from their homelands in
Texas and northern Mexico and
nineteen thirteen.
The jury called Apache were
released as prisoners of war
from the Fort Sill military
reservation near Lawton Oklahoma
welcomed wholeheartedly by the
Mescalero Apache and whereas
since the establishment
establishment of the Mescalero
Apache interim Indian
reservation.
homeland throughout southern New
Mexico.
And whereas the Mescalero Apache
Indian reservation is
mountainous and heavily wooded
Mescalero Apache tribe is proud
to share the natural beauty of
the Mescalero Apache Indian
reservation with guests and
patrons for New Mexico Texas
Arizona and many other places at
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that one
hundred fiftieth anniversary of
the establishment of the
Mescalero Apache Mescalero.
And be it further resolved that
a copy of the some of the
memorial be transmitted to the
Mescalero Apache tribal
government tribal council.
Gentleman are there any other
little.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative.
I rise to congratulate Mescalero
That's quite a bit with Lincoln
thank you.
Year was the year make as many
mistakes as the one that's what
we get to do as freshmen yes I
muscular Trav Apache tribe on
their one hundred and fiftieth
anniversary.
And thank you in addition to
welcoming all those tribes the
the community when I married in
to the little family and I just
wanted to express my mic
congratulations to you all and
wish you many many more healthy
gentleman from Lincoln Otero
County plans to build.
I will yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
don't want to rise and support
welcoming that I received that
our students the the community.
The the leadership there for
brand new to ensure that it
never had the.
because what I learned about the
the strong tradition and history
of the Mexico charter column.
Mr speaker more poorly I really
learned about the community
about that we are all connected
and that we all are part of this
greater family so Mister speaker
and gentleman I rise and support
Representative Roybal going at
all.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from the authentic
please feel.
All yield to the gentle lady
thank you very much gentleman I
beetle month so too was tried
and we have traced our ancestry
to time immemorial.
We are all family we're all
efforts for recognition of our
tribal
lands that we all.
I have had.
And I I think it's important to
note.
Mr speaker and gentle gentleman.
And being the warriors the
warrior tribes that they are.
They have won every single
challenge and with every single
For improving their tribe and
I'm proud to be related to our
brothers and sisters the
Mescalero but all of our tribal.
Introduce families in the state
we honor them daily because we
these are their lines our lands
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you inject there's further
debate the gentle lady from
Travis Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much I
want to congratulate the
Mescalero Apaches on their
hundred and fiftieth anniversary
and I also want to thank you
Is unbelievable and if you have
not had the chance to go down
and experience all that they had
thing compass I strongly urge
each and everyone of you to do
July weekend and it is out
stated the way I've gone to that
for many many years and I thank
you for putting that on I know
it takes a lot of effort to get
we had in the van up there how I
think it's been about twelve
years ago I believe it was the
little bear fire.
And they're hot shot team of
watch it for awhile and input
and sued was a over three
hundred homes being destroyed
businesses put out of business
and if that team had been
reproach Mr chairman and members
of this body.
They have a flourishing forest
that is able to sustain the
available by you all are
outstanding.
And
It just gives me great.
constitutes a healthy forest Mr
speaker I could go on and on
about all that they have done up
there in that region but I'm I
hope everybody does take the
you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
I'll yield to the gentleman.
I figure gentleman I rise also
I wish you would put on classes
to teach the US for service how
to take care of force.
so.
It is just amazing you cross a
cattle guard in the forest goes
from being overgrown.
that you just cannot drive
through and say well I wonder
who does this and so.
The the other thing Mr speaker
and gentleman that I think is
If you look at their impact in
Lincoln County.
They bring vital.
Income jobs in in security to
the reasons it's in your
memorial and many more the
Mescalero community has done a
great.
They do a good job in the
environment and I just I I think
there they have a a real.
From.
Watching and mentoring from
their efforts because it is it's
with that without a doubt the
gentleman my friend from Lincoln
and Otero counties yield.
I yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker I to rise
what cousins we are at the
Baskin lineage relatives we
share the same town the same
fourth of July rodeo Sarah our
races and we hope to continue to
do that again and
Visit your beautiful and sacred
going to stop along the.
Thank you have thank you Mr
speaker thank you Julie the
gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert thank you
Mr speaker to the gentleman from
and I to congratulate the
Mescalero Apache station for not
only having a hundred fifty
years on their lands but for a
out several of the things that
they've been involved in of
already been discussed but I'd
also like to say that.
The Mescalero Apache bring
season it's all four seasons
they own and operate the ski
Apache ski area that brings in
many people in the winter
months.
three eighty we will get that
thing fixed so that the the the
people can safely travel to to
your reservation from Lubbock
here and to thank you for not
only being here today to
celebrate this memorial and your
your reservation but for the
engagement that you've had with
Lente thank you Mr Spiegel Gen
one you'll smallest counties
you.
Are you the June thank you Sir
Mr president thank you for for
being here today you know when
their there they're being on the
face of this planet it should be
a celebration with its one day a
hundred and fifty years and so I
rise to celebrate your
continuance in the state of New
representation of the
descendants from this particular
tribe the Mescalero have a a
great legendary presence and
history in the United States
against humanity experience some
of the most atrocious actions
but you all have survived and
prevailed and I applaud you for
that I graduated people for
Their rights to self
determination protecting their
language their culture their
lands their water their air.
They're being.
And I applaud you for that you
You've been blessed with
extraordinary leaders as well
and I I when I think of those
that you stand in the shadows of
in the footsteps of the late and
Advocating on behalf of whatever
it was but most eloquently
standing up for state and tribal
relationships.
To the current leaders you walk
the footsteps part the legendary
from your very tribe I thank
them too for being the future
and for holding within them.
The very existence of who we are
as indigenous people so with
that it's it's extremely
Mr speaker thank you gentleman
thank you gentlemen there's
further debate over from Dona
Ana Representative small thank
you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Lincoln and those
other wonderful beautiful
of the comments Mr speaker
gentleman that we've heard here
today Mr speaker gentleman I
especially want to echo some of
those that we just heard from
the gentleman from Rio Arriba
tribal sovereignty I think is
very much guided in a positive
way and set a course for our
state Mr speaker and gentleman
heard shared here today and Mr
speaker gentleman I think
looking to the future as we
celebrate an incredibly
it comes to things Mr speaker
and gentleman like our county
commissions and other bodies we
want to make sure that tribal
sovereignty that government to
part of a a proud albeit very
checkered history with our state
but one for Mr.
Speaker and gentleman and Mr
gentleman there's much work to
do and I think in some of those
areas like those local
representations with county
commissions making sure that
constituents and to bring their
voice which has only helped the
state of New Mexico I see that
is so very much for a positive
and very proud Mr speaker and
gentlemen see you know for the
debate the gentle.
All apologies there's a
gentleman from earlier percent
fighter about how the Mescalero
Indian reservation.
Ians its trees and and really
they do it in tell me from a
firefighters point.
Which is better and what we need
to do.
Well is this is not a biased
they have a great forestry
department and they see an
aggressively and when I mean
aggressively mean aggressively
on highway seventy when they do
they're standing you can look
into the forest three hundred
four hundred yards and then when
you start getting into some of
the other stuff you might be
with you that is my experience
when I've been down there I was
just amazed at how beautiful
their force land is and you just
invited Rhonda my wives and
president Trost for his cause in
Lincoln and Otero County
get treated better than we
deserve.
And I thought I don't know it's
it's it must just be a culture
my wife was raised with
Apache reservation so councilman
level.
I was fortunate enough whenever
I was a young man and I work for
So if you've ever seen an adult
try to learn how to ski it's
kind of difficult so I go up
there in thirty years ago was my
pull people down to the the
first stage at where you can get
on hello.
I move that house memorial forty
seven as amended.
Do now pass and as the unanimous
consent of the house that the
no objection it is so ordered we
are on final passage of house
memorial forty seven as amended
the vote is now open.
Deleted Mr speaker I move to go
to that order of business
committee report seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
three thirty as amended has had
it under consideration point I
was recommendation that a do
pass respectfully submitted and
still the ongoing chair Mr
Was an eighty as I could afford
opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill four
fifty five has had it under
consideration point same without
a report with a recommendation
house before fifty five all
those information about tonight.
Those needs the as of a
committee board up to.
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair Mexico to about
thirty four hundred option
available committee report on
house bill four ninety five all
Mr speaker labor veterans
military affairs committee to is
been referred Senate bill ninety
six has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation to do pass and
it's referred to the provisions
of finance committee
ninety six all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Well the supposed may be a
Senate committee productive.
Mr speaker move adoption please.
Committee report is Senate bill
three eighty one of those in
favor is advocacy not.
Related to the legislature
point.
Mr speaker I revise that
request.
We go to that order of business
committee report seeing no
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill three ninety nine do
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
move adoption for an adoption of
Was a test of a good productive.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order this is the third reading
seven as amended on final
passage has been taking it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the gentle lady
to explain the bill.
You Mr speaker of body.
A difficult childhood my mom was
pretty poor my father's side of
the family didn't
That entry is very well except
for a few.
This is in the early eighties
she took a job there in fashion
she designed fashion shows.
Roger Patrick Frankie.
They Love Me they fed me they
Accepted and that was really
important for me as a young
woman of color growing up in a
place that wasn't really kind to
people like me.
from discrimination from society
at the hands of government.
They were facing pain and
suffering more suffering as they
saw their friends and their
Frankie Roger Patrick.
She helped shape me made me who
I am today and I am forever
grateful for them.
YouTube and read about this
discrimination that their
friends are facing.
Because they're all need to
queue.
They're seeing their.
out who they are inside and who
they love I am really angry and
I want to change it because what
they're seeing does not
represent my values doesn't
The folks who are listening our
young clear and trans folks and
maybe not so young I want you to
know that.
Mr speaker body this is what.
This bill does.
Update the definitions for
sexual orientation and gender
identity.
It updates discriminatory
that were never intended to
exist insurers that public
dollars can not be used to
discriminate it adjourns public
entities are held to the same
standard as private ones.
for individuals to access the
main Rights Commission to bring
their cases there.
This bill does not hold
individuals accountable that
Marshall Martinez and my data
and I am sick and Mr speaker I'd
like to yield to my co sponsor
the gentle lady from.
Santa Fe very quickly.
Mr speaker I'm so honored to
stand and rise and support and
co sponsored house bill two of
seven and would like to share
just a personal story of this
birthday this week started
thinking about what my use was
thank here in Santa Fe.
Growing up in a community that
is known to be so accepting so
was a high school student.
Mr speaker.
There was some challenge with
who was made fun of who was
targeted who were the people
a couple girlfriends in mind we
were braiding our hair during
one of our classes and a teacher
held us back after the class and
for something that was like that
and then my shame turned into
advocacy because a group of
categorized as something but
then the advocacy became why are
people in our community
categorize to something else.
of those who were being
discriminated against in the
hallways of my high school.
The app of that's that were
thrown around and are still
thrown around today being gay of
community I no longer see a
value in the young students that
I get to talk to you today to
celebrate diversity celebrate
who they are celebrated every
to uphold no longer do we want
to feel that this type of
discrimination exists.
Mr speaker I just want to stand
in strong support of house bill
how we spend our taxpayer
dollars in how it is that we
look at the past decisions that
have been made by New Mexico
legislation.
And Mr speaker I just want to
uplift those who brought this
forward to the New Mexico can
and this legislation does just
that thank you generally.
Mr speaker resents questions
the gentleman from a better
Representative block.
changing some definitions here
so first of all.
I would like to ask what's the
difference between the gender
identity in the previous bill
and the one currently in the
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
perception as male or female but
now it refers to a
a spectrum.
now we're just taking out the
binary aspect of that is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady.
Miss gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman
so you're asking and you're
asking about the difference
between gender and gender
whether they're masculine or
feminine.
It's sort of the outside looking
toward and gender identity is
how someone sees himself.
statute here gender identity
would be how you identify and I
don't believe was there a
definition in the previous bill
of gender Mr speaker gentle
we're adding gender as well how
are they different Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman sex is
what someone was assigned at
identity I'm sorry yes and what
is the difference in your bill
Mr speaker gentle lady between
the word sex and the word gender
as your bill stipulates Mr
and gender as.
The way society sees you.
Mr speaker and gentleman sex was
not there in the first.
the definition of sex reading
the definition of gender and
we're amending the definition of
gender identity is that correct
Mr speaker speaker generally yes
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman the The
impetus comes from the changing
And the updated again in two
thousand three so we're updating
definitions that we hope will
stand this the test of time they
need to be updated.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
that in this bill Mr speaker Mr
speaker I'm and thank you for
that question these definitions
came from the world the World
Health Organization and from
but a I was doing a little
research here in the WHL the
World Health Organization they
write that they recognize gender
engine and sexual diversity or
the concepts that gender
what you're the new definition
states for gender identity Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman that spoke
about right.
I'm not aware of Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman not that
we're aware of.
of the same or different genders
the absence of such attractions
so that makes sense Mr speaker
and gender identity.
believe themselves to be and
then gender is what society
believes them to be I just wanna
be crystal clear that that's
what that's what we're trying to
they're very vague in my opinion
quite frankly so Mister speaker
gentle lady hi I just want to
turn over here to the back page
refuse or otherwise limit a
person's conditions of services
based on race age religion color
national origin ancestry
etcetera so Mister speaker
Requirement for governmental
entities Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman what this
section does is it further
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady so does this
also pertain to like kids for
instance Mr speaker gentle lady
affects the teacher if they
decided to go with what the
parents said instead of the
child Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman what this
a pathway to address that
discrimination.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you generating so could this
discrimination let's just say I
there be damages under this bill
for that misuse Mr speaker thank
you Mr speaker
And gentleman I I'm really glad
in human nature if if that child
feels like they're not being
listened to and that they are
being singled out and they feel
discriminated against.
Over and over.
okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady so tell me where
in the bill is states for has to
be over and over Mr speaker
gentle lady.
classes which were adding a few
more.
If they feel discriminated
against they can go to the Human
Rights Commission.
And they can present their case
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so that would be totally
upon the Human Rights Commission
to make that determination is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
that is correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman and the
background on this commission do
we know who sits on that who
appoints this commission Mr
speaker gentle lady.
appointed by the governor and
there are different hearing
officers around the state who
hear cases.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so then we.
government entities to make
determinations based on those Mr
speaker is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman knows
that's not correct the
legislature has the power to
make the law.
speaker for expanding the act to
also include local government
bodies Mr speaker are we not
there by giving more power to
the governor through that
gentle lady well I think it's
very much in the scope of this
bill because this bill actually
adds more responsibilities of
the Human Rights Commission so
Mister speaker gentle lady.
at the school and they're a full
time staff Mr speaker gentle
lady and they.
Let's just say he's it was born
a man and he decides to
transition to being a woman if
volleyball Mr speaker gentle
lady would we be and then
discriminating against him Mr
speaker gentle lady per this
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generated can you please site
for me those employment laws
that were speaking about.
me to the page and line please.
Mr speaker gentleman can you go
ahead repeat your question so I
know exactly what you're asking
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally yes so my scenario my
You once Garcia rather now wants
to be in the women's locker room
because he coaches of women's
volleyball Mr speaker gentle
lady.
When he and then be protected
On page two.
Section one a no CD one E. under
the fair labor standards act.
labor standards act okay thank
you Mr speaker the gentle lady
okay that's that's an
interesting point Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Okay.
I actually have an amendment J.
amendment so a.
I would like to move it this
ammendment.
To floor amendment number one
for house bill two is seven.
nine one four point one Mr
speaker today.
Is it being and I would like a
roll call vote please Mr
speaker.
One two.
It is on the website.
and explain the amendment thank
you Mr speaker so I believe the
one that was passive says T.
Ryan lane on it the one I signed
it cross it out so just for the
record there so Mister speaker
mark and then we add in that
same line.
For the previous of the
provisions of this section shall
not apply to a public primary or
secondary school that makes a
interscholastic or intramural
athletic teams on the basis of
gender identity.
Mr speaker.
Thank the sponsors a friendly
question for you are you is your
amendment intending to create a
car about for discrimination
against the LGBTQ community Mr
only put a critical Kerr about
four protected areas for
individuals that are children in
local schools so they would not
within the school Mr speaker
gentle lady that is the purpose
of this ammendment.
Mr speaker gentleman would this
amendment allow.
pertaining to which is not the
actual the full blown statute Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker German unfriendly.
The debate on the amendment the
Hi you Mr speaker.
Speaker
and gentleman
During your questioning.
Use the specific for coach but I
I believe more generally or
you're asking if an adult.
Would be able to go into the
locker room.
but Mr speaker and and and and
gentleman.
It is my understanding.
From that discussion that the
If they identify as something
other than their biological sex.
That they would be able to go
into that locker room for that
restroom.
that's exactly the answer we got
Mr speaker.
Some speaker and gentleman.
It has been mentioned to me in
attributes that.
Is someone else's perception of
those physical attributes.
But Mr speaker and and and
gentleman.
That kind of goes to the point
that.
amendment is trying to do is
because there are very specific
physical attributes.
In the change room.
In a locker room that are going
to be.
I believe your amendment is a
reasonable protection.
For the others.
Who are in the locker room.
With a person who.
Once again biologically not by
across New Mexico believe that
is a fair it was called to carve
out.
Mr speaker and and and gentleman
I think they see that as a
gentleman yes I believe this is
actually very common sense and
bare bones approach to ensuring
the protection of young children
at schools Mr speaker gentle
activities etcetera Mr speaker
gentle lady so I believe Mr
speaker gentle lady this is
probably one of the most common
sense approach as we could have
The.
This comes down to.
Tension Ole.
Play sports there is nudity in a
locker room.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
speaker and this and that this
is not meant to be.
Overly sensitive but.
The the the genitals Mr speaker.
For the lack of having to be
exposed the speaker and
gentleman which in and outside
of
outside of what we're putting
Lewd conduct.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I as a grandfather.
I'm concerned about that.
undermining the rights and
protections for others.
I don't believe that that is
something with that we should do
It is women and girls who really
lose out here.
And Mr speaker and gentleman I I
appreciate your amendment.
I think that this is a minimum.
Are are the people who voted for
us.
The people in each of our
districts and no doubt will be
paying attention to this.
to be treated well.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
It used to be stated that.
My rights.
I I think it is reasonable a
reasonable protection of
children.
When an employee an adult.
And Mister speaker what they
will see potentially.
Our is exposure of physical
attributes not a pronouns they
and Mr speaker I believe
potentially putting children
potentially putting children in
harm's way thank you Mr speaker
Jim.
thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentleman I just I have
several questions after meeting
this ammendment and and forgive
would use a locker room.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm sure
that there are multiple places
that you could use a locker room
for each of their classes where
locker rooms are just trying to
be young people.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm sure
that they are Mr speaker it's a
requirement Mr speaker that
children go to school and as
Mr speaker gentleman is your
inference that these people
should have to go to a different
sure I got it Mr speaker gentle
and so if we both agree that
transgendered use who are just
trying to be kids who just want
to use a locker room to be kids
because of who they are.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I now understand your
question so you know it's a
requirement that they take
classes so.
same locker room as their
biological sex Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman but at the same time
would you agree that transgender
New Mexicans instruction trans
lady I'm not exactly sure if I
can opine on that since I do not
know the lived experiences of
every other New Mexico Mr
speaker gentle lady.
experienced danger or fear at
some point in their lives
because of who they are.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm sure
we can make the case that all of
us have have been in
population Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman could you
maybe you agree with me then
that by having to use the locker
room to their assigned gender
information on that Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
The gentleman may limit the
personal life nor should I ask
those Mr speaker gentle lady so
I've never met your children.
Mr speaker gentleman but what
are you saying through this
child's right to participate or
use that locker room.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes your child would not
have the right to be in a locker
if you have any transgendered
individual wanting to use the
locker room of their present of
their preference would that
bill it would certainly affect
the other children in that
locker room let's just say Mr
speaker gentle lady I I have no
idea what your kids are like or
who they are but let's just say
they want to stay female Mr
speaker gentle lady they could
make that very same case Mr
speaker that their rights are
being infringed upon based on
the individuals they feel
uncomfortable having in their
stepmother of a trans gendered
individual
and so my question is under you
amendment would you consider
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so are you asking if I'm
infringing upon your rights now
with this amendment Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker gentleman
children to utilize the locker
rooms of their choice.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so if you read the
amendment it does not say.
from M. which is on page
fourteen so I guess depending on
the school you go to Mr speaker
gentle lady there could be a
scenario where your child is
allowed to be in a certain
let's talk about other protected
classes let's let's just forget
about transgendered individuals
for second would you under your
Mr speaker gentle lady so what
you're asking if this amendment
would infringe upon others rates
based on factors not regarding
the word trans gendered for
second and let's put in the word
let's say.
Disabled.
transgender people thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady answer
as an attorney you know that the
ADA is what governs our country
and so it's it's a crime to
lady from being exposed to
present potentially dangerous
situations Mr speaker gentle
lady it has nothing to do
regarding folks with
disabilities Mr speaker gentle
lady which are already protected
transaction our children should
be a protected class.
Mr speaker gentle lady of this
amendment does not mention the
words transgender.
At all Mr speaker gentle lady.
this subjects
in a way that we try to avoid
some of the issues we have with
your amendment would actually
accomplish which is forcing
transgendered individuals to
utilize a bathroom or locker
Possibly targeted.
Possibly made to feel like they
don't belong there.
the facility
here forcing transgendered
individuals to out themselves Mr
speaker John here is forcing
actually physically and
emotionally putting them in
danger.
What policy with policies like
this and so I understand I
lives Natalie
at risk but I I think that
you're forcing them into a
position that no one would ever
gentle lady this would protect
them from being sued under the
statute however did would not
force as the gentle lady from
Bernalillo stated incorrectly
anyone to force anyone to be in
speaker this individual that
we're talking about
hypothetically could go to a
specific locker room they would
be critical outing themselves
themselves by whatever locker
Torrance thank you Mr speaker
so.
I had an interesting
conversation with one of my very
dear friends she's transgender.
When I lower she to spend the
That children have the right to
feel safe and that's all the
children and that means to me
and her and I have this deep
discussion was.
It's so awkward in school you
have somebody in that room that
makes somebody feel
uncomfortable.
And I keep thinking we forget
because I'm totally on board I
love love our transgender
coach watching them get
undressed and that is the bigger
picture to me with this I don't
think it's fair she doesn't
think it's fair and she's
transgender so I think we have
Other in a locker room and is so
composes of people staring at
you and I can't imagine what it
would feel like as a young girl.
To know that this person's
biological male.
center Chasey I have to table
for speaker.
We are on a motion to table
house floor amendment number one
to house bill two oh seven as
amended.
The vote is now open.
What's about to close.
One of thirty nine the
affirmative twenty two in the
Coming from a total you still
have the floor thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady so
I'm reading the bill here.
Reading the previous definitions
and it looks like we struck the
Mr speaker and gentleman
constable is biological so we're
updating that definition.
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
not stripping biological.
It is in the definition of sex.
certain words like masculinity
masculinity or femininity under
the gender identity definition
Mr speaker gentle lady if we're
supposed to be stripping it of
gentle lady.
This
speaker gentleman masculinity
vanity are not genders there
social constructs.
Whatever reason between Mr
speaker gentle lady what if what
if that person is not defining
themselves as masculine or
feminine just.
Not at all Mr speaker gentle
actually says or absence
thereof.
I believe that covers the
question.
Mr speaker German.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady so.
so that is keeping a binary is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman or
intersex.
So non binary thank you Mr
Male female or intersex as for
the definition of sex for the
definition of gender.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady so.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady seven how many
genders are there Mr speaker
gentle lady not talking about
sex talk about gender now.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so how expensive is
it Mr speaker Mr speaker I'm and
there's really just no way to
enumerated it's expensive okay
thank you Mr speaker the gentle
that say there's sixteen there's
some people that say there's
thirty and I just you know for
not including those specific
ones under this statute Mr
Mr speaker Madam.
I'm really glad you asked
because that's that's a that's
why we're doing this we're
updating these definitions of
the stand the test of time.
kinds of definitions in here
that would affect negatively.
Our legal system people suing
under this act and we certainly
last page of your bill Mr
speaker gentle lady I think we
need to protect these children
especially in locker room
settings and these settings or
they could potentially be harmed
concerns about page fourteen M.
and I would certainly recommend
that being stricken Mr speaker
thank you I appreciate the time
thank you gentlemen deleted from
Bernalillo Representative
Thank you Mr speaker and lady
from
from the house I actually
carried the two thousand and
The bill to accomplish
non discrimination based on
sexual orientation I believe is
nineteen ninety nine.
gender identity.
I'm like today where it usually
we don't bring bills to the
floor unless we think we have
all the votes to pass the.
eight speaker Hon he wasn't
afraid to do that and our former
Majority Leader the speaker can
Martinez said to me once well if
you're not losing bills on the
We
introduced a bill in two
thousand and three.
I included gender identity but
I didn't know that many people
ninety nine I met him in two
thousand and two.
His middle daughter is gay.
She's the mother of two of our
grand children.
for home if they lived here in
New Mexico this would make a
difference but.
The first experience because I
started reflecting.
Really talented he was a great
dancer and he did he did theater
and so forth but his wife was
kind of miserable at our school.
he became the.
Actor or performer that he
deserved to be but you know I
remember how hard it was for him
relationship I think back to
that young man.
He certainly wasn't the only one
one of my really good friends
And
Then I reflected on my first
experience with the trans gender
individual
that he was transitioning add to
my first husband ended up.
As his attorney because of when
he finished with all the.
terminate have her by then it
was her sorry and
That ended well for him for her
Without situation so.
That was the first time I became
aware as an adult.
That people could undergo
needed to live their lives so
when we passed the two thousand
and three bill.
I am very very proud to say it
But some Republicans voted for
it and if you're curious whether
you've succeeded one of those of
my colleagues I'll let you know
Looked at this not as a
political issue but as a human
rights issue and so I stand in
support.
realize that public entities
could still continue to
discriminate.
That is why this is imperative
because we haven't been able to
get.
our chairman Rights Act so that
it includes public entities
public bodies.
And I just want to say
this fact pattern that fact
pattern what happens if.
If somebody in.
describe what fact pattern is
well.
Mr speaker and lady from Thomas
it's like what happens if this
child experiences this what
thank you very much a hearing
officer will decide that provide
a hearing officer will decide
that and wouldn't it be the case
action.
If if the hearing officer NMFA
order the hearing officer was
wrong right Mr speaker gentle
lady yes thank you okay thank
Done besides the public bodies
went updated other language in
the law that reflects what we've
learned in twenty years.
we we learned a lot over time
and sometimes we have to come
back here and reflect the
reality of the day and modernize
No matter what Mr the the former
speaker lu Han and may or maybe
Mr as Sanchez may have indicated
so your question Mr speaker
entities that receive taxpayer
dollars from all of us to
provide services and so what
this this change does is it in
and gentle lady that includes
counties and cities schools and
that's some that's on page
three.
much we've involved in in the
twenty years since well it is
really longer than that because
of this nineteen ninety nine in
the beginning but so since then.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady yield Mr
speaker and gentleman I gladly
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
vote on this so the speaker and
gentleman this bill does
essentially some reasons maybe
maybe ten seconds as I'm reading
we're we're adding some new
definitions.
Mr gentle lady and
Then also.
Now includes them as those who
are subject to this anti
discrimination Act mystery
gradually is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
that is correct.
actually a Supreme Court case
here recently that made a
judgment can you maybe just talk
for a minute about that.
the Supreme Court said that
these entities were not
protected from discrimination
prohibited from discrimination.
Pardon me okay so Mister
generally so so maybe wasn't so
speaker gentle lady my
understanding that right
this first Mr speaker and
gentleman I did not applaud of
political subdivisions and
currently the Human Rights Act
applies to of private businesses
private entities.
Employers and and the like
But Mr speaker and gentleman UNM
college of nursing and said he
resolution New Mexico verses UNM
board of regents in nineteen
eighty one.
discrimination.
Law.
Section that applies to
employers and private entities
but does not apply to the
because.
I mean these things occasionally
here and I.
Don't appreciate it when we are
making rules for someone else
Mr speaker and I I I agree with
that I think they should.
Speaker gentle lady
Thank you for that.
and I just.
None of us agree that it is good
to discriminate.
Speaker gentle lady
Of my heritage
My heritage we are very.
Sensitive to any form of
discrimination.
steps in this direction and
supported some reason
legislation the federal level
for these very reasons Mr
internally so so I think I'll
This usually I guess my last
question is you know looking at
this.
Statute and and just being
sensitive to.
and if you could please help me
understand maybe I'm missing
something.
But it says a government entity
or public contractor refusing.
You know we will be considered
So that they'll they'll be
against the law must be urgently
so so if the school district
if this passes how does that
change.
Mr speaker and when it doesn't
change.
It just it it just means that
the students in that school are
Where would have significant
problems I I may just be missing
at for the speaker gentle lady
and and maybe I'll just talk to
you in your experts offline but
I very much appreciate you have
Thank you Mr speaker to heal.
Mr speaker happily yield to the
gentle lady thank you and six.
Allergy.
And I I have or had a
transgender in South Dakota
growing up with her
adult she realized that she was
a man and so he did the
transition and he got involved
in trying to keeps the South
Dakota legislature from
ours but he would call me for
pep talks and he would call me
for strategic advice and we
really really grew close and I
he said I go there to make
people like me and to realize
that people like me are just
people they're not demons
they're not horrible people
ago he committed suicide because
society did not accept him.
So a lot.
Along with that most some of you
classes grades I would say I was
the white girl my sisters were
the other white girls so I saw a
lot of discrimination around
Japanese and I haven't had a
sister in law who was native
American so we're kind of the
United Nations of a family and
it was rich and not and not in
disabilities for almost forty
years and and I have seen the
discrimination against people
with disabilities including my
Planned his curriculum and he
loves to eat and he loves to be
around food so we signed him up
for the culinary arts program at
a half an Albuquerque high
there and I said I thought the
reason for him being in there
was to get these skills not if
you have to have skills to come
in the so we fought and fought
and they finally put in chorus
it is high school years which
breaks my heart because the the
the people he went to school
with would be the people that
would hire him that would treat
him with respect to the rest of
you have heard of Klinefelter
syndrome.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I have
I was a an anthropology major
okay so for those of you who
born with two X. chromosomes and
one why so there sex is
indeterminate and the parents
can decide whether they want
that that baby to be a male or
Gentle lady Mr speaker I'm can
you tell me why you made the
change from handicap to
disability.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
thank you for sharing your
this change came at the request
of the disability community it
was high time to update that Mr
originally intended and that's
just awful so
And and as I said before in my
family wouldn't when my hair
turned I Representative for his
birthday rather than having a
party with presents I said give
and we showed videos of what
autism was and the difference
that that made in every member
of even a three year old girl
when Eric would act strangely
people to understand by exposing
them when we put we put kids
with disabilities out in the
south forty were I always worked
that the typical kids continued
that people with differences are
included
Okay I think I will leave it at
that thank you gentle lady and
Mr speaker thank you Julie
there's further debate the
Thank you Mr speaker as a gentle
lady from House county yield
Mister speaker I happily of the
gentleman.
Thank you.
the things that we discussed.
Primarily
Dealing with.
Some of the wording that's in
the in the bill.
in.
Your your bill as a.
Mr speaker gentleman there is
not.
Mr speaker gentle lady if I
Was that possible to private
business but it really is not
applicables to religious
organizations would that be
accurate.
Gathering my thoughts here it is
not applicable to.
Religious organizations that are
providing public accommodation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
might explain that further
because there are some religious
accommodation to their own
members or people that follow
that tentative faces are not.
a religious organization is
Currently.
Providing the services.
Mr speaker gentle and I'm sorry
I did not hear that can you
please repeat that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
religious organizations
currently subject to the
statute.
If they're providing public
accommodations they are they are
also subject to this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think a lot of religious
to do variety of things and it
seems to me that.
Those organizations are four
some protection from.
the constitution whether be the
state federal or state
constitution with respect to
some of these issues are is
there any specific case law that
you're experts will be aware of
Is a religious organization
religious entity is employing
someone
and they don't they for that
person or they don't want to
So you're saying that currently.
Under existing law.
Religious organizations cannot
Mr speaker John I'm just I'm
trying to tease out
they cannot discriminate they
cannot use those taxpayer
dollars discriminate employment
practices or in services.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
That's in front of us right now.
If a religious organization
receives one dime of public
Discriminating.
Even in their employment
practices.
Elsewhere in the organization
lady is that an accurate summary
of.
What you said so I understand Mr
speaker and gentleman if a
religious or any public
contractors including a
religious.
I would hope that they would
want to continue to discriminate
but they if they want to they
have to use their own private
dollars to do such.
statement that it's your
intention of what this
legislation to.
Basically require any religious
organization who receives any
Can not engage in discriminatory
discriminatory practices.
Anywhere within that the
They should not discriminate
with respect to who they provide
those services to.
I don't
I I can't imagine a religious
organization discriminating at
the service center.
Who hold firm to the tenants of
that faith.
And if they accept public money
is now they will be prohibited
now's an appropriate time Mr
speaker to pass it out of I
would move house floor amendment
number one to house bill two oh
seven.
one two three four five six and
got it wrong.
And I'll be happy to give you
the two two five nine eight.
It is now on the website.
Give me one minute Sir.
They will have you explain it.
Mr speaker this amendment is a
very simple moment very short on
page three line one after the
word into the.
Put a comma but does not include
religious organizations.
That would allow Mr speaker.
Continue their hiring practices.
Elsewhere in their organization.
Without fear of of losing these
other assistance that these
organizations are providing and
I can go through a whole list.
Catholic charities
providing those services and we
need to make sure that they're
allowed to continue to provide
those services for the well
being of our people so that's
why bring the amendments are and
clarifying question of the
adjuster Sir first Sir Mr
speaker and gentleman if
a religious entity receives one
hundred percent of their funding
from taxpayers will they still
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
would hope that no religious or
other organization would receive
one hundred percent other
funding from from government but
should be able to hire people
who are
professor tenants of that faith
elsewhere in the organization
discriminate for employment.
So that's why I'm just confused
by this by this amendment and
further Mr speaker and gentleman
right we're not asking someone
to take on additional duties
that are not part of their
contract of services so I don't.
Thank you Mr speaker
the gentleman from openness
Chavis county yield.
public contractor to exclude
religious organizations but does
religious organizations would
still have access to public
government contracts for
services okay thank you for
clearing that for me Mr speaker
Representative so.
those religious organizations to
serve the same people that the
government would serve using
discrimination.
But I'm worried about the
breadth.
Of this language and it's been.
answer Mr speaker Representative
I can I can understand those
concerns but.
My concern and you mentioned a
couple times before that you
would certainly hope that no
Episcopalian I love my church
I go there weekly and I miss it
dearly since I've been up here
but I am aware that there are
religious based homeless
shelters per se to deny services
based on race based on ability
language in such a way that
religious organizations would be
able to discriminate
on those species is that is that
a fair assessment Mr speaker
Hello.
Please have our cell phones and
silence it would be greatly
appreciated either in the
chamber or in the gallery.
I wouldn't have a problem with
the.
My concern is it goes well
beyond that and I would hope
that.
community that are providing
those services.
Open their doors and it doesn't
matter who walks in the stores
they are free Lee providing
those services.
Discriminatory practices.
Upstream if you will where it
seems to me that a religious
organizations wants to hire
example of that religious
organizations so that's my
concern it's not on the services
first thing in the first
amendment is freedom of
religion.
And so what we're dealing with
that.
Seems to me that we have to be
I wouldn't be making this
argument the we've we've had
testimony we've had discussions
that it's the intent to bring in
mean I I fully get it that that
is my hope as well.
But as it is since we are seeing
concern is that this language
would just.
Give them the green light to go
ahead and continue to
discriminate
who.
me heartburn is that I would
like to see an end to that
practice of an organization is
receiving public money they
should be used to discriminate
against any class of people I
think we can all agree on that
but we are seeing that every day
right now and I would like to
ammendment is it true the people
who are seeking services for
example like a homeless shelter
let's say.
Who don't fit the criteria of
Mr speaker and gentle lady are I
would say that
That I don't believe that
religious organizations are.
Subject to many things that are
set forth in this current
statutes and they're being
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative I would argue
that the status quo is not
enough because as I mentioned
earlier the status quo allows
amendment action where exactly
where would your amendment
Allow
for religious services to not
religious organization would not
discriminate with their public
funds just because we've made an
exception for them in hiring
practices or like maybe this
exception for them as a what
we're seeing so where would the
amendment put an end to that
discrimination Mr speaker
Representative Mr speaker and
gentle lady it does not.
legislation is to.
Insure that public money isn't
being used by a religious
organization to continue I would
Representative usually there's
further debate on the amendment
the gentleman from land
Representative Scott thank you
Mr the gentleman from Chavis
you.
Question is going to be real of
the to your.
I would like to bring it up on
her.
was represented to allow
discrimination is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I.
Did not.
One.
To order by the United States
Supreme Court.
Much more recent.
Last year.
Are you familiar with that.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm.
to serve seventy two I refer.
In involved illegitimately held
religious beliefs.
We do not consider that the.
According to his religion.
If you
were.
language.
On page fourteen chapter.
Would.
The gentleman on his circle back
was back to the amendment I
think you're now debating the
bill which is totally fair to do
when you are on the list to
debate the bill but we are on
the amendment right now.
Strong role to play.
Whether or not.
This piece of legislation.
Thank you chairman predetermined
there is for the debate on the
amendment the gentleman from
Figure it had nothing to do with
the the troubles in Lincoln I'm
sure Mr speaker the gentleman
thank you so much I wanted to
ask a couple of quick questions
you're talking about here either
do or my contract with the state
in the future if that's okay so
Mister speaker gentleman we we
heard from the gentle lady from
that the there may be some
religious organizations who
would want to provide housing
particularly the last couple
and I think we're we're better
off for it the speaker gentleman
in a few others to come to my
mind certainly food right Mr
speaker gentleman food pantries
seems like another really strong
area where this might apply Mr
speaker gentle.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
that would be the specific
example that I would have from
my own community is of feeding
that's frankly my major concern
for bringing this ammendment
thank you Mr thank you John I'm
glad we agree is sort of the
services and a few more to throw
out Mr speaker German please
like medical care whether that's
the actual care The New Mexicans
receive or even perhaps
transport to and from that from
medical care so really and those
budgetary investments from the
state.
Well Mr speaker and gentleman I
may disagree with with the
current or future with respect
to medical because as you know
Are no longer associated with
the religious organization that
may have found of those thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I I appreciate that Mr
speaker gentleman I think
of discussed a lot about the the
expansion and sort of the the
focus that the gentle lady from
houses bringing to us but we're
gentleman for instance those who
are pregnant
Mr speaker Jim and there are a
whole there's a long very
That is correct and you're also
might note that we as a society
are building on long established
programs.
Instituted and started by
those things need to be
recognized and and in my opinion
applauded Mr speaker gentleman
and I don't disagree and Mr
today also looking backward Mr
speaker and gentleman with
what's already there in law
whether that's race Mr speaker
speaker gentlemen would open up
the ability not only looking
forward but looking backwards
across all of these classes of
New Mexicans for them to now be
those services would they not Mr
speaker gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman I would argue to the
contrary I would argue that
these organizations are
are not turning anyone away who.
Desires those services in fact I
I would say they are encouraging
advantage of those services many
of which are not using
government funds but the funds
from from the religious
organization itself so so I and
same but Mr speaker gentleman
the way I read the amendment the
amendment would give the
absolute legal authority Mr
speaker gentleman to those
gentleman then decided not just
based upon the discussion here
today a based upon someone's
race based upon someone's
country of origin Mr speaker
then this would give them that
legal rights to continue to
receive funds intended for a
purpose and then Mr speaker
gentleman to very clearly
thank you very much share much
in this conversation and
certainly the hope and how all
of us should be serving fellow
community members Mr speaker
appropriated in this chamber to
then be
and and New Mexicans to be
excluded from receiving the
benefits of those state funds
maintain the status quo it
allows those religious
organizations to continue doing
exactly what they're doing today
and that they don't have to
change their hiring practices in
Requirement.
People of the tenants of faith
to be in certain positions
them to a test do we continue
this good work.
Or do we maintain our tenants of
faith and I think I know the
answer to that and it's going to
Mr speaker gentleman thank thank
you for that Mr speaker
gentleman this of flies to those
public funds and the use of
public funds Mr speaker
gentleman this doesn't apply to
those those public the non
public funds Mr speaker
gentleman any organization can
having a legal basis to exclude
based upon a number of different
criteria I don't think it
necessarily would or will happen
this would allow it to happen
that's why I can't support it Mr
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The just to to interject myself
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct so Mister speaker and
gentleman under current law.
other things like that so is it
is so Mister speaker and and and
gentleman have there been.
Lawsuits in the state of New
Mexico are you aware of any
speaker and gentleman Mr speaker
and gentleman I have no personal
knowledge of those suits Mr
speaker if those persons if
those things were going on we
would know about them.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
The concern about.
A very very hot topic which is
that religious institutions in
particular their efforts are to
reach out to people who believe
other than themselves is that
not correct Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker and
benevolence and offering
services to the public it would
be counter intuitive.
To reject people in the public
could disagree with them.
And particularly if they're
can tell you that the the
religious organizations I'm
aware of.
Particularly Christianity.
That would be their charge would
the.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
to the to the extent of your
bill for your amendment to this
bill.
Would be to maintain that those.
That they'd still be able to do
that without having to affect
hiring practices.
for allowing.
fair characterization Mr speaker
and gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman that's not only unfair
characterization that's the only
reason why I brought it forward.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
About four weeks little over
four weeks to the beginning of
the session we'll stay here and
took an oath and one of those
questioning provided towards.
Commitment to the oaths that we
take thank you Mr speaker so
rather than question they're
both I will I'm gonna quote
something that is out of the
The first amendment in the
constitution of the United
States of America.
Which we pledge allegiance to
exercise thereof.
The second part of this.
Is actually were at the a lot of
the debate on on the set the
Say things.
In their system but specifically
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The first amendment says that
that we will not.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
Does it say anywhere in that
first amendment.
Unless.
Their public dollars associated
Under the current.
Protections of civil rights in
New Mexico our current law.
Is how it is in relation to the
free exercise of religion.
With.
The.
Bills that we are debating here.
Of the free practice of
religion.
Is that Mr speaker and
gentleman.
What you're trying to amend.
Selfishly.
Programs in my community.
That exists today.
Either continue providing these
services.
For.
Change their their hiring
practices the respective to
their.
July's.
State funds utilize our own
funds to help those in need in
communities that are doing
exactly what's happening in
Roswell New Mexico today.
Mr speaker and gentleman at how
many.
ministries has a food program
the community kitchen run out of
St Peter's Catholic Church is
the other
is the other food kitchen in our
Are you going to the food
kitchen Mr speaker and gentleman
or or are are you saying
selfishly on behalf of your
community.
have those programs in one or
more of our communities that we
represent and I would hate to
see us pass a law.
That is going to discourage.
Those.
Religious organizations to a
test.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I that is a reality.
That all across the state
continue providing those
services if they can if they
discontinue pride providing the
services which is it's called
benevolence for reason it's at
cost.
Well Mr speaker and gentleman
all all the answer requests like
this certainly the people who
will no longer have those
to go out and do good as you
already pointed out to do things
to meet the needs of those that
we come in contact with and if
give you the Representative
Scott briefly mentioned.
A
A ruling.
But that wasn't a religious
organization that was just a
private.
bill include an exemption.
The of conscience for.
For individuals who have a
business.
but I don't believe it goes far
enough because the one thing
that's not been mentioned yet in
this debate is that we're
amending in.
With this bill.
a business who now will be faced
with a potentially providing
allowing.
Biological folks of one gender
into their bathrooms with.
But we have not even addressed
the great expansion that
potential cost in liability to.
Private companies private
will cover I will be supporting
your amendment.
To.
Maintain.
The status quo which allows.
Cibola McKinley Representative
Alcon on the amendment thank you
Mr speaker I'm glad you finally
some jobs as far corner.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
I have built is into this
building for and other
committees.
And
is to add government agencies
government agencies as of one of
those who can not discriminate
against a person.
For purpose we do believe that
we read this bill that we looked
at it would you agree that's the
purpose of the bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
looks to me like there's too
to define what a public
contractor of a political
subdivision is of my correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman in the
This and additional whatever it
may.
Is doing their own thing and
they're not accepting in the
In that case.
Thank you just introduce.
Percent of the cost into a
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That person becomes a.
you're saying that because it
falls under the words.
Now we can not attend
As the bill is presented.
A religious organization who
accepts money from the
government would be a public
contractors and they would then
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman expect the better than
I could basically use.
the religious and the team has
to follow the rules just like
If they are going to government
money provide a service.
Under a contract with the
government of the government.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
They will either have to.
Agree not to discriminate
anywhere within that
organization.
put them in should this bill
pass in its current form.
And that is exactly what coming
from the gentleman from Chavis
Mr speaker
Nobody has to get out of what to
do the minute they become a
contractor the total different
money to find a contract.
I'm sorry Mr Stewart gentleman
from Chavis I'm a discussion on
the amendment because.
If there is further debate on
the amendment the gentleman from
Chavis Eddie in the reserve
Mason.
Yes Mr speaker.
following all this but basically
your amendment will.
Thank the religious part back to
status quo what the.
The statute says today right.
the services are currently
providing they can continue to
to provide without having to
worry about being put to the
profit religious organizations
go through some public money
today.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I I do not have any first hand
information on on what happens I
departments to engage in some of
benevolent Tivity but the the
process would probably be very
based on the the type of
By the organization that would I
would suppose.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
suppose to.
The state.
Control of funding from that
organization.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
I would hope so.
While.
Why this isn't good as status
quo if I break the law today.
I think the status quo.
Is good I have over side.
Invited to table that
discriminate today.
was approved for the last
several years.
Adequate.
Thoughts of services are
rendered.
Different state that I would
will the gentleman from Chavis
skilled Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Chavis said
in a terrible.
this body or person that I know
are free cope with that would.
Would not say.
That the.
Take great precedent not only in
our history but in our daily
lives would you agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
agree I think that's why our
country was founded.
There have been different.
Organizations different people
Continue to respect including.
Ourselves is that correct.
I don't think that we can forget
when we.
Opened up in reader
constitution.
We.
And and and look for guidance
but what.
Everyone.
Should.
That.
religious organization is
paramount and it should have
standing.
Equitably.
not be discounted and that's
what your amendment does it
gives them.
Equitable funding.
heritage and so for that reason.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'll
stand and support today and
every day that a religious.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
yield to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo county.
the front office.
The
Mr speaker and gentle lady the.
receives money.
Then they can not engage in
discriminatory discriminatory
practices anywhere within the
organization.
takes those jobs within that
organization the people who are
going to be doing the the some
of the work of that organization
Mr speaker and gentleman so
you're suggesting that.
This statute is going to if they
if the Catholic Church for
example was to take public money
could to to be and none and a
woman could to to be a priest
and that that's what we're
opening that kind of into that
that kind of.
bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
why I want to make sure it's
clear that were exempting
religious organization so the
anything else and and that is
the the concern I I don't know
about your specific example but
that is a concern is that this
is much broader than the
it applies to the entire.
Process as I understand it
including the provision of
services and for that reason I
can't support your amendment.
The motion to table the
amendment roll call has been
requested and granted.
On a motion to table house floor
The vote is now open.
Was about to close.
What is one of forty three in
the affirmative twenty two in
the negative house floor
requested by a half the caucus
that coats be allowed to be
removed that is granted I'm
gonna check the thermostat in
here.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
appreciate your indulgence and
and the this debate I have
state can continue to.
Get those services provided
although I think the service
providers are going to be
impacted by this legislation in
many communities and I'm
Thank you Mr speaker that's part
of the young lady.
language especially I caught up
with my special ed students the
war that is now in police seize
more inclusive I pulled the look
forward to hear something like
These bills many things came to
my mind
in my personal experience people
that I know one that one that
one story that somebody share
road trip on a stop in a little
town and you can house one forty
seven the general season like
me.
was assigned state and New
Mexicans on out here.
dating at the stop of course
there the when the noted area
them doctors on your system
people tell you medical you know
out of them but he peels and I
stories reflecting what I have
gone through I've been denied
services for how I look how I
sound eighteen these public
institutions academic
I was thinking how these bills
who help people who sounds on
looks like me what also elected
Gentility good question question
where the sponsor and probably
for the for the rookies
especially those of you who are
in the front row and you're
of us I know it's tricky and
made that mistake many times
myself but that would be the
appropriate decorum Mr speaker
thank you I am I'm glad I did a
gentle lady Mr speaker I am.
I know your story I recognize
your story I have lived your
story in your friend's story and
it's unconscionable to me that
speaker and gentle lady it will
ensure that any.
Entity that receives public
funding including a school Mr
speaker or university cannot
detailed in the protected
classes here Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker that that
lady I follow up question quite
a we need to have all those
lived in a world in which
everyone believed everybody was
equal but that is the of the
unfortunate and said true that
that's not the case protected
classes are protected for a
reason it is because they have
historically and continue to
Thank you thank you Mr speaker.
There is a debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
And at the end of the day there
is going to be people that will
continue to be meeting.
Cool and discriminate against
others.
affect us as much as what we do
in the walls of our own home and
how we're taught.
I would encourage this body to
do everything we can to support
families and to teach our
children and our grandchildren
million dollars Representative
Sanchez thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from all those counties
including my own.
whether they're your neighbor to
your family.
anyone
strangers to the fact that you
can as much as possible.
But I just want to say that
family members and their
neighbors
I just want to say that thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen there is for
the debate the gentleman from
Lee Representative Scott.
Mr speaker I will always yield
to my friends Mr speaker okay
page fourteen programs.
Their practices.
Of rules.
entity you cannot discriminate
against a protected class but
it we're not asking the public
contractor who's receiving
public money to do something
Gentlelady to pressure to.
Let's talk for about a.
Won't contract to do
For between rules for one full.
A young woman
question would be contractor.
To to
for that service.
Mr speaker gentle lady
absolutes.
The qualification allowed in
Mr speaker and gentleman
I want to retract my previous
statement that's okay what I've
learned is that it depends it
depends on what that person can
do the job that set him so I'm
This program seems to state
unequivocally.
For discrimination can be
Mr speaker gentleman that that
isn't true.
We're trying to scrub the body
Mr speaker German unemployment.
contractors providing services
to the state of New Mexico and
Rose.
It certainly does seem like it
will deploy.
hiring practices from the
services.
The public contractor does.
A governmental entity entity or
public contractor cannot refuse
or otherwise limit.
What the conditions on services
to a person.
able to go to work for the
state.
Mr speaker and gentleman
employment is in the existing
Confused.
I can certainly envision
interpretations.
and the representative Gallegos.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady please yield Mister
I want to talk to a little bit
about what I do.
In life when I'm not here with
you fine folks I advocate for
kids in foster care and I think
are struggling in the kids I
would happen to work with are
struggling and so
just giving them a level playing
field.
internalize a little bit and so
I think that that this bill
really has done some of that
conscious thinking for us and so
grants I applied for contracts
and
So what I am hearing you say.
Is.
That.
So what I'm also hearing you say
Mr speaker and find and gentle
lady is that we should protect
our most vulnerable New
Mexicans.
Mr speaker gentle lady
We've seen so much anti NMSA
these the letters slowly because
I if I slam I I get to get going
too fast L. G. B. T. Q..
rhetoric has it's almost like a
group mentality at times that
puts people in danger would you
agree to it that that's been
across our country unfortunately
the on New Mexicans should feel
safe in their communities and I
think that this bill helps us to
prioritize and make sure that
hundred percent.
And Mr speaker
and so.
Gentlelady would you also agree
that the LGBTQ community should
what I want to say is for all
those reasons are there is a the
reason I will vote for your bill
today so thank you so much Mr
speaker and provide gentle lady.
There is for the debate the
distance of my voice Montoya and
Martinez are on the list.
The lady from earlier was of
Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so.
as I was listening to the
debate.
it occurred to me that I'm not
Of questions that I was
interested in talking to about.
To make sure that I understood
So Mr speaker gentle lady
As a business owner.
people with respect and not
discriminate.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
you are required to do that
that's public accommodation.
If I were to become a contractor
for the government let's say
that
But if I were to contract with
the government would.
With this bill change my
obligations.
hiring more people that is
fantastic
Mr speaker gentle lady I I want
to get a little bit more clarity
on the question that you asked
contractor you talking about the
state contract.
Hello to questions that thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady those work quite a few
questions but I'll just answer
Prohibit you from discriminating
if you have a public contract
which is Mr speaker tax dollars
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady in addition to being
a business owner.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
you know twelve thirteen
fourteen.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes in
Mr speaker gentle lady I am I
have one between.
In another city between.
Excellent thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady
has impacted your view and
motivated you in this regard.
Mr speaker gentle lady
this piece of legislation
particularly because we're
having these conversations
pretty regularly at home
a couple months ago my daughter
binary then they told me about
their friends Lauer and other
friends of school and how
important it was for us for me
to
gentle lady
I would sort of also agree that
being a mother of a twelve year
old and a fourteen year old it
was particularly aware of the
challenges that some individuals
face with regard to sexual
orientation or gender identity.
But
Soccer practice I'm having a
very part of our conversation
with my daughter about
sexual orientation and gender
gentle lady and that you know
thirty years ago but times have
changed and Mr speaker gentle
lady I I certainly think that.
it's important that.
impacts that we know
discrimination can have.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
very much appreciate that you
have brought this bill forward I
Mr speaker the gentle lady.
Could you.
I'm going to sort of veer off
here a little bit maybe in the
specifically when it comes to
eradicating discrimination.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
So I.
This is what I hope with this
legislation I I all I want is
for us to.
The dollars that I earned that
are paid to the government in
taxes I don't want those tax
dollars to be used to
They can do the business of the
state are public contractors can
provide the services that they
provide to fill those gaps that
that state government local
government can't can't
sexual orientation gender gender
identity pregnancy all that
protected classes are listed
here that that is what the
intention of this legislation is
Why
why is it important that we.
Make sure that these protections
are put into law.
Right now a the students.
Can face discrimination.
that's one that's one reason why
it's it's important right now Mr
speaker gentle lady there are
clear and trans homeless use the
they are and who they love
that cannot happen that is why
we are doing this bill there are
real life situations right now
anything about it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
All of this sort of brings me
back to
right not just mothers but
mothers fathers grandparents
and how we want to protect our
children from.
Some days I wake up and think
about how different
the community and society is
Discrimination still exists
it may have
been targeted at at other people
and become the adults that
they're going to be
Choose what you know direction
in life they want to take if
they're going to be engineers
lovely but as my husband
described as psychedelic
So maybe we will go for a career
important that we work together.
To protect.
And for me especially the
children
that they do not.
Does this does your bill find.
the subdivisions but what are
those remedies that we will be
able to see.
a great opera singer I know she
is so this is the.
This is how it works if the
child's experiences
Can take that case you know long
with their or their parents or
their kicker caregivers to the
Human Rights Commission and the
Human Rights Commission will
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Thank you and some of these
use if you could be a little bit
more specific that would be
helpful.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
in terms of
a path to that sort of the
federal court system on the
basis of race age religion
And sexual orientation Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
At times like this I I really do
some of you may remember Mr
speaker gentle lady my
performance from two years ago
with my first son
Talking about what why this
bill.
This is in line with our values
here in New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle lady this bill
is that the original.
Incarnation of this bill was in
because we neglected at that
time to include public
contractors and political
subdivisions as part of this
believe.
And what they want which is to
protect.
Folks who come from these put
protected classes.
discussions is.
Not.
Not being able to sort of the
have shaped my beliefs and why
this bill might be particularly
important to me.
but.
I also my experiences Mr speaker
Could you share with us.
Why it matters for New Mexico to
urgency or or added
Is that city.
Mr speaker gentle lady
there are.
so that's one reason secondly Mr
speaker gentle lady there are
over three hundred pieces of
legislation all around the
country right now we talked a
little bit about that in the
stigma ties.
Children and adults who were who
the defined themselves as LGBTQ
I a plus and that is why the it
message to our young people and
the older ones as well.
It's important that we that
people they're people with
rights.
close my my questions to you
with
My appreciation actually for
you and your co sponsors for
respect for for people and our
friends and family and our
neighbors and how we can work to
We have one of those.
Debate for more than three hours
I moved to close debate it's
been a motion to close of maybe
all those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
bill two zero seven as amended
do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill two zero seven as amended
the vote is now open.
gentleman from Chavis Eddy and
Lea Representative Mason are you
ready on item number twenty two.
Mr speaker I'm reading within
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker.
I'm bringing this forward in
support of the New Mexico's
future farmers of America.
approximately a hundred and
thirteen instructors of the
first page of farmers the more
than five thousand members in
the state of New Mexico.
The.
logo's specified in section.
Sixty six dash through the phone
twenty four.
The.
Response to some of the earlier
debates on license plates in
this house I like to say that
this bill.
These are different.
And the.
I also like the.
Tolman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker I have
are just have bill this pandemic
yield so.
Mr speaker I think I'm downright
unrecognizable at this point.
Mr speaker and gentleman does
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker the first one it's
one right at the committee.
There is no.
And as we all want.
The.
No.
I now move house.
Bill number.
Three sixty amended now pass.
I submit that this.
A little more right on the board
please.
in the affirmative three in the
negative house bill three sixty
as far as amended has only
passes house regulations thank
you.
Shouldn't pass from the
unanimous consent.
Thanks.
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker House Bill five twelve
board of finance and this
legislation removes out for the
counties see no debate the
gentleman close.
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill five twelve the vote
is now open.
Who is one of sixty seven in the
affirmative zero in the
negative.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Thank you Mr speaker house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at three
forty five in room three zero
seven thanks a there was a note.
J. lady from McKinley at some
zero five thank you members take
note don't party too hard.
The lady from earlier symptoms
and thank you Mr speaker just a
reminder that the house health
and Human Services Committee
UN thank you Mr speaker house
commerce will meet at three
forty five members agree
seventeen members signal agility
from Los Alamos thank you Mr
speaker your house judiciary
committee will meet at three
Learning.
So you give people the committee
committee from Santa Fe.
hundreds Bill part party let me
see if I can get a growing.
Thank you Mr speaker so tonight
is the hundred bill party six
thirty to eleven we are
have days off doesn't get any
you know sick time all that we
keep working and the staff keeps
working day and night night and
they have tickets if anyone
hasn't gotten tickets staffing
hear me come and see me we'll
get you all of that but
tonight's about celebrating so
please everyone join us in
Do we know if he is this issues
are on.
It is according
surgeon at arm's interventions
over tonight.
when attorneys twelve or one PM
thousand come to order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon Senators
location it is so ordered.
business committee if there's a
reduction it is ordered.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Leo.
Sen objection the house was
stand in recess until two PM
tomorrow happy Friday happy
committees and joint under their
own party.
