Okay please a clerk to call the
roll.
To.
Representative on in our new as
it.
Representative block present.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little here.
Representative Rehm here.
Representative Zamora your.
Vice chair Figueroa here.
Madam chair Johnson here.
And Chasey is excuse we have.
Already we have a quorum and I
want to welcome everyone to our
committee meeting today and
we're going to move house bill
two seventeen and here it after
this a house bill two oh one and
house bill two oh seven will be
heard after house bill two
seventeen.
And up for colleagues please
don't forget to turn your mikes
on we're in a different
committee in committee room with
that Representative Garcia thank
you madam chair.
The committee I'd like to
introduce on my right of
superintendent for more of the
political he'll on my left is
analyst vendor Anderson.
And before we start Madam chair
on a hopeful one we do have an
amendment to it.
If you would like me to read the
amendment.
We have the number and pass it
up.
Okay so we are going to this
number okay read your amendment
number the amendment numbers
point to two point two to two
point one okay so will make a
motion to discuss the amendment
do we have any opposition.
Seeing none go head.
Thank you madam chair of the
purpose of health government
election in Affairs building
tool one on page one line
fourteen after the COVID Sir
private investigators.
And after.
A couple of the word.
Can't see accountancy and Sir
real estate appraisers on page
three between nine eleven and
twelve Mr to follow these new
section section five section
sixteen that's twenty seven B.
thirty six mix NMSA nineteen
seventy eight beginning of the
two thousand seven chapter
fifteen section thirty five as
amended is amended to read sixty
one the twenty seven B. dash
thirty six termination of eighty
two budget debate repealed.
The private investigator
advisory board Mr chairman and
why one twenty twenty nine
percent the Sunset Act the board
will continue to operate
according to provisions and
other private investigations
until July one twenty thirty
effective July one.
Madam chair dream on page three
between eight twenty and twenty
one sure to follow the section
section seven sixty one dash
thirty dash twenty four NMSA in
M. as a I've been seventy eight
begin involve nineteen ninety
three chapter two sixty nine
section twenty one is amended
is amended to read termination
of HSD.
Very few.
Real estate appraisers board to
terminate effective July one
twenty twenty nine the rules do
appreciate at shall continue.
In effect until July one twenty
thirty chapter sixty one article
thirty New Mexico NMSA thank you
seventy is replaced by effective
date July one twenty there.
What happened here madam chair
on the original bill.
The bid on when they drafted the
bill rate without these two
agencies that's where we put the
men and women and to put them
back in place.
Thank you Representative.
Do we have a motion to adopt
amendment any discussion on the
amendment Representative ring.
With.
Okay all right we have a motion
to adopt your amendment and
second.
No opposition.
And you have an amended bill
Representative thank you madam
chair on house bill tool one as
amended.
we need a professional licensure
board extending the termination
date of legislative aboard for
dental health care veterinary
medicine architects professional
engineers and professional
survey of public accountability
and funeral services eliminating
the termination date.
Of the Legislature board and a
COVID pre for.
That pre pharmacy acupuncture
oriental medicine.
Amending the yield on the New
Mexico NMSA nineteen seventy
eight madam chair I have on my
expertise the mobile one million
on.
Lou thank you thank you chair
and thank you Representative for
carrying this very important
piece of legislation this is
something that we have to do on
a regular basis is to renew
boards and commissions so that
they can extend their sunset
date the legislative finance
committee heard from each of
these boards that are listed
here as well as the ones that
we've just added in to the
amendment and maybe that really
important decision to let the
medical boards that were
mentioned joining with the
medical board and the nursing
board and not having a repeal
date it's pretty clear that
we're not going to repeal for
let those boards sunset at any
given time and so to have to
keep coming back to the
legislature every six years to
talk about are we going to
continue having optometrists are
we going to continue having
pharmacists the answer is always
going to be yes and the the
original goal for sunsetting was
that the legislature could then
look at those packs and see
whether there was any updates
that needed to happen but
because there are so many boards
that happen at the same time
it's nearly impossible to do
that I'm working with
Representative ring right now to
update the P. I. board we're
doing some of the top find free
updates but typically that
doesn't happen what does happen
is every year those groups come
up here and they the lobby the
legislature to make amendments
to those acts on a regular basis
and so for these particular
point it really is not necessary
for us to reconsider sensitive
them every year so I'm hoping
that
if you have any questions I'm
happy to answer.
Madam chair will stand for
questions.
As.
Good to see thank you.
Yes.
Okay go to the audience
And supported.
My name is Dr Robert James B.
both from a doctor or in
medicine here in New Mexico.
Member of the New Mexico citing
that contradiction medicine
which is a professional
organization I'm also the
department commander of the
military order of the Purple
Heart veterans service
organization similar to the VFW
but you must've been wounded in
combat to be a member of the
organization so I run the
organization for the entirety of
the state I'm also their
national surgeon so I advocate
on behalf of veterans related
health care
well I guess to more than one
legislative body.
This that.
As a doctor we Medicine it's
clear that this legislation is
pretty important to me
personally just in terms of my
own life.
But New Mexico is the state in
which we finish last in many
many things.
When it comes to acupuncture in
the end that's one of the health
care.
We outpaced every other nation
in the I'm sure well actually
every nation world except China
has a state we do so we're first
place in the entire United
States we're forty five years
ahead of every single one of our
competitors in this country.
We are able to provide very
important health care.
to the the people of the state
at an affordable rate and we are
closing the gap.
On the access to health care for
the constituent your
constituents and and my brothers
and sisters that live in the
state.
The thirty percent of other and
to get their health care at VA
the rest of Medicare and
Medicaid.
Threats to our profession end up
sending some acupuncturists to
other states to practice because
they're not going to risk their
ability to practice in the state
after seven years so this
current legislation from a from
a personal perspective is is
quite important to me in terms
of the the
people that I represent
you keeping them jobs you're
keeping them access to their
health care without the threat
of having their their doctor no
longer be able to provide that
care after him instead of years
so I'm do I really urge you to
to
Tell the members the floor to to
pass this bill if you don't come
probably gonna come to take your
job.
Madam chair and under the
members of the committee my name
is Abbas Akhil I would licensed
professional engineer in the
state and today I'm here to
speak in support of the W. two
or one I'm a board member of the
New Mexico society of
professional engineers and on
their behalf and on behalf of
the two thousand or so licensed
engineers in the state I want to
be the state that the design
buildings bridges roads pretty
much all the infrastructure that
you use every day and we put our
name on the license number on it
to certify that the needs of the
local codes standards and it is
C. for the public to use the
licensing agency which gives us
this part is the New Mexico
border of licensure for
professions yes online service
which is the subject of the
people want to date so I'm
speaking in support of that and
I want to be debate the
statement from my The New Mexico
site you professionally juniors
The New Mexico society of
professional engineers with over
three hundred active members
supports the state board of
licensure for professions and
juniors professional service and
Furthermore we support house
bill two zero one would expand
the sunset funded for five to
July one twenty two.
So with that I urge you to do it
to pass on this bill and
hopefully with the of the house
and the statement licensed to
practice in the state thank you
so much madam chair and members
of the committee thank you.
Please.
Hi good morning good afternoon
madam chair and committee
members like I want my name is
Argha Felix I am licensed
architect in the state of New
Mexico and I'm representing both
myself in the American institute
of architects which is about
five hundred members in the
state and other over seven
hundred licensed architects in
the state of New Mexico we urge
also to pass on this bill
similar to what my colleague
said we are in charge of the
whole sixty life of welfare of
people in the state of the
building for you occupied I
noticed that your business is
important we can do better.
part part of our whole job is
actually working to make sure
that our constituents and our
citizens remain safe so I urge
to pass.
there's supporting fund.
Seeing them less than what fans.
Johnson.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members at and Jessica
Johnson chief government affairs
officer for animal protection
voters and and we also urge I do
pass on the bill and
specifically support extending
the termination date of the New
Mexico board of veterinary
medicine
the that board serves a critical
role in our state's animal
welfare infrastructure not only
by promoting and regulating
veterinary medicine but also by
developing and administrating
the a statewide to spay neuter
funding assistance program and
providing valuable consultation
to stakeholders on a wide range
of animal welfare issues as well
as promulgating rules related to
animal shelter infrastructure
and care standards.
The specially since as the new
executive director William
Durant took the helm the board
has really stepped up its
mission required efforts to be a
resource in providing assistance
and disseminating current
information affecting the the
public and licensees and
applicants and so and we just
truly appreciate the director
Duran's leadership and the
valuable contributions of of
that board members and the
animal sheltering Committee
which operates under that that
board thank you so much.
Okay.
It was a.
Madam chair
madam chair excuse me if I may I
apologize Michael Sanchez that
in and ideas and I not see Ms to
Representative the two point I
thank you for that.
Representative.
Thank you.
Apologize for untruth.
Thank
you.
The the the the stuff.
I apologize for the chair.
fairer Representative of course
not in the late.
The.
Madam chair in presenters
How often is this bill come up.
Madam chair I think it be five
years correct is five years and
and the board and
Commission to have if they don't
renew the have one here before
legal way to to the actually six
years from the date but it's a
fight every five years and madam
chair presenter is the are there
gonna be any changes made to any
of the sports
in this session.
The settlement childhood by
expert ensure that there might
be some changes you can explain
thank you thank thank you madam
chair Representative I am aware
of to changes that are being
made of very purposefully one is
to make some amendments as I
mentioned Representative free
agency helping me with to the PI
board to do some cleanup work to
add some responsibilities so
that bill is Representative
remote remember remember it
slipped my mind right now and
the other one is a dietary the
LFC was very supportive of
moving the podiatry board
there's a hundred and forty
seven licensees over to the
medical board it's taken me a
little bit of time to work with
both of those bodies to get some
agreement on what that would
look like and we're making an
amendment to Representative
Matthews podiatry changes and
that I believe is being heard on
Wednesday and madam chair.
The expert witness on some on
the.
That has to be done with the
legislature refuses and stuff.
Thank you that's all my
questions and.
Often the.
However
Thanks
for.
Was also part of this
legislation that it should not
be undecided so at this time and
I would like to offer an
amendment to include the dental
for in this legislation and
respond.
Madam chair to repeal the dental
board what you would have to do
is eliminate section one and
then on on page four line for
you with that in afters after
sixty one to eighteen you would
add in six one dash five A. F.
thirty and then down where it
has the building laws of I
haven't figured that part out
you'd have to lift it from page
one one twenty one and twenty
two and put in the order that it
would be an.
Yes ma'am it is different.
Madam chair for.
So.
Yes yes.
Yes ma'am.
So you reviewed it right now.
I would just master to.
As to what exactly what needs to
be actually probably work with
their committees committee
report thank you.
That.
Addition to.
Those who
have.
Representative.
Sure we have some to a.
As amended as of.
The.
Thank you madam chair all thanks
for the.
Thank you.
This is.
All
of.
She's.
Thank you for singing.
Yes good.
The morning or afternoon.
Good afternoon.
Madam chair members of the
committee I hope you're doing
well this afternoon
my colleague Representative
Christine are yes and I are
bringing house bill two
seventeen which is relating to
elections allowing persons that
are sixteen and seventeen years
of age to be qualified electors
is that simple and but I'd like
to do is ask my.
Colleague and co sponsor to say
a few words as well thank you
madam chair members of the
committee on the brief because
I'll be here for a long time for
the next bill
I'd I was into classes before
the session began inTaos yes
Academy and it has high school
and I asked the question if.
You all in the room their
sixteen year old seventy rules
if you felt like you had the
right to vote and unequivocally
they all raised their hands and
said yes absolutely we work.
We pay taxes we know about the
issues and then they said some
really bad things about adults
make choices on their behalf and
it really it really hit me.
I believe them I believe there
civically engaged I believe that
they're working that they are
doing the right thing and that
there sometimes even better
informed than we are are are
amazing college Representative
Chasey told me last year.
That you want to make voting a
habit we want to make it chronic
not the chronic but we want to
make it chronic.
We want our young people to keep
voting every single year we have
to instill those values from the
very beginning.
That's why I support this bill
and and madam chair members of
the committee
I would like to introduce my
expert witness her name is Layla
Satan and she'll be helping
answer or respond to any
questions that you may have and
we now stand for questions thank
you.
Flexibility on this.
It's.
Okay
let's go ahead and.
Legislative.
Many members of my name is may
consider I am twenty years
twenty one years old and
currently work as a community
organizer with the quality New
Mexico I'm happy here to testify
on behalf of the sixteen and
seventeen year old Boko as I
believe that these young folks
in New Mexico if the right to
fill democratically
represented the government to
after all young people around
the state are already leading
men's advocating for minority
rights working jobs well.
They are personally affected
every day by the policies are.
All the way up to the right.
Especially under queer and trans
students who consistently have
to hear their own lives in
person I debated in rooms where
they aren't even allowed to
voice their because they are in
under any constituency that has
to listen to.
The reason why I fully support
house bill two seventeen and
urged the committee to thank you
so.
Good afternoon members.
Thank.
I very recently turned eighteen
but I would have loved to have
been able to vote for this year
as you all know voting is how we
participate in democracy and
especially in New Mexico young
people make up so much of our
community passing HB to
seventeen will allow more voices
to be heard in local government
and those were excited about
sitting again will be the one to
decide to vote and make a change
the process so thank you thank
you.
Good afternoon chairperson and
members of the committee I'm
Christine Armstrong prophylactic
non binary person along with the
director of advocacy at the
transgender resource center of
New Mexico.
I'm here in support of house
bill two thousand.
By lowering the voting age we
actively take a stand to protect
our O. W. P. Q. with the school
system where you are watching
their systems berated by school
boards.
France.
Regularly that name is the
standard in the classroom.
The committee organized the
sentiment will away from the
state for the school board
meetings.
As reported by the Trevor
project transgendered off by
their youth attempts suicide
less about half their programs
are effective which is a welcome
reprieve noted that fans youth
attempts suicide four times the
rate of their sister peers for
the twenty nineteen with with
two separate.
Reserves eighteen dollars
official speaking on their
behalf not to mention many have
already proved everywhere.
Okay today's.
If.
Members of the committee.
Go to Mexico.
Strong support of this
legislation young people are
already engaged in and the fact
that I sentence that are made by
the for for governments and
other bodies but don't get to
have a say in who makes these
decisions we know across the
country and especially here in
New Mexico people are already
fighting at the forefront of
every movement that works to
support New Mexico families
giving access to the ballot to
sixteen and seventeen year old
the another way that young
people are able to fight.
For us and all of those yes
thank you.
Chair members of the committee
have scientists and the public
co director bill futures if they
women of color LED see what
organizations I'm also the proud
mother of four kids two boys two
girls and two of them just
turned eighteen we had the
privilege and honor to take you
to vote for the first time in
Los crucis one thing that we did
hear from them especially during
some issues that were coming up
at the Los crucis school board
was about us without if they
were making decisions about
that.
In.
Without them having the
opportunity to have their vote
for the person Representative on
screen.
Yes thank.
Okay comments according to.
Yes.
Well this.
good afternoon Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is a lease deal and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty NCLT
and transform education New
Mexico state in full support of
this bill because it centers the
voices of young people and
particularly when it comes to
creating the equitable learning
environment that our students
deserve like the last commenter
said are we really believe that
as experts in their own
education I student voice should
be at the table and improving
the learning that happens in our
schools and many other species
as well so for these reasons and
the others can hear today we
urge you to support this bill
thank you.
We have we don't.
Senator.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is because of a policy director
les me food center and rolled on
Ana County we support to
seventeen HB two seventeen
because we work in school
gardens throughout southern New
Mexico we have summer camps
community of programs and youth
partnership program on our farm
we witness every day our
ensemble and thoughtful young
people are and we know they
deserve to participate in the
systems turning their future I
also know from personal
experience like many teenagers
growing up in low income
families I began working at
sixteen and it was discouraging
to be prohibited from voting for
anyone to represent me many
sixteen year old already have
jobs pay taxes contribute to
their families economic
stability and take seriously
their responsibility to care for
each other and build a brighter
future for New Mexico this is a
non partisan bill expands voting
access to people of all
political parties and ideologies
we trust and value Mexicans
enough to know the more people
voting to better healthy
democracy is an inclusive one
with high participation please
give H. B. two seventeen it to
pass thank you.
The.
That party.
I'm my name is Brittany hardy
madam chair and members of the
community I am here from
animator pro I would like to
voice my opinion and my support
for H. P. to seventeen for
sixteen seventeen year old
electors I have worked in many
APS schools I'm also a mother of
a sixteen year old who is
working at cemex he dropped he's
learning to drive and pays taxes
we also just open up a bank
account and I know that him and
his friends are ready to go out
and vote and I think it's only
right to open up this
opportunity for our young people
to vote
And
Just give them the opportunity
to also what was school boards
which determines the future so
thank you madam chair committee
members I support this bill
thank you.
The.
Yes hello thank you for taking
our call
but.
I'm I'm on my wife's phone I
like to voice my opposition to
this bill
the reality is young people at
the age of sixteen have not
experienced any part of life
most of them the vast majority
are still living at all you know
I understand intrinsically you
know how they feel as when I was
a young man you know I was
working actually is from the
time that I was fourteen years
old and I was out of the home at
seventeen years old but I can
pretty much tell you that I
didn't have a clue as to what
life brought and the and the
weighty of decisions that had to
be made you know even as an
adult.
You know it requires that we
actually research and look into
what people stand for and not
taking them at their face value
look back in the past at all
think young people of fortune at
the age of sixteen are you able
to do this not even at eighteen
I understand exactly where they
come from but that's what their
parents are for is to advocate
for them and to advocate for the
things that help them and they
can start the process of being
involved by researching and
presenting good arguments to
their parents first of all.
We are now hearing comments in
support of the bill.
I
agree.
Hello good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is on GPO Gee I serve in
the capacity as vice chair of
the native Americans impact
parts of Mexico we represent all
twenty three sovereign nations
and we like to stand in strong
support of house bill two
seventeen I also and and social
studies teacher an as tech
schools and I can tell you that
even at the age of fourteen an
eighth grade
they are there are a lot of
civic minded students that are
highly intelligent and you know
make my heart soar on a daily
basis when we are talking about
bills that are going to the
legislative session I'm able to
hear their arguments about why
or why not they supported bill
and so for those reasons and for
all of the reasons that person
standing in support of this bill
I ask use for a to pass
respectfully thank you.
Good afternoon chair and members
of the committee my name is
miles of deputy director of Ole
and the staff that will support
and I personally can't stand in
support of this bell
I think back to nineteen seventy
one when the voting interests
change from twenty one to
eighteen.
What they said to be able to
change that law despite what
what both unpopular was that if
people are old enough to be
drafted old enough to die there
also was enough to.
We think the same thank if that
at sixteen young people are
facing incredible social
pressures
from gun violence two decisions
about their identity at our.
That are.
Pilots as well so I hope that
you recommend and I do not you
need to seven.
All I also like to really
quickly operate up the
unintended consequences that we
stayed up globally and that
lowering the voting age to
sixteen actually makes Ahrendts
bowed out well and.
Some folks on the webcast we are
hearing comments in support of
the bill before we go to
opposition please make your
comments in one minute thank
you.
JD Matthew.
Hi madam chair and members of
the committee G. Matthews I'm
with the New Mexico working
families party it's good to see
you on the bigger committee room
today
I am here in support of HB two
seventeen
I agree with of much of what's
been said about about support
for the bill already I think to
finish a thought that I think
miles was trying to make younger
people voting in a household can
have a reverse effect in getting
the adults in the household to
be more active in voting as well
when they work before and so I
hope the committee will pass
this bill in a positive way
through today and have a good
rest of your Saturday.
Isabella Baker.
Thank you for money it's
thank you members at madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Isabella Baker I live in
profit New Mexico I am the co
founder of youth with as an
action with fans in strong
support of this bill today as a
group that works to empower
young people in our state and we
above all believe that you for
the solution and that they
deserve self agency and they
deserve a true voice in our
democracy and to have a state
and the people making decisions
about their everyday lives
sixteen and seventeen year olds
are held accountable to love the
created for adults every day
their paychecks are taxed they
can drive the he tried as an
adult in court in some cases and
many more.
They deserve this Friday and I
and the many other folks here in
support today believe that this
will make our democracy stronger
I'm asking the committee to
support this bill today and to
help our state leads the nation
and voting rights to include
including allowing sixteen and
seventeen year olds to them
thank you.
Access able.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is asa Chavis I am here as the
executive director of an
immediate vote urging you to
vote in support of H. B. two
seventeen as a mask input
presenting to Spirit female
during high school I had a hard
time anytime I wanted to go to
the bathroom myself and I
believe that allowing the vote
for our sixteen and seventeen
years old native transfusion
particularly really need to be
able to have this opportunity to
vote for the people that are
making the decisions that are
going to affect their everyday
lives and the treatment that
they receive within the halls of
their schools so for that and
also as an organizer who helps
to get out the vote it is often
a question that some of our
sixteen and seventeen year olds
asked as to why they're not able
to vote I've seen and hand first
in percent of folks who do want
to vote and the civic minded
sixteen and seventeen year
should have that opportunity so
for that and the reasons others
have stated I urge the committee
to please pass HB two seventy
and thank.
We.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Erin
Anthony and I'm a policy fellow
with enemy to vote and I want to
express my support for H. B. two
seventeen.
As a previous commute community
members have already articulated
I believe it is important to
extend the franchise of voting
rights to sixteen year olds so
they can have opportunities to
be more civically engaged in our
democracy and develop a trend of
participating government
elections to voice their
concerns and for those reasons I
stand strong support for H. P.
to seventeen thank you.
Johnson.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Senator Johnson a member here
at care and yet that here's the
T. today on behalf of my he's
got the state like communicating
for a voice in this process.
of our high school careers young
people grow a great deal where
increasing responsibility in
schools and homes in this
community members many of us are
working their own costs help our
families and invest in higher
education and our perspectives
are shifting from immediately
today to our concerns about the
world that we're inheriting in
our vision for if you choose in
the roles in society so that the
decisions that you on the today
literally shape our lives far
more rural she worries and what
you choose to do or not do on
issues like climate change for
example we have a life or death
my children and their children
even more so so we deserve and
are demanding a seat at the
table and short of that we at
least must have the right to
cast a vote and decide who best
represents our interests
you're all set as a steering
committee member of a very
active use and Justice
organization that works
sometimes in advocacy.
Error code DC.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Erica Davis
provide college as I was trying
to.
Did that happen.
Director of growth of director
of advocacy at growth growth
rate excuse my colleagues today
all we have been provided with
job real hard of I hate letting
you know that we are in full
support hear echoes of the Santa
Fe as well just part of the list
be as you all have been
internally sitting in committee
on legislation written by
students at demonstration of
bill that we've seen with our
wonderful students out of
academy across the state of New
Mexico from the student leaders
that we are hearing.
thank over at hillside had
everything from steamboats were
acting kindergartners ask deep
questions in our.
The elections Act what more can
we know about this person I
don't really know where they
stand and how they feel about
these things our children have
always been ready as they become
young adults let's continue to
stick them into the leaders we
know that they're capable of by
trusting them as most of them
are an indication
intergenerational
and I'm working with them we
support.
Hello.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is willing
to salon and I'm talking to
projects director transaction
and I'm here in strong support
HB to seventeen as someone who
works closely with use I get to
see every day the way the
engagement the moxie and I
believe that passing the bill
would only strengthen democracy
and provide more opportunities
the the serve that right and I
that's why I believe we should
pass HB to seventeen thank you
madam chair members the
committee.
Let's go back to the audience
for opposing comments anyone in
the audience in opposition.
Okay seeing none let's go back
to the webcast do we have
opposing comments on the webcast
please make your statement
within one minute thank you.
I have.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee on part
of better together New Mexico
grassroots organization of
thousands of people from across
the state that want the best.
For our state for election
integrity hand for the youth of
our state.
we stand in opposition to house
bill two seventeen.
Not because our sixteen and
seventeen year olds are not
impressive because clearly we
have three teenagers in the
state that are super impressive
but.
They're going through tremendous
like changes as a transition
from.
L. hood to adulthood.
Maturity is
something that they're
struggling with it's a time in
life that brings great
uncertainty and struggles in and
of itself.
This measure of actually
inclined to our mid teens
because as they are struggling
with decisions for themselves
not in a position to be making
decisions that are all for the.
I deli.
Hello my name's Mike Daley I
live in Gallup New Mexico
I'm opposed to this bill and
since hearing about it yesterday
or cold seven other adults.
And they uniformly agreed with
me that.
Children should vote and I'd
like to speak one lady so they
want to make bold and fun.
Voting is the most important
responsibility of citizens I
don't think it should be left to
children thank you.
Aaron he.
Hi I'm I'm calling to oppose
this bill first of all federal
law sets the voting age of
eighteen and our New Mexico
constitution explicitly states
the legislature is not allowed
to change the the voting that
the age so I don't know how this
this bill is legal in the first
place
that gentleman that mentioned
the drafting age being eighteen
that hasn't changed I don't see
the justification for lowering
the age something else the same
legislature believes that
children under eighteen are not
responsible enough to live in a
home unless all firearms are
locked behind locked doors yet
they think that they can make
decisions for us as you know as
a state that just doesn't make
sense also this is a Saturday
this is not a school day and
only one person under the age of
eighteen has called in to
support this bill ninety five
percent of the comments were
from people who are paid by far
leftist organizations to support
it so I don't see this group of
people calling out for this
right
in it either so that's my
comment thank you.
Yes good afternoon my install
for lan conducted a committee
are more opposed to this to
seventeen number one if you're
gonna make children the age
maturity allow them to vote at
sixteen by the way the bill
doesn't say seventeen it says
sixteen.
Thank you should also allow them
to all our arms get very
a sign contracts and the
responsible and also faces are
from rural situations not as a
juvenile but as an adult so can
I propose this thank you.
Stewart.
Yes this is merry ng I'm I'm I
would agree with them and
previously I and woman I am
another rate person just a
citizen
agree that with the contracts
and with the laws that those
those need to be changed also a
voting is to be allowed for this
age of our potential voter also
that they are of those people
are not allowed to those
children aren't allowed to sign
contracts and one thing I think
it's really important at this
point in their lives is for them
to learn civics and the election
process in schools to prepare
them to vote also that's been
lost in our schools and I think
that should be restored so that
they would be fully prepared at
the age of eighteen to to vote
responsibly and well for the
rest of society so I definitely
oppose this bill thank you very
much.
Hello of the committee members
my name is Pablo Martinez I mean
Gallup New Mexico and I'm just
gonna come out and say the real
reason why you want this bill
the passes so it'll be in the
pool of identities for our voter
rolls system Eric to use in our
lessons to match the bows of
harvest for the election thank
you.
Yes Representative.
I committee to people thank you
for allowing me to speak I am
speaking in opposition and the
reason is this I have two
grandchildren that are the age
of sixteen they are very just
beginning to learn their way
around they don't have they have
good ideas but they're not
channeled and at this point in
time those are not the people
that we want making the laws for
purely allowing them to drive by
themselves at the age of sixteen
and we don't allow them any
other rights so I think that I
agree with the gentleman I spoke
earlier if they go through their
parents to speak with their
parents and have these
discussions with their parents I
think that we will have a better
group of people as they turn
eighteen thank you for allowing
me to speak I'm in in opposite
opposition.
Very strong.
Thank you that concludes stark
opposing comments committee
members I have Representative
Zamora.
I
thank you madam chair presenters
for bringing this bill forward.
I wish I could just voted no
would be done for the.
How many fifteen year olds.
Did you hear on the call Madam
chair representative Mr okay
that Michael Sanchez
Representative someone I I
didn't hear any fifteen year
olds but.
I know the and a critically the
sixteen year olds and seventy
rules that I have spoken with
dozens of them support this idea
and feel like they're being
under represented.
Madam chair and Representative.
If this bill was to be enacted.
Would fifteen year olds and
register to vote when they're
sixteen.
Mr chairman defer to my expert
witness later.
And madam chair and
representative
six year olds would be able to
register to vote not fifteen
year olds.
Madam chair and and
Representative we've seen some
bills go through the legislature
where now they want seventeen to
be able to register so they can
vote when they're eighteen.
same day registration I guess
maybe I didn't see in your in
your I.
And your bill exactly dissected
it down that they had to become
fifteen at the day of the
voting.
what but.
I think we have to use some
common sense about some of these
bills madam chair and
representative.
Do we really want sixteen year
olds.
Legislating or voting to to for
their legislators that have to
be twenty one or what our next
push are we gonna let.
Sixteen year olds run for the
legislature if they're old
enough to vote for the
legislature I believe that they
ought to be able to legislate.
And that's a scary thought.
I have a lot of people that make
comments on this bill and a lot
of.
A lot of emails and.
It's just that and and most of
it madam chair and
representative is is they make
common sense statements is.
They they they have their
parents to advocate for them.
Do you madam chair and
representative the feel like the
parents are doing a good enough
job Mr chair I mean Madam
chairman and Representative
somewhat that has nothing to do
with that you know brain studies
have already shown that
young adults are dealing with a
lot of abstract and complex
issues it has nothing to do
whether they whether their
parents can advocate for them or
not they're at a point in time
in their personal evolution and
their growth where they feel
compelled to make their own
decisions they surely work they
surely do a lot of things that
promote self.
The guidance and support and I I
don't believe that this has
anything to do with with me
feeling that they're how the
grown ups in their lives are
doing their jobs this has
nothing to do that but madam
chair.
Madam madam chair and and
Representative that it does have
something to do with that that's
exactly what it has to do with
if if my.
Sixteen year old.
Daughter what it told me that
she wanted to be an astronaut
and flight of bars and and be
one the person first persistent
Landen Mars we support that with
the with these kids.
But that's not reality.
And the reality is that sixteen
year old children madam chair
representative are still
maturing and growing up and
that's why we didn't see fifteen
sixteen year olds on those calls
and that's why we don't see him
in this room.
Is because their mind is
somewhere else.
Madam chair representative they
want to be playing video games
they want to be hanging out with
their grandparents and their
parents and their siblings.
And sure.
Some of them aren't as
fortunate.
Maybe in some maybe just wanted
to our aggressive enough Madam
chair representative to go out
and get a job.
And some might be not fortunate
enough to but that their parents
can afford to buy in their shoes
and everything they need and
they go out and get jobs that
was me.
When I was growing up.
But I wasn't thinking that I
needed to voting changed.
The political ramifications in
my country when I was sixteen
years old and I sure don't want
this Madam chair representative
to lead.
To drafting sixteen year olds to
war.
It's bad enough madam chair
representative that the
government has pushed it and and
takes eighteen year olds to war.
Let's give them a chance to be
kids.
Let's give madam chair let's
give him a chance.
To spend time with their
families and mature in a way
that.
That lets them have that part of
their life to be kids to to
enjoy life.
Want to get.
Into legislating and and.
Directing your state your
country in a different
direction.
You're not a kid anymore and
you're taking on
responsibilities that are could
be detrimental to the state.
And madam chair there was
another comment made on on.
Online testimony.
We want our elections to be safe
and fair and legit.
And if my sixteen year old kid
gets a ballot.
Or anybody else's sixteen year
old kid I believe that the adult
is gonna have.
A lot.
Of.
What's the word I'm looking for
the that the kid is gonna vote
how the parent tells of two.
That's Madam chair
representative that's just not
right.
Influence.
Because they're going to go to
their parents and they're going
to ask him.
Who is this person how short a
vote here how should I do this I
should do that.
The pride do it madam chair and
representative as an eight year
old but at least.
We're following federal law and
and and trying to abide by the
constitution.
And now we here we have a bill
in front of us Madam chair
representative that.
Is is having children vote.
I just I just can't comprehend
that.
Madam chair representative it it
has to do with the integrity of
our elections.
It has to do with government not
supporting our family unit.
And there wasn't any kids.
Today in testimony saying I want
the right to vote and I've never
seen any kids.
Insults on social media and the
public anywhere.
This bill Madam chair
representative is about grown
ups one kids to vote.
To me I think well let him be
kids let him grow up.
Given that in their life.
And I don't I just I think we're
pushing to the limit with this
bills like this madam chair
representative with all due
respect.
It's it's.
My opinion and I I know you have
a different opinion and you see
a different side of the coin
but.
I just don't get it.
Madam chair representative
that's all the comments I have.
Representative Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much very much
madam chair I think I hope this
is on
Madam chair I I too I have to
say that for a while I struggled
with this bill as well
I felt like with everything that
I know about children being the
step mother of two gin zeros and
the formation of frontal lobe of
the rain at first I thought you
know maybe this wasn't such a
great idea
to to allow sixteen year olds
to.
Register and and become active
participants in our democracy
and then I had a pretty amazing
conversation with an advocate in
this room actually
who reminded me that a lot of
the issues that we are talking
about madam chair in this
committee in this session right
now have to do directly with the
sixteen year olds whether it's
their bodies the health care
that they're able to receive or
the gender that they're able to
affirm or this the schools are
able to attend of the material
that they're able to learn of
the schools and then it kind of
hit me madam chair members of
the committee that these exact
kids we're talking about voting
are the ones without a voice.
On all of these issues that
we're discussing and then I
thought back to my step
children.
You know I think back today
Hochman Vigil when she was
sixteen years old I don't think
there's any way that day Hochman
Vigil would have been able to
register to vote and get active
in the process and be able to
take advantage of that right but
some of these kids that I know
my step children included who
are so affected by the some of
these issues and quite frankly
madam chair and sense that they
are being denied a voice in
these issues those sixteen year
olds are exactly the ones that
we want to vote.
They're exactly the ones that
are going to educate themselves
on the issues and go through the
process and learn how to
register and and and.
At eight and educate themselves
about the people they're voting
for the issues that they're
voting about these are going to
be the the most careful and
attentive votives voters that we
can have because they are the
ones most affected.
By the issues that we are
discussing today so I stand here
in front of you madam chair
members of this committee
members of the public as someone
whose mind was completely
flipped on this issue.
Because it's not we're not
talking about sixteen year old
voters in a block.
We're not talking about any
general sixty year old we are
talking about the sixteen year
olds are affected by these
issues and are going to be
driven.
And tenacious enough to be calm.
Part of this process to be able
to vote.
And that then chair is exactly
why I will be supporting this
bill I want to thank the
sponsors of this bill and
I want to thank all of you for
your time thank you.
Representative.
No.
That.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I'm probably
the only representative who can
actually pass for sixteen or
seventeen.
No twenty six so you know I've
so my first question would be
are you also open I could
probably pass for twelve year
right Representative okay.
Thank you for that I did hear
you yes Sir.
His ears are really good share
when I'm like sixty five a look
fifty five so take but anyway do
you also support lowering in the
constitution the age to serve in
our legislature because right
now it's twenty one for house
twenty one twenty five percent
you know if you have an equal
seat at the table to vote I
would assume that you should
also have the same right to sit
in this chamber I think eighteen
year olds that convo they can't
currently serves in our
legislature so do any thoughts
on that.
In the summer and members of the
committee Representative block
at this point I'm just focusing
on this bill so I don't have a
response for you at this time.
Thank you madam chair and
representative says okay.
Sounds good well I have a few
points here so I know the there
are many parental.
Responsibilities with children
such as signing consent waivers
if they go on a field trip.
If you know right now the child
cannot sign a legal contract and
they also can be charged as an
adult but they're not a
medically charged as an adult so
do you think the opening up this
channel with sixteen year old
seventeen year olds voting could
also open up these children to
the liabilities of adulthood at
an earlier stage madam chair
representative madam chair and
members of the committee and
Representative block anything's
possible but that doesn't mean
that this is going the first of
all that's not the intent I'm
I'm assuming that if anybody you
for example madam chair would
want to move that forward that
would be a provocative as a
legislator I this isn't what
we're here to talk about at this
point.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative well I think.
In my opinion it is on that
point.
Regarding these other issues of
liability because if these
children are electors and they
are able to vote then I guess
they will be getting that
information about voting in the
mail Madam chair representative
they will hear about these crime
issues that plague our
communities so here about
abortion though hear about any
other issue that is an adult
issue they will hear about these
when they're going to vote madam
chair representative so I I
would make the case that if
we're going to treat these folks
as adults at the precinct where
they're voting I think we should
also treat them as adults in
real life Madam chair
representative as I heard from
testimony that's exactly what
they're looking for.
Madam chair I you know I have a
response that I will allow and
ask for a with all due respect
my.
Expert witness to respond to
cause some excellent response
thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative
with regards to the legal
definition of adult I think
You know we talk about signing
contracts and and things like
that but there are
other minimum ages and other
ages of major that
that are part of the legal ages
in different states
that are difference
so there are there is a working
age there's a driving age there
is a age of consent for sex for
marriage there's a drinking age
smoking age and then of course
the listing the armed forces or
something that was brought up as
well so these are all ages that
as a society we've decided
Our appropriate ages and those
have changed at different
moments and different states
have different ages so
for example consent for sex in
New Mexico is sixteen.
And I believe in Texas.
I believe in Texas and Arizona
they are difference and and
And Colorado as well
that the driving age the working
age so when you're talking about
liability
I'm working.
Thank involves liability driving
involves like the
and so I think
the the liabilities involved in
voting I think are much less
than those involved in driving
and working
I want to speak to an earlier
point that Representative Zamora
Prada.
Regarding
Developments and coming into
adulthood.
I.
Someone brought up in I think of
the teacher in the Santa Fe New
Mexican article that came out
just a few days ago that there's
nothing magical magical about
the age of eighteen nothing
magical happens on your state
for your suddenly an adult and
you suddenly have all of these
new abilities in this new
knowledge
At the time we're yeah you
suddenly have a lot of new rates
but it's but this is all a
process and this process of
becoming an adult is a time
usually and hopefully with your
family and your community and in
that time the hopefully you're
allowed to grow into that and
we're hoping that
having the ability to vote at
sixteen will help folks grow
into that civic engagements in
their communities and studies
have shown that it does and
increases but it turned out.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative well you know I
think you may have made a very
good point there you know the
process of becoming adult.
And we make changes you know
throughout high school I'm not
the same person as I was ten
years ago Madam chair
representative I'm Eckstine I
now right.
I guess I'm a time traveler
that.
But you know I I would maybe
completely different decisions I
probably would have made
different choices on the ballot
box because that life experience
it does matter Madam chair
representative and I think if
you're if there is a person
that's going to be making these
very important decisions for
everybody.
And they don't necessarily even
have a state in the game a lot
of these sixteen year olds you
know most live at home they have
never signed a paycheck they
have never paid rent before they
have never some of them have
have gone to work like myself I
start working at fifteen I think
but a lot of these life
experience things that actually
changed my mind on many policy
issues they came when I had to
work in a work place and
actually had to pay rent had to
you know get from my job to to
to home and back and so I think
that that would change a lot of
the electorates thought process
but also on the point of amount
of people voting right now
eighteen to twenty five year
olds they only come out for
elections about thirty percent
thirty one percent of them
according to recent circle of
polls that show people who get
out to vote so I don't even know
if this would encourage more
voting because folks who already
can eighteen they're not doing
it Madam to Representative what
do you have any comment on that.
Yes chair representative there
have been a couple of studies
specifically in Norway there
were there was a
Sort of a test done for the
lower the voting age and what
happened was
The sixteen and seventeen year
olds actually came out to vote
in higher numbers than the
eighteen to twenty one year olds
and the idea is that sixteen
year olds are more rooted in
their communities and their
families and so eight eighteen
year olds are more in and of
people in their lives they're
you know they're moving probably
they're changing that they're
going off to college or they're
starting a new job for enlisting
in the armed forces and so this
may not be the best time to
start habits they're probably
changing their address so that's
sort of like a and St time to be
trying to start something new
especially it's something where
you need to have an address to
you know find your precinct and
that sort of thing and so that's
a big reason why we think
sixteen is a better time to
start this habit of voting.
Madam chair representative block
and like to add to this in case
there's a curriculum the program
around young people voting
students so they start really
young they learn all about the
issues they learn some really
important things like where
they're going to vote how to
register to vote all of that
they they participate in
elections at their school in
fact in in years past they've
had they've had a sort of undue
influence on the outcome of the
vote because they were so
informed that their vote had an
influence on the the the folks
who.
Are allowed to vote there and
the adults in this because it
believes eighteen enough so that
that whole program.
Started to show that young
people Lee in their later teens
sixteen seventeen.
Well informed.
And they they wanted to vote
they couldn't wait to the moment
to do it.
Thank you the measure would be
like if we have something like
here thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and I I
certainly think that education
is important for children about
voting and I think we please
when I went to school taught
social studies and social
studies we heard about how
elections were won and he won
them in we talked about the
voting process and the whole
electoral process so you know I
I I don't think anyone's making
the case that kids should not be
able to advocate because we see
a lot of child advocates around
the capital here and they're
making a big difference and I
think they already are making an
impact however they don't even
have the right to vote as it is
Madam chair representative so I
would make the case that right
now they are actually.
We.
Moving the needle even more than
being able to vote because if we
look at the statistics going
back to who actually is voting.
I would like to see in that
Norway study you know how many
of these kids were actually
swayed by their parents well you
better you better go but with me
you know and I certainly would
not want anyone to be swaying
anyone else regarding their vote
or the lack thereof madam chair
representative so.
Going on here.
I I'm looking at studies are
about brain development and
there's a lot of peer reviewed
research out there that shows
there's this study it's in the
political studies association
their journal it's a peer
reviewed journal and it's by
scientists talk wing chan and
Matthew claim they're both PH
dis and they say that sixteen
year old and seventeen year olds
wouldn't be confident voters
because research and
neuroscience suggests that the
brain specifically the
prefrontal cortex is still
undergoing major reconstruction
and development during the
teenage years.
And adding that prefrontal
cortex is what enables us to
weigh dilemmas balanced trade
offs and in short make
reasonable decisions in politics
Madam chair representative so
I'm looking at the science here
and unfortunately I I need to
follow the science on this and I
will not be able to support this
bill because of that thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Andrea.
Thank you madam chair
Representative under this bill
would a sixteen year old be
allowed to vote in a federal
election.
Fantastic thank you so what I
heard Madam chair representative
I heard the representative of
state earlier was that the
sixteen year olds that you've
been speaking with were ones
that were already very engaged
in civic actions they have jobs
they pay taxes they are paying
some bills and they would just
like to say and how.
laws that are crafted affect
their lives
they would just like to say and
how those laws are passed and I
don't think that's terribly
unfair
the representative
Representative mentioned earlier
that for the most part sixteen
year olds are you know living at
home not paying rent I've known
plenty of twenty three year olds
who live at home with their
parents and don't pay rent and
don't vote so I don't know
that's necessarily an adequate
measure because of I've seen
that happen it and many many
ages and I think that keeping
out children who have and I I
don't even want to think
children because I hear children
I think eight year old nine year
olds
and sixteen year olds are as we
discussed earlier they are old
enough to consent to sex which
means they are old enough to get
pregnant and.
That is not those are.
Children activities those are
not children's decisions so
these adolescents.
Are us that we expand their
rights that they be included in
conversations about their rights
and I think keeping them out of
that conversation I don't think
that grows the engagement that
is already in them I think that
grows apathy and I do not want
to contribute to that at all and
on a personal note I'm gonna
pull a nerd chart here
we are planning missions to Mars
and will probably have the
manned missions to Mars in the
next ten to twenty years so that
is very much realistic and I
think giving engaged sixteen
year olds the right to vote is
just as realistic so thank you.
Right.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and representative
how can a sixteen seventeen year
old live on their own.
Mr chair I mean Madam chair and
Mr Representative re my very
dear wonderful friend we are.
I think one of the things that
we don't have adequate
information about is the fact
that there are many sixteen year
olds that are living on their
own I mean you can look at CYFD
you could look at many
areas in which we gather
information to give us the
guidance about what we need to
do to help supposedly kids but
there's so many kids can.
Young adults are living on their
own for a variety of different
reasons and we just don't have
all of the.
The information of the
statistics.
I don't you know they may not at
this point in time.
Be able to sign a contract to
get a house.
But I I guarantee you if they
needed a.
Hotel or something they could do
it I'm just saying that.
This simply this bill simply
allows them the opportunity to
vote.
Nothing about anything else this
allows and the right to vote.
Madam chair and and
Representative I agree we freely
or big budgets but you know the
the point is is they have to
live under the guidance of their
parents or they have to go to
court and be emancipated.
And that brings in a lot of what
the discussions been already
about how to the engage in
contracts how can a Mary another
person how can they go to a
doctor they can go to a doctor
unless it's an emergency
situation I can't get their own
driver's license
the can't purchase of firearm
they can't consent to whatever
you want to make it.
And yet I hear the arguments
about why they should vote and I
remember the arguments that I've
heard against holding them
accountable for murder.
And that the arguments against
that is that their frontal lobe
isn't developed until the early
twenties and so they can't be
responsible for their own
actions.
And I go which side is it.
And madam chair.
Representative I'm gonna try to
go through this quickly so we
could move on on Saturday you
get home.
What it chief just just just
just bake in the state and
speech to the legislature.
Mr the eighteen year olds should
not be magistrates judges and we
want to change that age.
And that's in a bill this moving
through the legislature right
now.
Why because they don't have
enough life experience and I
think madam chair Representative
all of us can go back okay when
we were in high school.
Whether you want it whatever
School lection process you want
to have.
What was it.
It was a popularity contest.
There wasn't Hey what's have big
debates and we'll look at all
the issues and inform that way.
But madam chair let's go now.
To.
The campaign.
Campaigns are ugly we all know
that.
Now they're going to be lobbied
to vote for someone.
And they're gonna be subjected
to all of the stuff that adults
are subjected to.
The agency information all that
about a candidate.
And I don't think.
I don't think that we need to
allow them to get into that
arena and tell their little
over.
anyway madam chair those are the
reasons why I can't support this
and and.
Your if you want to respond it's
fine.
There is the response to that
distant that you're making madam
chair your arguments thank you
okay thank you madam chair.
Representative.
Yes.
No.
The thing.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative lo yes.
More no.
Mr Perot is.
Madam chair Johnson.
I.
in the lower forty four percent.
Okay your bill did not pass
Representative.
And voted.
I do agree that.
And.
To.
Adult food and responsibilities
for this right but also at the
same time as a native American
woman as an anti as a sister I
think we should protect our
children and let them be
afforded an honor that process
go through their coming of age
it's a big deal it's a big
ceremony it's a big process and
so with that thank you for
bringing this bill forward madam
chair and members the committee
we really appreciate the debate
the discussion thank you so much
thank you thank you.
House bill two zero seven.
OK Representative Ortez madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for scheduling this
bill today I'm here to talk
about House Bill to so seven.
But before I I talk about the
technical aspects of the bill
when it tell you why I am
carrying this bill.
Growing up my parents divorced
two as seven it was.
Not a very easy time for us to
grow the single mom who's taking
care of me my brother.
To make a lot of money we were
poor quite poor.
And
Sort of lost my father side of
the family except for one.
One person to really but maybe
maybe this is a.
She.
She really loved me and my
brother and my mom and she gave
me some really remarkable
experiences when I was about
eight she moved to San Francisco
from a really tiny small town in
there she had this pretty
fabulous life working at Macy's
since the eighties I know I have
dated myself and go into the
math
She worked at issue round
fashion shows.
She has a crew of really
amazing.
Mostly gay men and women helping
her put on these amazing amazing
fashion displays.
She invited me over a lot to
visit with her.
I loved being there I was.
Accepted.
And supported I felt a sense of
community from her crew who took
care of me and trust me really
awesome clothes
many local it it made me feel
good.
And I kind of knew what was
happening in the eighties a
little bit you know I was aware
that her friends Patrick and
Rodgers and Frankie
experienced.
Real severe deep discrimination.
They were losing their friends
to aids they were losing their
family it was a time of of
sadness but it was also a time
of joy and celebration and that
is all that I experienced love
and celebration and caring and
acceptance and I need you to
know this that this the shape my
life it shaped who I have become
it shaped how I think about
people who may be different than
I.
That we all deserve this love
and respect dignity affirmation
what was shown to me so
now the mother of two children
and as they.
Navigate their lives who they
are as people who they believe
themselves to be their identity
who they they love I think
about.
Thank you and Patrick and Roger
and I and I think about how well
things have changed certainly
from the eighties until now.
That my children.
And their friends.
Are not.
Protected from discrimination.
By the state.
The state that we live in and we
know what's happening all around
the country with art queer and
trans children's rights being.
Battered.
So the time to make these
changes.
To this already existing law is
now for.
My children say for the sake of
their friends and all the
children in New Mexico.
Now I'm gonna tell you what the
bill does so thank you thank you
for letting me tell that story.
The builders for things it
updates language from handicap
disabilities are statutes should
no longer.
Reference an offensive word like
handicap.
It updates definitions that can
stand the test of time gender
identity and sexual orientation.
It creates new definitions for
sex and gender and it closes a
loophole that allows public
entities to discriminate against
all protected classes so what we
were doing with this bill is
that we are saying
affirmatively and clearly that
no taxpayer dollars should be
used to describe.
In the state in our beautiful
state of New Mexico and with
that I'd like to introduce my
expert Marshall Martinez hi
madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
having us here today my name is
Marshall Martinez and executive
director of equality New Mexico
we're statewide LGBTQ
organization The New Mexico
Human Rights Act was adopted in
nineteen seventy one model
closely off the Civil Rights Act
at the national level with a
short list of protected classes
since the New Mexico is added as
we have at the federal level
multiple protective services.
In two thousand and three we
were the fourteen state to add
sexual orientation and the third
state in the nation to add
gender identity to our Rights
Act.
In nineteen eighty the New
Mexico Supreme Court on an
appeal case read the term public
accommodation extremely narrowly
and determined that state
government public entities local
school districts public
universities municipal
governments were exempt from
discrimination prohibition Human
Rights Act is not illegal for
public bodies to discriminate in
New Mexico.
This is continue to be true for
fifty years well many protected
classes and are Human Rights Act
are covered at the federal level
L. G. B. T. Q. people are
explicitly left without
protections which is most
evident current times when we're
discussing especially public
education institutions and the
political battles are happening
across the country.
As Representative Ortez said
this bill amends Human Rights
Act to include the prohibition
of discrimination at public
entities by local governments
federal this bill will protect
LGBTQ students and seniors from
discrimination this bill will
help provide access to justice
for queer and trans homeless
people and those impacted by
system such as the family's
Department.
This bill will giving you more
accessible path to justice for
any New Mexican who's
experienced discrimination at
the hands of their government
for without if any young person
any person seeking services is
otherwise forced to interact
with the complicated federal
system to file discrimination
complaints.
And lastly let me say very
clearly to every LGBTQ young
person out there who's feeling
the brunt of these politicized
attacks every day.
I see you the quality New Mexico
and with our sponsors of this
bill we are with you and we will
fight until New Mexico says it
very clearly your life is full
of value your only deserving of
love acceptance and affirmation
not in spite of for you are but
because of.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair we stand
for questions.
Thank you.
Let's go to the public.
Getting used to the new
equipment.
All right.
The old equipment that's right
Representative Zamora if you are
here in the room today to speak
in opposition to this bill would
you raise your hand.
Speaking in opposition okay
speaking in support raise your
hand.
We'll start on my left in the
back pop up state your name and
take a minute and tell us why
you support the bill.
Thank you for running the timer
for me.
Thank you madam chair committee
members my name is asiri I can
hear the ACLU Mexico and we're
here today to stand in support
of house bill seven because the
Human Rights Rights Act is a
crucial piece of legislation
that all our relatives in New
Mexico deserve the protection of
how we stand in support of two
the members to our house bill
two seven not only because it
clarifies and modernizes
definitions contained in the
humans rights at Human Rights
Act but because improves our
ability as a state at right to
protect our communities as we
see fit in a manner that the
list of lists our collective
humanity and defends the dignity
of our people I want to thank
the sponsors for their hard work
on this legislation and asked me
to pass.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Kayla.
I stand in support of this
legislation.
A few years ago my sibling came
out of and my number one job we
can affirming identity AT
intends to enter.
Expensive you at contemplates
suicide they did not receive
support affirmation from the
school systems of the
interaction with our except when
teacher who was and thankful for
that passing this legislation
would get my family and others
like recourse to support my
hands left ones and to allow our
young people who are gender
expansive to focus on what
matters hello a happiness and
peace and that lives thank you.
It chairperson members of the
committee Christine Armstrong
but the non binary person
director of FC had the chance to
interview next.
It was always been head of the
curve when it comes to
discrimination protections for
the Human Rights Act from
develop the protected from
discrimination based on the
number of factors want to trace
averages for okay the location
here and leave this laws
intended to protect with my
community and I know you
Mexican.
Another we collectively have a
better grasp what gender gender
identity must take this chance
to modernize legislations by
Adam had classes.
Most wonderful transaction the
nonconformity.
Every job to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is made so
right up with the quality New
Mexico I stand this from support
as a clear then to try my best
to speak for others like me as
well.
This is mentioned this update
then Rights Act excludes
loopholes that currently allows
public institutions discriminate
against anyone especially
members of the LGBTQ plus.
As sexual orientation and gender
identity are not within
federally protected class the
state confidently that I have
seen this happen first hand
fortunately not just myself but
I guess my queer trans best
friends at a high school that I
believe was meant to protect the
investment but instead for them
to be very very thoughtful
things that.
The feeling is that to be the
issues facing higher which means
that the government is just.
The act definitions of this bill
proposes to address workers.
Transposons Mexico for
recognized by the government
this is why I recently spoke in
favor of possibilities.
So as.
Thanks.
Chair.
Members of the committee my name
is Joel the money in Sanford
executive director of the New
Mexico religious coalition for
reproductive choice.
We understand as a face rooted
organization The New Mexico
Human Rights Human Rights Act is
a strong statement on our values
as a state.
The state that understands that
that divine prisons lives in all
of our citizens.
And understands that that divine
presence is not just in those
binary.
Peaks and valleys of our state
but in the in between spaces.
In the sunsets are spectacular
surprises.
In the marshes of the Bosque del
Apache.
In the foothills and the maces
and so for that reason.
Right thank you.
Share
my name is heather Smith and I'm
a full futures.
Many market leaders around the
state are part of a group
community and in our leader
gatherings we have for
experiences with gender based
discrimination.
Adding gender to determine like
accidents sending Human Rights
Act removes loopholes that allow
discrimination to happen
without.
From here you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Julie at
coop I work with Mexico
travelers association and this
is really important trial
lawyers are the folks that stand
beside individuals like many in
this room who have the courage
to come forward and hold big
institutions accountable for
harm and to make systematic
changes systemic changes to
those big institutions so we
support this bill and thank
everybody in the room for having
the courage to come today and
testify.
Madam chair members of the
committee can candidate with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
as social workers we like to
have an even playing field for
all and we should all be
available to
to we should all be free excuse
me to to form from
discrimination and the ability
to live our lives as we choose
we believe that individuals have
the right to to excel in the way
they can't Senator our
constitution and our statutes
are moral documents and morally
I believe that we we don't have
a right to discriminate in its
anyone thank you for.
Okay.
Hello the new chairman members
of the committee my name is
Sanjay fail to representing the
native American democratic
caucus of New Mexico and we
stand and support this bill
thank you.
Let me clarify on the webcast
that we are doing public comment
in support of the bill and
please make your comments within
one minute thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is for the
legislative I'm a workers rights
attorney for the New Mexico
Center on poverty we think this
postion producing this important
bill we stand in support of H.
B. two oh seven because it
modernizes the current Human
Rights Act to ensure that all
government entities and those
receiving tactic taxpayer
dollars including state agencies
state contractors and grantees
are prohibited from
discriminating against
individuals based on certain
percent personal
characteristics.
The Human Rights Act is an
important body of laws that
protect Mexicans from
discrimination and enforce those
protections laws currently read
by many public entities to scoop
some public and sees and this
results in long protracted
litigation to determine who is
covered the bill would ensure
the act is a holistic one stop
shop for comprehensive non
discriminatory coverage for all
New Mexicans my expanding
further defining certain
protected characteristics under
the act senator gender gender
identity sexual imitation of the
bill ensures as many New
Mexico's possible are protected
from discriminatory behaviors
for these reasons we support
this bill and urged committee to
pass thank you.
As I.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee Ellen pints on
behalf of the disability
coalition we advocate for the
interests of persons with
disabilities of all types people
with disabilities are very
familiar with discrimination and
marginalization and we want to
see everyone protected from that
kind of unjust treatment so we
support the expansions of
protections proposed in this
bill and we would especially
like to thank the sponsor for
including in the bill updating
of the language in the act to
remove outdated and offensive
terminology relating to
disabilities so we urge your
support of the bill thank you.
Thank thank you committee
members.
Representative Hochman Vigil do
a position of.
My apologies of comments in
opposition of the bill please
raise your hands.
CNN okay webcast.
We are now doing comments in
opposition of the bill.
Seeing no hands raised will go
back to Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you for this.
Well
The former trial attorney myself
actually created quite a few of
these pieces New Mexico.
Right that
Mines and tell you that
the difference between the
federal protections and the way
those cases are litigated verses
what happens in New Mexico are
very stark
for federal cases you have to be
very specific deadlines you have
to please K. very specifically a
lot of times people that have
the sounds of this
discrimination.
Recognize or
not for the images anyway and
then you try and limit the
living spaces here in New Mexico
and have a lack of definition
and they know where no man's
land and you have the spaces
last for seven years.
What he did in the service worth
of that you're you're you're
set for the case to make that
times.
And I think that I was.
Imperative that the house is
flawed because
we have an entire population.
Touch.
I myself have a set time to is
transitioning right now and
every day I worry about what
will happen to them and I worry
about them being adequately.
Legally Representative but most
of most.
All.
Mostly protected at all.
And I think passing this law
gives a very
Strong message.
To those in our society every
single person deserves to be
recognized in the service of the
protected the state of New
Mexico and that is the issue of
the teachers.
The tolerated and
then
to
provide not just some it is
everybody is entitled to
justice.
And so I will be.
Happily slide into this bill.
And this is not percent say that
but I want to thank the sponsors
for this mass.
And I hope.
More thank you madam chair and
thank you present this bill
forward.
Do you see that that.
We're and.
People in this state why is it
that we see that they are being
discriminated.
Against in these.
Situations that that are in your
bill we're we're talking about.
We're talking about yes.
Public contractors.
Is it.
Is that the person is the that
there are people that feel
they're being discriminated
against or we see backs.
The contractors.
Aren't hiring in the.
We're at our transgender and and
I have a question about gender
and.
Fund.
What's what's the difference.
Gender and gender identity.
Madam chair representative if I.
Wide wide do we feel like
they're being that people are
being discriminated against.
Madam chair representative
someone thank you so much for
the question so so a couple of
things one the first thing that
I would say is that because the
Human Rights Act is not
currently apply to these public
institutions we don't know if
this discrimination is happening
because there is no where to
file an official complaint what
we do know we have there are
some very specific court cases
including recently Albuquerque
public schools there was a
racial discrimination case filed
against Albuquerque public
schools by an indigenous student
and their parents and that case
was thrown out of court because
the judge of the District Court
judge followed the ruling of the
New Mexico state Supreme Court
and said it's not against the
law and so we have a couple of
cases a couple of instances
where public institutions have
been accused of discrimination
but there can be no fact finding
because there is no case to be
presented because the law
doesn't cover those and Madam
chair representative to your
second question when we talk
about these public contractors
the Human Rights Act already
applies to employment labor
union membership housing and
public accommodations so those
public contractors or these
public bodies cannot
discriminate against an employee
because of their sexual
orientation or gender identity
or race.
But they can't discriminate
against the people to whom they
provide services based on those
characteristics the intent of
this law is to include that
services aspect to close that
loophole.
Madam chair representative
somewhere and I I would add that
that has happened we have this
is not a hypothetical there are
instances in which public
contractors who receive money
from the state to provide
services are discriminating
against queer and trans people
who are seeking their services
at a homeless shelter.
The size of the year.
That is happening.
Madam chair and and
Representative from.
We we see in the public and and
in life in general.
somebody will lose their job.
And then they pick up.
The pickup and present
themselves as maybe maybe
somebody gets fired from a job.
And maybe I get fired from a
job.
And if I do my job and take care
of it and and take the
responsibilities.
I probably won't get fired.
But if I don't do my job.
And then I get fired and then
the first thing I say they fired
me because as a Mexican.
I see when we do.
Things like this that we give
somebody a wait a backlash at
these employers.
And and I understand.
What you get in that but I also
see a problem on the other side
of it.
Okay madam chair.
Would it be respectful of needs
to to just this young man I I
believe you introduced yourself
as where transgender right art
are cleared or yes madam chair
representative of what I I yes
my name is Marsha Martinez And
identify as a queer Chicano okay
and and thank you for that thank
you for being who you are thank
you for standing up thank you
for being proud of who you are.
But at the same time Madam
chairman and.
Expert witness at what point in
time does it become that you're
discriminating discriminating
against me.
Because I'm not.
And and madam madam chair and an
expert witness I'd like for you
to answer that question.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
I.
In.
My experience is that what what
we are talking about here what
our community LGBTQ folks in New
Mexico are asking for is
protection under the law to
prevent that discrimination I I
don't think I don't I don't see
your haven't experienced a
situation in which that that
idea discrimination being sort
of turned around in the other
direction
I certainly don't have all of
the experiences in the world and
so if you have felt that.
I'm I'm not sure that I can
speak to that but I know this
legislation is about LGBTQ folks
accessing public services being
safe to get an education and and
knowing that our government
treats us and expect us to be
treated the same as everyone
else Matt madam chair and and an
expert witness then why is there
a whole list of people on here
religious a fitness this is the
I can't remember all the those
on the list.
If this is just about queer and
trans transgender people why is
there a list of all a bunch of
other people in this bill Madam
chair representative I'm not a
I'm really glad you asked that
question
the folks that you just
mentioned who who are on here
are already protected under the
Human Rights Act.
They already.
afforded those protections.
That that what the bill does is
adds another.
Another group to the protected
class Madam chair representative
it also ensures that.
That we're closing the gap for
other public entities to not be
able discriminate on the basis
of.
Race ethnicity age.
Gender gender identity.
This public institutions include
school districts.
Political subdivisions.
That's what this bill does.
So so in in in
Does this give the employers.
Less right to fire somebody if
they don't do their job.
Madam chair representative I'm a
employment is already covered in
in this act and I believe other
other acts and imagine that some
folks in your committee can can.
Educate me on that but that's
not what that the bill isn't
isn't about employment.
Madam chair representative can
you tell me the difference
between gender and gender
identity.
Madam chair representative
somewhat half I can do that.
So.
Gender is it is like the outside
looking toward the person the
societal or public expectations
and understandings of an
individual as either as it
relates to their masculinity or
their femininity gender identity
is is the inside it is how if
that internal self perception
how the person sees themselves.
So madam chair and
representative is gender.
To use it at their
is it a religious thing or is it
a scientific thing.
Madam chair representative I'm
not a
I don't think it's either really
but I'm gonna let Marshall
respond to this Madam chair
representative somewhat out that
is neither religious nor is it
scientific it is identity and it
is something that we know gender
something we know has been
evolving consistently and in our
culture and cultures around the
world and what we had to do with
these definitions what is
critical about these definitions
is to make sure that they are
able to stand the test of time
as ideas about gender and gender
identity is continue to evolve
so madam chair next expert
witness so then do you think
you're discriminating against
religious people if you if you
look at it that way.
Madam chair and representative
some of that I I don't think
that we are this this bill
covers religious discrimination
and also what we're saying with
this is that public institutions
schools public contractors state
and city government just has to
treat everyone the same
regardless of their identity.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you presenters for
this.
Representative.
Madam chair and representative
what I see this bill and and
tell me if if it.
Fits that
there was an incident up in
Colorado where the
cake shop refused to go ahead
and make a wedding cake does
this go ahead and and say that
that shop passed to make the
cake.
Madam chair representative ream.
That would be a case in which
that's public accommodations and
they're already covered in this
in the Human Rights Act as it
has a Texas welcome them chair I
can't support it.
The the other people have other
beliefs and I want to respect
them their beliefs also I think
the religious beliefs and so I
want to respect everyone's fully
funded I support what you're
trying to do but not putting it
in stone I guess kind of the way
to say it thank you.
Incentive.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative sorry to.
Keep is here.
But I just had a few questions
for you regarding your bill so
You know I think the point of
what you're doing is good you
know I I supported in theory.
But I just have some questions
regarding these definitions
because what we talked about
definitions that will last the
test of time you know and I and
I know at least from my short
time on this earth that there's
been a lot of definitions that
have changed over the years so
can you just let me know how how
you know for certain that these
definitions in this bill.
Will be that.
Will be etched in stone let's
just say madam chair
representative and and
chair representative black for
longer than the twelve years
that you have to I hope so.
I'm gonna let our logo on that
thank you madam chair
representative blocked
so first of all we do we don't
we can't know that they will
last for ever but we believe
that these definitions which by
the way come largely from the
World Health Organization and
and also include elements from
both Oxford and Merriam Webster
to dictionary
but focusing on the World Health
Organization which allows and
encourages LGBTQ folks to be
centered in and to define the
language used about us and so
and this languages these
definitions are pretty broad
what we saw prior to this word
lists as we all know lists are
probably the worst way to define
something I would argue because
the list changes even a little
bit in the definition is updated
these definitions we think have
the ability to last for I don't
know in perpetuity but for a
significant amount of time
because they are broad and
expansive enough
To me the the continuous
evolution we see okay thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative thank you Mr
Martinez isn't thank you so then
I'm looking at this bill and I
think maybe I'm not reading it
correctly can you give me the
difference between gender
identity from the previous act.
What was stricken verses what's
in there now percent of both of
them are listed on the bill
could you give me what changed
in that definition madam chair.
Madam.
Representative plug the second.
There are a lot of lines on the
Pino lines go through words.
Madam chair representative block
the previous definition is that
gender identity is.
Binary either male or female.
Now it is focused and based on
their perception of themselves
which can include non binary.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you.
Representative.
Okay so what I'm reading now in
the in the bill madam chair
representative changes male or
female to masculine.
Masculinity or femininity could
we do it definitions for the and
the bill Madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative block we don't
have definitions for masculinity
or femininity and and the reason
for that is because even those
are abstract concepts so I've
for example I think there are
many folks in this room who
who's who were maybe were alive
at this time and old enough to
be attentive or whose parents
were attending school when women
were not allowed to wear pants.
They were considered too
masculine right
by having a definition of male
and female that is incredibly
binary right
And changing the that was the
previous definition definition
changing that to masculinity
and femininity which we have a
basic site understanding up
allows the freedom of that
evolution of gender to get to a
place where I think many folks
are excited to know that women
are welcome and encouraged to
wear pants in public for example
and so so we don't definitions
for masculinity or femininity
but we have an understanding on
a societal level of what those
concepts are and that allows
room for this act for these
definitions to continue to be
accurate Madam chair
representative block in the
previous definition gender and
gender identity where combined
and we're pulling them apart and
defining them separately.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so.
I'm guessing this bill from what
you've said it's trying to break
that binary interpretation of
male and female with these
definitions is that correct
madam chair representative Mr
Martinez.
Madam chair representative I
would say is attempting to break
that binary it is attempting to
include.
Folks who live in between and
outside of that binary this this
bill is about inclusion and non
discrimination is what I would
say madam chair.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
All right with the I just a I
find that just interesting
because for changing definitions
based on two things right
forcing masculinity and
femininity we're still keeping
it technically binary by that
definition would to agree madam
chair representative Mr
Martinez.
Madam chair representative I
wouldn't fully agree because
they do believe that many folks
many folks who identify very
clearly is male or female still
exhibit exemplify and are
perceived to have both masculine
and feminine characteristics the
constructs of masculinity and
femininity are not inherently
binary the terminology I think
in the English language will
always be struggling to catch up
with us but I think we all
really understand and see that
those two terms create just a
sphere of identity and
presentation.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so I see in
the bill well I I took notes on
the bill so I guess I'll go back
there but I think you took out
the word sex and changed it to.
We change the meaning of sex I'm
not mistaken on page four.
And that's based on physical
characteristics and you took out
chromosomal is there a reason
you took out from someone Madam
chair representative Madam chair
representative so we so we added
a definition of sex because we
New Mexico is long had a
nondiscrimination on the basis
of sex but it was never clearly
defined what we know is that sex
is scientific categorization as
male female or intersex and it's
based on biology physiology or
physical characteristics what we
know what science tells us is
that one way to determine sex
can be through DNA test which is
chromosomal that is biological
another way is through the
measuring of hormones that is
physiological another way is
through
through physical examination of
either internal or external
organs and so those are physical
what what the vast majority of
science agrees is that there is
there are male female and
intersex folks for whom all
three of those categories sort
of need to align to create that
categorization and so what we
did.
Is add a definition of sex which
had never previously been to
provide.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so what's the
definition or what's the
difference between sex and
gender now Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative so
sex is a scientific scientific
categorization right gender is
the public or societal
perception of us and then gender
identity is how we identify
ourselves our perception of
ourselves or how we wish to
present ourselves to the world
and those are three very
distinct things.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative will I'm just
looking at scientific studies
that I've been looking at in
preparation for this bill and.
That's a little different from
what I'm reading you know and
gender is here it says according
to Dr sands.
She wrote for the university of
Chicago press is the journal of
women and culture and society
she wrote although there
related.
Permissible sex and genetic sex
are disparate the first refers
to the whole.
Chromosome the second to the
particular genes so I'm getting
that.
That genetic is what gender
means is that am I reading this
wrong madam chair representative
Madam chair representative block
We're basing our definitions on.
The World Health Organization.
The dictionaries.
Community.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you representative will all
right I guess I'll move on that
I just think I just a lot of
questions here but I guess I
won't give us here all day so I
appreciate the input and the
thanks for bringing this forward
thanks.
Representative on your new yes.
Representative block no.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative Rehm no ma'am.
Representative Zamora.
Vice chair Figueroa yes.
Madam chair Johnson yes.
I yes Sir.
By a vote of five to three have
the to pass on your bill thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
At.
Is.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for having me here on a
wonderful Saturday afternoon.
Allergies are just beating the
heck out of me so please forgive
me the only way I would me to
percent house bill two thirty
nine and honestly I'm expecting
to be beaten up pretty bad well
but by the looks of okay.
So.
I.
I have a friend okay but.
This bill we have thought about
this and we thought about this
for years and years I don't know
if it is in the right format but
it is a bill that is relating to
animals it prohibits an animal
shelter from euthanizing or
crossing absolutely the the
euthanasia of animals in
shelters or temporarily houses
it creates a website to search
for missing pets.
And it that created the
initiative to help fund counties
secure funding the most
important thing about this is we
can get this through here we
have to get it through
appropriations.
So with that that Madam chair I
know all of you have read the
bill I know you already
opined on it so I will leave it
for questions thank you madam
chair.
Audience for those.
Please raise your hand.
The opposition.
Okay our rates.
Yes ma'am.
Madam chair and members the
committee my name is Manuel
Garcia on the veterinarian
Representative Mexico in the
men's Association.
And while we.
Understand the spirit of the
bill we have some.
Concerns number one being that
and what shelters are already
stretched very thin both in with
manpower and money
forcing them to not use nice on
wanted pets.
It's going to be a disaster long
term number two in terms of the
website for lost and found most
and shelters currently have a
lost and found a statewide it
may be difficult to a pet lost
in
cedar hill New Mexico could be
potentially different than
Senator Lisa so just kind of
should be localized and E. R.
he's done and then in terms of
probation for helping those
animal shelters stated in two
thousand twenty Senate bill
fifty seven was passed taxing
some of the pet food labels on
that money is now currently
being tied up in some litigation
but we could get that money to
the veterinary board we can also
start to distribute that amongst
and shelters specifically for.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you next.
Good afternoon madam chair.
Committee members my name is Dr
Samantha here I am a licensed
veterinarian in the state of New
Mexico I'm also currently chair
of the New Mexico border
veterinary medicine I've
practiced of private practice
for sixteen years and I have
shelter medicine for TM.
And while I appreciate the
spirit of this bill like to have
concerns to to to to echo what
Dr Garcia has.
unfortunately the shelters would
fill up rather quickly and would
have no means to get these
animals to a safe location and
it would create an unsafe
environment for them the other
concern I have about limiting
euthanasia or the decision for
use in Asia is taking it out of
the hands of the veterinarian or
the shelter staff who are
capable of making good decisions
on behalf of an animal it's not
an easy decision to make.
To euthanize an animal.
Obviously some exceptions that
are listed in the bill
unfortunately that's not a
comprehensive set of exceptions
for euthanasia and we see many
many instances for euthanasia
for the humane quality of life
of the animal is a decision that
needs to be made for something
other than a debilitating
disease or because of its is
here and it's danger it posed.
With that I was.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is William
Duran I'm the executive director
for the board of it Medicine I'm
not gonna go if they said I want
to talk about the administrative
burden that this would cost to
the agency number one.
The the website there's no way
this.
Agency of the money we make some
money to live on the last two
years FY twenty one twenty two I
took over beginning last year so
I wasn't here the operating at a
deficit had to get the deficit
and supplemental special
appropriation for decided
deficits over the last year
we've made a lot of cost
cutting.
Moves within the agency so we
will not be in the deficit the
timing of the bill and with all
due respect to the to the
honorable Sanchez would put a
financial burden I have two
staff members none of us are I.
T. I'm in the process you over
to do it right now to help us
with that I do and I contractors
that are.
Showing us financial
expenditures so if the harm this
agency and to what doctor Garcia
said about Senate bill fifty
seven we are in the process of
getting that money out we do
have that money general care I
care facility fund was.
Part of the animal sheltering
board when we took over the
board of twenty seventeen that
came to us that money is in our
fund of we are you just put the
children committee together
appropriate sample bottle off.
Where it wasn't done by law they
were just picked so we had our
first meeting this week actually
we're on the right path to get
that money out to the people who
need that money we gave two
hundred eighteen thousand
dollars out in twenty twenty one
and we hope to have more
opportunities to get the money
that we're bringing and so this
bill just the timing of this
bill
redundancy of the websites that
doctors you talked about it in
the redundancy about initiating
a spay neuter program we're
already in the process of doing
that so I oppose the bill though
the respective to the
representative this is not
correct press thank you.
You go to the webcast.
We have comments on from the
webcast attendees in support of
the bill.
Okay webcast do we have comments
in opposition of the bill.
Thank you again madam chair and
so much for the opportunity to
provide comment of resume we so
appreciate that the honorable
Representative Akan is doing
this because he cares about
animals and we completely agree
with him that the goal is to get
shelter euthanasia down to zero
however we do unfortunately have
concerns about the approaches in
house bill two thirty nine for
the reasons already stated and I
won't repeat except that I do
want to emphasize that we we
know that there have been dire
consequences for animals in
other communities that have
adopted eight times deadline no
kids mandate without providing
all of the animal shelters the
resources they need to reach
that goal and that resulted in
warehoused animals suffering
endlessly in kennels and crates
with nowhere to go so this
reality in the lack of resources
for the the shelters here in New
Mexico is why we cannot support
this bill currently without some
key changes and would love to
work with the sponsor on getting
the needed resources to shelters
to meet the shared goals that we
all have thank you so much.
Thank you by the number of
concerts.
Yes Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and presenter.
Representative.
How many animals get euthanized
in the state of New Mexico
annually.
Madam chair representative these
Zamora is just I don't think I
can give you that number I don't
think anybody can that and
that's fine
Representative I think you're
doing this out of the kindness
of your heart and that's where
we all want to be but the
reality of it is that the animal
shelters madam chair and and
Representative.
We're really designed to be a
temporary holding place so that
somebody could drive.
That animal.
And I agree with one of the
testimonies on the.
On the video that we don't have
the facilities.
So for gonna change and go this
route.
We need to have the facilities
for these animals can.
Be held in a humane way.
I would like to see zero kill in
the state.
But we're not there I think.
And I supported the movement for
the bill of that that help the.
The state neuter.
And I know in one of in my
district we see spay and neuter
programs coming by mobile units
coming by in.
And they come by and they spay
and neuter animals at no cost or
very low cost and I see a lot of
activity going on there
I walked into will spay and
neuter
Functions that was being held.
Then it was amazing the amount
of dogs and cats over there.
So I think we're working on this
At and I just don't see the
facilities being set up for this
and it's gonna take a lot of
money to do it and and I don't
see anything in your bill about
redoing the facilities and stuff
and I'm concerned also about the
main way.
That we treat these animals so.
I I just can't support this bill
at this time maybe as a as we
progress forward and.
And
maybe change.
Things in the state and I and I
do really do believe and have
great expectations a spay neuter
and and and us promoting that to
help the situation that we face
today and.
And in in in social media on
Facebook always see people
adopting dogs or or somebody
finds a dog and instead of
sending it to them not that
animal shelter the.
They try to find the owners are
asking somebody else wants a dog
or something I think.
Paul are very.
Conscious about not wanting to
send their dogs to the.
To the pound
And there's the.
And the that's all my testimony
madam chair and all my questions
Representative thank you.
Committee members.
Representative.
Yes madam chair is ten
Representative Alcon if you
looked at the significant issues
that they put under the FIR.
Yes so I'm I won't read all
those one of the things I think
that is concerning is that you
could have an animal the
veterinarian says is dangerous.
And can't be adopted and they
can't do they can't euthanize
that animal and I think that's
but anyway belabored if you've
looked at that thank you Mr
madam chair and normally I don't
answer I couldn't there was not
a question but.
Exactly I think it more than
anything this bill is just
looking to find a way.
To fix the problem that we're
having and then that it might
not be the right and the new
especially after I saw but I got
hit with on this.
The it's probably not the right
way to go but I know we need to
go somewhere
Madam chair representative I
agree with you and I don't know
how we educate
animal owners to be responsible
animal owners I mean that's
really what the issue is but
yeah.
Madam chair I I move to table.
Unfortunately the twelfth you
had to do.
Representative madam chair.
we have a question about the
right.
On that madam chair what if we
table it the bill is killed.
Because we were all it will.
Which of which would be less.
Get
exactly which would give the
bill a chance to improve our
look at different things and.
Representative.
Related to all the bill and
At that discussions
The
card in with you thank you.
My comment is
Thank you.
Of course that we're asking for
funding to stay in there.
And we're.
Nineteen eighty two.
The situation so with that I was
going to ask Representative
Cologne if you wanted to roll
the bill.
Madam chair if I was a tear yes
I would just able to bill it
could be brought back up on a
motion from anybody that's on
the committee that voted to
table the bill if I can come up
with the a lot of work okay I I.
I will do that then so we will
take the motion to we have a
motion on the table to table the
bill.
By Representative block.
Secretary and we have a.
A second by Representative
Zamora please take role.
Representative.
Representative on your new yes
to table.
Representative block yes the
table.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative little yes to
table Representative Rehm yes
ma'am.
Representative Zamora yeah.
Yes to table and I'd like to
explain my vote.
Vice chair Figueroa yes madam
chair Johnson yes.
Eight two zero.
Chair you have to take
the spin my sanity here this
bill.
Madam chair I can explain of of.
Madam chair and and
Representative UGC on thank you
for bringing this bill forward I
think it's very important for
for our people in the state we
see so many people nowadays that
have their dogs and my grandkids
of.
Have dogs and.
But but we need to take it a
step further.
May and educate dog owners.
And also.
We don't want dogs that are
running out in the street which
is most of the time why pound
picks one up.
To have to call us.
Some kind of problem for there
to be another dog or or somebody
getting bit or something before
we have the right to take
control of that dog.
So I think I think the you know
this this goes.
All the way back to the safety
of the people of these
communities and.
And I think we need to be very
cautious with that we can't.
We can't just a.
Not support our pounds and stuff
and and tell them that they
can't do their jobs and then
they think they start thinking
well why are we gonna pick up
these dogs that we can control
and and have a way to to keep
control of the population and
everything else and.
And a dog that's out in the
streets.
Does create some kind of risk
for kids and other people
we've seen that in the past and
that's why we've tied up the
news on the on the laws
regulations and.
And hopefully we can.
Receipt and do better with the
spay neuter
and do better across the state
with that.
Thank you Representative and
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
It was nice being here with you
on a Saturday.
Okay.
If you
on.
I just listened to the fact that
a.
Kali.
Very we have special guests in
the state.
Hi Representative this is our
special guests thank you members
of the committee.
Introduced my mother.
Rio was.
Ma'am can I have your phone
number in case Representative is
a.
All I have
All.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yes.
The state.
So
I of the controlled.
Well.
There seems.
All the clerks National Review
is.
Yeah so the changes have.
Change.
Go to Korea.
Yes the.
I.
We have.
This.
You don't have the votes on this
I'm sorry this is taking a.
Now producing.
Thank.
Are very well
to work
the
rules they're saying is.
For of the.
Most.
St Onge in.
but.
She is.
That.
And go after.
Right.
As.
Is it.
This
is a.
this review that.
Thank you for that.
This is.
Have.
So.
Also.
This up.
Having yes you do have.
I got a copy of the committees.
We'll see how many there are
there.
I could let you look at this one
with.
This.
It almost.
The only.
Buyer pays.
With the.
So this
for listening to the men's.
You should always.
Much of the.
Ask for.
Yes
It's my initials as listed in
the.
By the.
section.
he says the same section that
were changes to create.
So it's another at that I see
the if we're getting.
First.
If I.
Thanks you too sorry I got ready
to leave.
but.
You know and others.
Research on how the process has
to be.
consultation a postcard and
there's.
Associated.
Saturday.
The
staff.
With.
has.
That is my my first.
This is Nancy eight
cancellation process for.
right now so typically either so
it has to be one.
Secretary.
That would be.
With with a dress address
changes.
house program.
This so it's just a different.
I just want to point.
So we.
Last.
Later.
My card.
There are more and.
Word on.
This is.
What I'm saying is.
This
is.
For.
Hi.
Right now.
Here's.
So we have another.
Data sources to offend.
You you too.
That staff.
Is is.
But.
So.
That is households.
Sorry
ladies.
for.
Hello we are.
Sources.
Isaac
Haas force.
I
see that.
Your.
And then also.
Sales.
That is really.
We're.
Yeah I.
Certainly.
As.
Well.
Your.
The house to.
These are two year for the
house.
Okay.
Two twenty in.
The
anything we.
Our.
Okay is.
These.
The program.
Him on.
This is a program.
This
R. eight.
Appreciation.
Made from.
To.
Somebody was.
He.
Well we.
We
just.
Just be online for.
The phone is.
And so is this is one of the.
Guidance resource.
The cost
The other thing.
As we get it right across
let's.
It is not.
Yeah I'm happy to provide.
Thanks for.
Is
that right yeah.
Okay thank you you're free.
Committee member.
I mean this is a.
Okay.
There are here.
Hey.
Now the mirrors I have seen the
some of the trying to do the
same thing so.
Over to.
Have to trying to do the same
the and home with everyone from
going
on station offline.
Yes so we'll figure out what's
the best one of.
The.
stated next we.
It was.
Related
to.
Where they have thank you
committee members St audience an
audience on the webcast we are
going to adjourn our committee
meeting today thank you
everybody for attending and your
