My sister greater up here.
Madam chair Johnson.
Four.
The.
It
would have.
And let's go ahead and check in
with house bill two eight nine.
Representative okay.
Good morning thank you very much
of Madam chair.
Committee
Representative Kate's and
presents a house bill two eighty
nine hope to expert witnesses
thank you for that Commission
and I also have.
The part from this is the city's
Commission okay.
Thank you very much I will allow
them to get this is this is a
bill of about the need to access
data so that.
Be able to find the best
representation of their clients
and I will defer to my experts
this.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee it's my
pleasure to be with you today my
name is Linda Freeman I am the
executive director of New
Mexico's sentencing commission
and this is actually a small
reworking of our the sentencing
missions data collection bill
the sentencing commissions as
twenty seven member commission
and in addition to our workers
policy area we also performed
research on a variety of topics.
News about our okay okay just
double checked all although
there.
To be a lot of strike out in the
bill it's really of the
organization of the of our
existing data collection rules
and made it addition is the
explosion thanks mentioned.
A juvenile in behavioral health
data as well as the inclusion of
the statewide criminal justice
sharing network which as of a
recent addition since twenty.
That also includes questions I
do have Douglas carver deputy
director on the soon to answer
technical questions about the
bill thank you okay good morning
does.
The morning madam chair
apologize I can't be with you in
person my son and I are both
sick and I didn't want to bring
that to your committee seems
okay.
All right so hope you get better
soon let's go ahead and go out
to the audience so we have
Members in the audience who are
in support of the bill.
Okay and then do we have
opposition.
Seeing them just go ahead and
hear from you.
Support of the.
Good morning.
From the administrative office
of the courts we work in close
partnership Mexico sensing
Commission sharing our.
Thank you.
Okay good morning my name is
captain personal number
registered.
Counties we also think that this
is a great idea and a great way
to profit sharing data across
different government thank you
Hey.
Those from secretary this is the
office of information technology
department of information
technology
prior to this role I served as
the project manager for the
sentencing commission's efforts
and we're support this bill
anything that the fourth data
sharing and not duplicating
actions resources full for the.
Further comments.
Go to the pass seeing him as a
for.
I mean Madam webcast opposing
comments on this bill saying and
Committee members Representative
Zamora thank you madam chair and
representative and expert
witness
bring go forward how Madam chair
representative how is this going
to affect you.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative for instant money
expert witness.
Madam chair representative.
I think the bill are the bill
always kind the general
information being able to be
share this with the passing with
the sentencing commission and
historically we've been able on
occasions get juvenile records
but sometimes we've had to enter
into separate the issue remains
are in line with the
organizations most recently we
came across this is a project
that we have the first district
attorney's office here in Santa
Fe and what we wanted to
accomplish with that is the one
increase version effort at the
district attorney's office for
young adults and juveniles as
well as adults age twenty five
one of our research interest in
this project was to follow
juveniles who had gone through
that system as well as to access
their information process other
state district attorneys offices
so we can see what happened in
the past with juveniles as they
got went into the old system.
Where did that happen.
I'm sorry of the.
Okay so on so the research goal
of that project okay what
actually happened with juveniles
and young adults in the past and
create a diversion the
specifically tailored to some of
the problems that that juveniles
and young adults experience so
it's very important for us from
a research perspective to be
able to access that information
and if the bill mentions of our
in our publications of course we
would not ever individually
identifying when we go to great
lengths to protect that
information as well as seeking
institutional review board
permissions from the university
in Mexico.
So madam chair and an expert so
that.
Why have you not been able to
access that information.
Madam chair representative
initially we can talk agencies
through the the the bill as it
currently exists with the
explicit since juveniles are not
explicitly mentioned we get a
little bit of push back but
often times we are able to
negotiate an agreement with
those organizations this would
just clarify that given
permissions also.
Madam chair in the.
Thanks for for this what is your
take in
People that you've been having a
hard time with their is it just
all across the state
Madam chair representative this
bill is a is a reorganization.
Statute and you're you're
correct it is changing being
able to allow a clear I on the
process on how data is shared to
be able to keep people's
information
confidential while still sharing
the data so that representation
happen and in the strongest way
and madam chair and and
Representative the reason I'm
asking these questions is
with you specifically mentioned.
So I was wondering what the
issue was.
With juveniles and and the other
for the rest of the information
that gets shared file are we
having trouble with.
Thank you madam chair and.
I I my answer would be is
because the juvenile was not
specifically in listed in the
previous statutes and that this
is a this will help with
clarification on the the
sentencing commission is being
able to work with agencies I
performed and use this is just
extra steps by this
clarification they will be able
to have a more streamlined data
sharing process and I'll defer
to my mate expert witness in
case there's something else.
actually defer to Douglas if
that's okay because I think he
can explain probably better but
slack wacky in our existing data
collection thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Zamora the
problem comes up with juvenile
data because there's a separate
statute and law is actually to
statutes and all reserve
regarding the confidential Act
confidentiality of juvenile
criminal justice data so we will
point to our existing data
collection statute which is some
thirty years old and written
very broadly and say this
statutes as we can get
everything and look at some
pushed back.
Understandably because it's a
very sensitive information so we
we get where they're coming from
saying but there's a separate
juvenile confidentiality statute
that exists so we usually can
come to an agreement or find
some kind of work around we
thought that by updating the
statute bring it into the twenty
first century it's over the it's
almost thirty years old
clarify precisely what can be
obtained would help to send some
of those concerns and people
also are often concerned with
the confidentiality of both the
juvenile data and the behavioral
health data I think they're more
worried.
That personal information will
be fat will be obtained from
those about those juveniles are
people struggling with
behavioral health issues so
that's why we also put in the
provision about any reports will
only use de identified data help
us wage those concerns so I hope
representative that answers your
questions.
Yes it is and and it's getting
right to the manager and and
presenter it's it's get right to
the point of forget get matters.
Are there certain laws.
The key from sherry juvenile
data.
And and I believe we've heard
some of this legislation as I've
been here in the past four
years.
To try to keep some of that data
confidential so that when these
kids become of adult age.
Then they that there are they
get a better chance at life.
And and get to.
Get to have some kind of of a
privacy for from the records
that they can kind of I guess
Leominster far over again and
and try to make a better life
for themselves.
Yes Madam chair representative
that's precisely the case
there's as I said and I didn't
know down being that because I
statutory reference.
Part of our statute in the
children's code that protect the
confidential confidentiality of
juvenile criminal justice data
for precisely the reasons you
mentioned we don't want to
and really no one should be
judged by the our stand their
life but particularly with
juveniles we want to give them
the chance to start over.
The problem is you can't study
go to the most basic question
and then the mentioned the study
were doing with the first
initial district one of the
things we're looking at is how
many juveniles who have been
involved in the system Senator
right as adults if we can't get
access to that juvenile data we
can't study how many had been in
the system and then percent of
rated committed another crime
once they became adults once
their after eighteen so and
that's very important to be able
to study that bridge because we
don't know a programs targeting
juveniles work unless we know
whether a child who is in that
program.
And did or did not commit a
crime when state shifted into
adulthood so that's why it's
important for us to get access
to that information and as you
mentioned Representative there
are two statutes and law that
protect the confidentiality of
juvenile criminal justice data
it's only available to a limited
full of people.
Now we believe that our statute
as written it says you can
access all data with no
qualifications we thought it was
important to put in that we
specifically have availability
or can access to do without data
and the behavioral health data
and criminal justice sharing
network data but we also wanted
to add that what I refer to as a
double lock on confidentiality
so people share the data would
be confident that any thing that
goes into our we publish will
not be able to be traced back to
an individual.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative and the
Representative I think that's I
think that's very important what
you're doing there but at the
same time for do we draw the
line in the sand.
I look forward to to more of
this debate committee and and
see what for this bill bills
thank you for your testimony
thank you Representative an
expert witness thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
little yes thank you madam chair
and representative thank you for
bringing this for so given the
rise in criminal activities
especially among juveniles seems
to be rising
let me ask another get this
another way because I appreciate
your questions Representative.
What type of information will be
collected so that
if the bill passes.
What will what types of programs
can be you're describing can be
implemented to.
In that cycle.
Thank you madam chair and
representative says I need for
to my experts.
Madam chair representative on.
One of the programs that I
mentioned is actors.
For juveniles and young adults
that we're developing here in in
Santa Fe one so that program
would provide all.
Of would be contemplates
providing necessary services in
behavioral health as well as
supervision and and
Case management actually the
better within supervision while
they're in the what would not
well they're in the diversion
program so that one possible
source of programming that might
be
contemplated on the type of
information that we would we
would seeking juveniles as the
juvenile justice information so
we right now we do have the
information from the point so we
know how many cases are actually
petitioned we know kind of the
outcomes of those cases but in
some cases like with the
district attorney's we would
also like to hear statewide from
the attorneys
if those juveniles had other
cases where sometimes there's
people who live I kind of on the
move out of jurisdictions and
there's a lot of information
about how do those are have
informally like whether or not
like they had cases but not
formally petitioned so that's
the type of information.
Okay and madam chair and the.
it is.
Freeman thank you
So reminds me Madam about the
information that you're going to
be receiving will there will be
it will be green.
cleaned rather so that there are
no identifiable
markers.
That will counties are going to
be as confidential.
Will be maintained
confidentially.
Representative Madam chair
representative was for to my
experts thank you Madam chair
representative yes so we
actually have to in order to use
the information we have to
maintain the identifiers but we
have an institutional review
board approval with you whenever
in a research project so we will
specify how it's stored Services
words if you're late moreover
when a project is like
oftentimes we have individual
reviews for a particular project
once that project is completed
all the Asian is is stripped of
its identifiers at the earliest
point and we refer to the next
slide please one of the key
things with this project as well
as some of the statutory
authority that our commission
has we we are past evaluating
programs are funded under the
prime reductions grant and it is
necessary to making those
identifiers so we can follow
somebody through the system if
that makes sense but as soon as
we can questions we complete
that it is that we move to the
identification as soon as as we
can.
Thank you madam chair if I may.
Madam chair representative if I
could add on to that
Answer that Linda just gave if
you look at section B. of the
bill notes that all records data
and information received by the
commission as the same status
Confidentiality in short as it
did when we received it that's
actually from existing law it
was buried in the existing
statute we put it up higher in
its own subsection so that be
clear but what that means is
that when we get information if
it was confidential at its
source it's confidential with us
so people cannot use the
sentencing commission as a back
door to otherwise confidential
information so any reports we
publish will be de identified
data but it's also important
that when we get raw data and
from a source perhaps a district
attorney about a juvenile
people can't then send ever
request a public records request
just to get that data because it
maintains the confidentiality it
had where it began and so that
that's an important part of our
statute it gets missed a lot
when we were discussing the
statute with entities so that's
one reason we opted out from
where I was in some subsection
so be more prominent madam
chair.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair on that point.
If if you'll allow me.
But.
But with all respect so we just
heard a statement on this side
of the table that says that the
information is stripped of its
ID so nobody knows for that
person with that information.
What information that is am I
correct.
Representative Madam chair
representative.
It is my understanding that for
the information is information
that has identifying markers
what money expert witness was
stating is that when outside
sources are cleaning the data to
find the office health program
for diversion health programs
are helping or using data that
identifying markers for not
provided in that shared data.
We're kind of conflicting here
we're hearing that we're not
gonna share data you're saying
we're share for sharing data can
be stripped of I need Madam
chair representative.
To make decisions and to best
Representative.
their clients and date of need
to have the data the data has
identifying markers and in the
winds are.
Under.
I'm I'm I'm defer to my
excellence.
The madam chair Representative
what I describe was a process of
how we use information on a
specific evaluation so what
Douglas that is if that is the
exactly true it maintains the
confidence the data with the
confidentiality the house is
that comes into us during our
research process we made a
process where we have groups of
people together as soon as that
process is done we do identify
we would not shut share the
identify do this out with
anybody what what doubles with
mention is that any reports that
we have we would only use
aggregate level the that we
would never use individual level
data I hope that answers your
question.
And madam chair and and
Representative yes would you be
open into the identifying the
data before you get it.
Madam chair representative on
that would limit their scope
inability to be able to use the
data in the most effective
manner.
And.
And madam chair.
I want to respect Representative
Lewis time and and her debate
solves all stopped my debate
there but I'm I want to come
back for more questions okay
thank thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you okay I appreciate the
responses Madam chair
representative enough
thank you okay Representative
Andrea nor in New thank you.
Representative mistreatment Mr
Carter I'm going to ask a
question that hasn't been
answered tangentially gonna ask
it anyway just for clarification
purposes could any of this data
is being collected be used for
prosecutors prosecutorial
processes in individual Madam
chair representative I will
defer to both my ex.
Madam chair representative the
short answer.
Because in our role of the
sentencing commission that is
not one of our who present so
you know we may receive process
information we need to see sort
data but largely what we're
trying to do is to evaluations
of programs and perhaps in some
cases we may be working with
someone who is a prosecutor's
office to create a diversion
program that information to
never have a feedback loop back
to that that office.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative maybe Mr Carter
also answer.
Yes please
Madam chair representative I
agree completely with what Linda
said is we get information but
there's no information that to
answer your question directly a
prosecutor could get from us
they would have to go to another
source to get that information.
Representative witnesses that
was just okay I have
Representative block and the
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative and experts so my
question is regarding the client
ID that you mentioned earlier
can is this client ID created at
the sentencing commission.
For.
We only this commission or does
that also translate to other
departments Madam chair
representative.
Representative I'll defer to my
experts Madam chair
representative yet the client ID
is actually currently right when
they feel quite ID in terms of
program evaluation that is
something that we create on
staff of the commission but part
of the broader
statewide criminal justice data
sharing network for adults only
is looking at integrating the
use of the I think it's called
the state identification number
that's generated by the
department of public safety that
would allow us to track only
adult on defendants through the
criminal justice center once we
get the so I he pushed out to
the other agencies.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative anything after
that Representative.
Madam chair representative.
May I ask my expert witness.
When will that.
State idea occur is it currently
in place madam chair Sanchez yes
the state identification numbers
actually been used for years as
a biometric member at the
Poynter Rosset's created the
issue is in twenty nineteen when
they were brought statutory
changes
we officially agreed that that
would be the number that we
would like to use in the federal
justice their system.
About the budget so right now we
have a project we're looking at
matching engine work system
helping them back fill that
number and then we need to work
on prospectively receiving that
number since its file metrics we
want to receive it
electronically that makes sense
because the more people who
manually type that information
there's a higher risk of being
typed incorrectly so we want it
to be electronic data sharing.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative miss Freeman so.
Regarding juveniles.
How do you have to create a
manual number through your
department just reduced
juveniles and those that have to
be recreated every time the
department shares data about the
juvenile madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative I will for
defiance.
Madam chair representative in
our work what we what we're
doing is using matching
techniques and that's one of the
reasons why it's difficult right
now freezing matching techniques
that involved names dates of
birth and a little bit of fun
that's the logic that makes
sense so in case there's the
entry errors like but you're
making we basically houses on a
use algorithms to scare people
but we have matching techniques
that we currently use.
Chair representative so I guess
my concern is regarding these
juveniles data for using their
name and their their birthday.
I guess that actor could look
into the system if they get this
information somehow and they
could maxed that data from
whatever the data set is to that
individual.
Madam chair representative.
Thanks for.
Madam chair representative I
would like Mr harbor to start
with this answer.
Thank you.
thank you madam chair
Representative Representative
black if I think I follow your
question the if I can restate it
it sounds like you're asking
whether someone could
essentially.
Access our system hack into our
system to do that match
because madam chair
representative any information
that we have as I mentioned
maintains its confidentiality
that it had at the source so if
we get information that the
sentencing commission that's
confidential.
It's confidential if someone
were to hack into the sentencing
commission to get that data for
whatever reason to match it to a
juvenile that's a theoretical
possibility it's a theoretical
possibility added source as well
madam chair
but knowing can't you couldn't
have a public records requests
there's no you can't use a
commission as a backdoor madam
chair representative to get
information that is otherwise
and accessible or confidential I
hope that helps
that gets your question
Representative.
Thank you
Okay Representative ram madam
chair and Douglas here's here's
where I think all the Robinson
on the assets question and I
think we cleared up so we have a
seventeen year old male who's in
the juvenile justice system so
you're going to get the arrest
information you're going to get
is passed priors you're gonna
get a side game formation is is
then read act.
Madam chair representative it
depends on whether you're
talking when it are you are you
asking when it comes to us or
when it leaves us assessed at I
think that's where the confusion
is there's input and the output
madam chair yes madam chair
Douglas go ahead and answer both
sides that.
And madam chair my understanding
and I am Mendes the research
experts so all of our partner
where I I get this wrong but
we'll get the information
identified when it comes to us
because we need that we strip
out that information and assign
internal numbers to work with it
pretty early in the research
process anything that goes out
is D. at what's called the
identified it the identified
aggregated data which means is
not tied individuals at all so
we assign a number internally to
work with it.
When it's published in its
aggregate form and
Representative you've seen our
prison population forecasts and
many of our reports at of course
corrections and Justice.
We have the bar charts and you
know this many prisoners have
been incarcerated for this
offense etcetera that's the
output.
The input would have the name
attached to that information.
But the identifier that
this Freeman was talking about.
We strip away that name and when
we're working on it internally
it has a unique identifier that
we've assigned to it for those
for that essential research
purpose internally and I I
believe Madam chair
representative ream that's how
it works but Linda please
correct me if I was wrong thank
you madam chair.
What's the answer to New.
If I have a question about
something that he stated that
that they need the the
identifier to begin with I'd
like to an explanation as to why
the the that identify can we
left
finishers sorry sure thank you
madam chair.
Representative Rehm first of all
I I do not believe were
contemplating actually receiving
behavioral health data on
juveniles as that was mentioned
there are other safeguards for
juveniles and the rules about
behavior healthy that juveniles
are different than the bills for
adults I do not contemplate that
use I do agree with doubles is
testament and the reason why we
identifiers in the first place
is because we are tracking
individual through systems one
of the the key things that we're
doing is looking at juveniles as
they progress through the adults
system so we want to understand
what characteristics of
juveniles who do not process
people who do not go into the.
Those who do so without those
identifiers we do not be able to
follow them into the adult
system once those murders
happened we do get in a fight as
as quickly as possible.
Okay Representative Rehm for the
first of madam chair so for the
follow the process once they
become an adult of can read
them.
Can we now see the adults saying
with a juvenile record.
Madam chair representative I'm
asking for money.
Experts say.
Madam chair representative often
what we would do is create
aggregate composite of the
juvenile records so not the
individual records for that but
that that individual had contact
with the juvenile justice system
if that makes sense and what
types of cases what types of
outcomes.
Madam chair representative when
you ask
US can we see.
Is the we the public or is that
we the sentencing commission at
the sentencing commission we
could put those pieces together
but nothing that goes to the
public would be able to trace it
back.
Okay makes sense madam chair.
Thank you I hope that.
Part of it but it is or maybe
and muddy the waters okay
Representative little and then
Representative some marketers
have.
Representative what
Representative little and we do
pass thank okay we'll go to
Representative Zamora and
Representative block and then
back to the motion.
you madam chair thank you so.
Representative so.
You get the information.
Identified.
And then you still go back to
other entities that have
information or other government.
Or dust or whatever you go back
with that identifier and
research this individual's
records am I getting that right
or the information that you
received is what you get and
which workforce.
Chair representative this data
is used for a variety of
purposes and so I will defer to
my expert witness to talk about
details of the operation that is
why the.
Information is identified first
and then aggregated into a
larger database because its use
for different purposes and I do
for mistreatment and madam chair
and representative and that's
exactly where I need some
clarification is.
Why do you need to identify.
And the use that to still go
back and find out more
information on that particular
these thank you madam chair and
representative Madam chair
representative it is my
understanding that
The sentencing commission may
one of the many services that
they're providing may be needing
to track this to not from not
just from juvenile to adult but
from county to county and so
that identifier would be a form
and I I will defer to my experts
wouldn't surprise further
clarification.
Madam chair representative what
I think the revisions is like
with regard to adult the that
particular commission actually
has a steady flow of information
that we receive from our
partners including the point on
the department of public safety
those kinds of things I'm on the
rear case that we're working on
a project for were actually
tracking juveniles we received
that that I that juvenile
information into the match it's
not like constantly going back
in time in doing those things
these projects have the specific
evaluation purpose I hope that
answers your question.
And thank you thank you the
presenters and thank you madam
chair.
Representative off the manager
of the Representative the
question so can the person who
has this Ivy League this ideas
identifying them can request
that from the department Madam
chair representative madam chair
representative I'll defer to my
experts witness.
it the individual could not on
and that was made need to
clarify this for me but
individuals can not ask the
commission for any of the
information that in our
possession what we typically do
is even when we receive it broke
last we refer them back to the
agency that contributed
information.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
your budget go ahead okay.
Mr Carter did you want to add to
that.
the madam chair that was
precisely correct thank you
madam chair right okay a we have
a motion on the table where do
pass in the second
let's take role.
Representative on your morning
yes.
Representative loft.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative little yes.
Representative ring yes ma'am.
Representative Zamora no.
Representative lost.
yes.
I saw the court.
Have a lot of those committee.
Vice chair figure all.
Madam chair Johnson yes.
With over six to one okay you
have a do pass on your house
bill good lesson Judiciary.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee thank you okay house
memorial eight.
Years
here is the moral twenty eight
this is just that we will be
sending two on if it
successfully.
Approved floor and dignity we
will be sending this to.
just basically stating that
New Mexico legislator is asking
for Washington DC the state.
Percent of Washington DC has the
population the state of Wyoming.
it just has all the operational
measures and it needs and
currently we are taxing its
citizens without allowing them
of voting representation in
Congress this is what I believe.
We we against our founding
fathers.
While working for
It is the.
It is just a simple support
that of the we believe that with
taxation there must be
representation and I stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr Ian's do we have
comments in support of the bill
House memorial.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I had a Berlin
president of the league of women
voters in New Mexico the league
has a long held position that
citizens of the district of
Columbia should have the rights
of self government and full
representation in Congress the
United States is.
We continue to believe there
should the station without
representation and we ask you to
support this memorial thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Ellen
pods and I'm here today
representing myself on a new
organization the state of my
hometown so I am particularly
grateful Representative K.
profiles or it is scandalous
that residents partitions
capital city do not have
representation in Congress.
Education.
Not have the right to self
governance as both sponsor and
other people in the numbers
residents are the two of mention
of.
If you've been to DC we.
License plates that say taxation
without representation on we
fought a revolution over that
principle but two and a half
centuries later.
The people of the state or sell
subject to it so that the New
Mexico legislature will go on
record as supporting the rights
of citizens of the city thank
you thank you all right I don't
see any chance of the web for
supporting COVID.
David.
After dating is what you are
speaking opposition to this
bill.
Okay go head.
Yes thank you madam chair of of
the members I was to support the
search on the internet about
this issue to split up with for
your consideration.
Is that the stated purpose of
this bill is to provide
representation for the residents
of the state which is a good
thing but I stated purposes I
found out is that it will
provide to additional US Senate
seats for the Democrat party
which is up so those that
mention in addition to a
additional house in addition to
the house.
so pervasive of this site's this
up going to statehood this
option I just called
retrocession and what that is is
that it will return the best
majority of DC back to Maryland
the state what she was stated
back in seventeen ninety and
this was done originally when
the issue was so important when
the city's of Arlington and it's
out Alexandria were
basically us here to do seeing
no they contacted between
eighteen forty six for the rest
president for the summer session
a concept at it could be an
option that you should consider
because what it does is so the
folks in DC up as you would say
of a bigger bang for the Buck as
far as representation because so
they would have
this will be from part of what
Maryland and there was.
Yes and I said the source lack
diversity that's another thing
as far as the ones work better
than unconfirmed stated they
would have liked American to
what to back up on that thank
you very much sure next we have
nine a rocker or you in support
or opposition to the bill.
I'm here to support.
Please state your comment.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is me out record from the ACLU
of New Mexico and I'm based out
of Los crucis I'm here to
provide support on behalf of the
ACLU of New Mexico and actual on
behalf of our affiliate in DC
that feels very strongly about
this as well for HM twenty
eight.
Washington DC is the only
national capital in the
democratic world citizens do not
have equal voting and
representation rights.
It is long past time for DC to
be granted statehood making DC a
state is not a partisan issue if
the campaign for equal civil
rights it is a democratic effort
to re enfranchise nearly seven
hundred thousand Americans who
have been wrongfully denied
their fulls voting rights for
more than two hundred years
every person who believes in our
democracy and equal rights
should support DC state had and
I to do pass thank you thank
you.
Their hands raised back to the
audience do we have any comments
in opposition to the bill.
Seeing none committee members
Representative Rehm and then
Representative blocked.
madam chair and Representative
Kate so.
What our founding fathers of.
First column where these staff
all play would New York City and
they looked at Philadelphia's
and then why did they choose the
C..
Madam chair representative I'd I
believe that that would be a
better served answer from a
professor of history but I will
tell you that they were it was
chosen in eighteen oh one and is
hi what
limited.
Still Senator.
I have studied is it was a
centralized area when our
country was divided before the
war.
Madam chair and representative
Kate.
Partially on it I'm not the
professor of history but what
they wanted to find was a
neutral site.
And
James Madison wrote in
federalist forty three paper
that.
That all states should be given
a fair shot at expressing their
needs and American government he
said that if DC were a state
voting member in DC would use
their powers because they are
physically close to the center
governor and so the idea was
we're gonna have ten square
miles and that will be we're
this government is and we don't
want to have them have undue
influence on
the government in our I think
that that's really an important
decision and when we ask you
does this does the seat stand
outside of the ten miles square
miles.
Madam chair representative says
management respond I will say
that when Mr chair NASA was of
growth that we did not have the
internet's so maybe physical
proximity was important but in a
very globalized world we are as
close to DC as anyone else's at
this point
I am not familiar with the
orders I will say that the
population with in the DC area
is approximately the same is our
state of Wyoming.
Madam chair representative K. so
DC actually stands outside of
the ten square miles and as the
one person spoke they can.
They can rejoining Maryland and
stay with more.
The original DC way and came
from Virginia and Maryland.
yes so they could they could go
back and join that so madam
chair and
Representative cage committee
vote for president currently.
Madam chair representative they
are able to participate in all
of our government's elections.
And
Madam chair and Representative
Kate so they've that all all go
ahead and tell you they've got
three electoral votes of you
know so they're participating in
the election and I appreciate
the they have that and they have
local government as well I
really think that the founding
fathers were
Really spent a lot of time not
only on our constitution but
trying to make things equal and
fair process I understand the
issue the that you're trying to
say but
I can't supported I think that
we need to follow our founding
fathers and and what they.
What the rationale for
these thank you madam chair
thank you representative
Representative block thank you
madam chair thank Representative
so.
Bill or your mortgage I don't
see any where in here that says.
You the constitutional
amendment.
Is that we we are we are.
I'm sorry Madam chair
representative.
By this us this morning.
We are communicating to
contracts that we were wanting
to move forward was already
voted.
And
Eighteen ninety seven.
Us to move forward with making.
The district of Columbia say.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so our founding
fathers I think that explicitly
put forward that this must be
neutral state we had folks in
the Senate and the house that
were.
you know regarding.
They were voting members and
they would have I'm doing.
So I think that is just
something to now and then we do
also support.
One in the Marshall Islands
also.
Having such representation in
Congress chair representative
Madam chair representative if
Representative block would like
to bring new memorial two I
would be gladly respect when we
read that before making a
decision thank you madam chair
thank you Representative that's
all the questions I have madam
chair I move a do not pass.
We can.
the table for a do not pass.
Thank you
chair for please forgive a
freshman.
Am I able to closing remarks.
After the.
Thank you very much for your
patience we have a motion for a
do not pass this by
Representative Zamora a second
by Representative block.
Please take full.
Representative on your new.
Representative lock.
Yes do not pass.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative level no.
Representative green yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Vice chair Figueroa no.
Madam Johnson no.
Three three.
So we have a vote in the three
three and
of your do not pass the motion.
Yes.
Well to come out floating Center
so your your house memorial.
as he has done has not died.
Has it been table.
Closing comments please.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative to
I am.
Very disappointed.
Of the politicization.
Of providing.
Communication that we would want
district of Columbia the state
that we would go against that
basic principle of taxation
without representation.
And as many of us are
generational New Mexicans we may
have remembered stories in our
past as the territory under the
control of the United States
with out all of our rates and
access
as a state we are fairly a new
state and we still have a
generational memory what that is
currently the district of
Columbia must completely relied
on the federal government for
its funding stream which
prevents them from of many of
their self self governing and
planning.
I respectfully I am grateful for
your time and your consideration
and hopes to bring this back.
Thank thank you Representative.
Okay next we have on the agenda
house bill two zero four.
Armstrong.
The jury.
I'm here.
Some.
This is
the chair.
The.
Yes.
This
can
Yes.
Right Representative Armstrong
house bill two zero four thank
you madam chair
Thank you for hearing the bill
scheduling and I appreciated the
unfortunate thing is I did bring
samples for everyone.
We did bring a sample this is
what this bill does Hospital
tool for is that.
Related to the state so.
All together several of all this
cheap though is the state could
be wise is the state to have so
on and so forth so what came to
my attention that we should have
we don't have state mineral.
And so what we are introducing
madam chair members of the
committee.
This night from the county money
in Magdalene Sicko.
should be accounted.
For the state mineral with me I
have John recommend from
the bureau of geology and I'm
not sure the title I'm sorry in
the state legislative curator of
the.
School using.
And without madam chair I'd like
to have him say a few words if
you don't mind.
Thank you for this
It's interesting New Mexico is
one of the most mineral wealthy
states in the United States if
we don't have a state.
I came from a island as Rovers
verses are minerals and
Representative but it had a
statement back in the fifties.
so we wanted to propose a state
funeral for New Mexico there are
many obvious choices many you
might think of of Koppers being
one of them prior to copper
silver very important in state
history in mind in the state of
Florida is another one million
data and so familiar with there
are a lot of possible choices
but in the mineral water cool
community and in terms of just
international recognition
there's one mineral that New
Mexico is associated with in
fact I did a whole of curators
mineral curators around the
world champion China full of the
elsewhere and asked what mineral
do you associate with New Mexico
and their hundred percent this
answer was missing in is because
of specimens like this obviously
beautiful and almost unique to
New Mexico affect the Kelly
million megalitres mining
district is world famous for
this particular colors.
So terms of state recognition I
think there's no better choice
than this minerals to identify
in New Mexico to the world as a
state.
Also things like copper for I
have been used by the state this
is because you need.
And without chair we stand for
questions okay let's go to the
audience do we have
Comments in support of the bill.
Any comments in opposition to
the bill go to the web cast any
comments on a half board or
opposition.
Seeing and committee members
Representative Zamora thank you
madam chair and thank you
presenters and expert witness
what is Smith and Smith's ideas
for street.
Madam chair smis and night is
used for and for of sync sync is
a metal it's a critical mineral
to the United States actually
some critical metals last.
For many applications you know
that that think outside can be
created it's not provide it's
actually created from taking
things from things like Smith's
and I make things that cost are
used in make up issues in cell
block
history is inviting in the
medical industry comes from the
use in paints up Sherman
Williams was actually one of the
earliest.
Industries or companies mining
zinc and lead in the back of the
district for peace so that there
are many many other applications
it's a like a higher like copper
it has a multitude of
applications but
I don't have time to get into
the history of it very
interesting from the perspective
of where this comes from the.
The
pandemic eight our understanding
of sink industry.
And madam chair and presenters
we also use a lot of zinc to
farm well Feaster New Mexico is
known for some think
deficiencies and if we don't put
zinc on our corn crop we're
we're usually in trouble so as
to so yes it's it's part of.
Part of who we are the world and
we have in our bodies and the
grounds thank thanks thing that
takes a.
Balance nutrient level to grow
good crops and and sync is one
of the one of the new
micro nutrients that we use in
farming.
Madam chair I move this past.
Have a motion for.
Yeah.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair.
So we have to pass.
Is there any opposition to the
motion.
The man Representative we have
to pass on to go congratulations
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Present voting in the
affirmative.
Thank you.
To get into.
We.
House Bill respects the right.
To.
Thank you.
Committee.
Doing this of.
As we know the work we decided
not to okay that's okay already
committee chair thanks committee
the committee for having this
morning I have with the two
experts I have please who is on
with the team at icasa and and
also have K. weeks to research.
As well and I'll turn it over
the million but I wanted to kind
of check in with you about H.
two three three six which is
that that education and what
this bill simply does this
enabling legislation to create a
data sharing committee which is
made up of experts and appointed
individuals to do so to keep
things that are done in our
state on the one to review the
current data structures and
platforms insuring reporting
protocols that we currently have
in our agencies and our bodies
here to to look at the
procedures to ensure the data is
compiled and maintained and
shared away responsible and
effective three to present that
plan to the legislative finance
by the first of twenty twenty
January first of twenty twenty
five and finally give feedback
on all their research done to
the legislature and wrecked it
does not engage with individual
that and that way that's not a
risk in this what it does is
really help us understand how to
best utilized for the past four
decades there are many places
where now that the point of that
too much New Mexico just isn't
one of those spots we're at a
time that we have the
opportunity we have sufficient
data we can when we get the
agencies can run regressions and
develop with understanding of
the correlations of behaviors or
or use of services on we can
utilize that data to provide
services more efficiently and
effectively targeted better and
so right now all the data we
have so I the agency that have
other similar tasks or the same
task cannot share that
information and are unable to
develop efficient.
On know what we have in New
Mexico in addition to the
resources of the losses that
have that wonderful resource in
New Mexico tech and the high
cost eighteen hundred have done
similar work for the U. N. and
others which is just so exciting
we have reserves right in the
state we want to utilize that to
ensure that we are creating the
best practices how do we do I do
or remove the in the
identification of matters from
data to still pull for the
information be really helpful
and so with that I'm happy to
hand over to my experts if you
want to say anything for you.
Over.
Representative chair
representative may need some
Senator registered lobbyists
from Bernalillo county.
anyway that's what I
specifically have an interest in
this and the answer that
Bernalillo county on a county
level engaged in a but two year
effort to try to figure out how
to promote broader data sharing
amongst the criminal justice
partners locally and what we
found is that we ran into not
technical problems we ran into
governments from your office.
We hired a guy named John
control whose attorneys and
national experts on data sharing
the.
Range from the legals.
It is that we have to create and
establish well for governance
structures to guide how the the
shared amongst part of this
meeting how do you best the
identify the data how do you
just store the data how do you
create station remains on your
price level that can be used
across the state agencies that
we Senator enterprise agreements
can be rolled out statewide so
that the courts feel more
comfortable sharing their data
with the central school the
district attorney's feel the
same eight eight HSD feels the
same D. O. H. feels the same so
the reality here is this is
still is all about assessing
what's out there in terms of
data projects assessing what's
out there in terms of
platforming I was being used and
then coming up with a governance
structure that will allow us to
do broad expected responsible
data sharing in the future
number states follow this
relevant model I hate to say
this is Texas to Colorado
Colorado also did to
California they all have a
different a different concept on
it at present but they all
started similar to where we will
get a bill like what we're
looking at today assessing
what's out there and making
really good decisions about how
best to move forward in terms of
the promotion officers.
All right madam chair members of
the committee Representative
thank you very much you're
likely I'm the chief technology
officer for the institute of
complex additive systems
analysis I've been there since
two thousand and one when I was
an intern with a short break for
eight years where I serve the
state at the department of
information technology so the on
the back window in I guess and
so so madam chair and members of
the New Mexico tech and the
costs I have been some of this
for our involvement started with
some work that we've been doing
with Bernalillo county both
through their criminal justice
coordinating council on some
data integration efforts and my
director Michael Smith to
unfortunately wasn't able to be
here today because he was ill
had had even shared with their
data integration subcommittees
early on in those days and then
work with the New Mexico
sentencing commission on a
number of data sharing
initiatives some of which you've
heard about this morning with
the some of the different
identifiers such a so from the
perspective of of you know of
New Mexico tech and Costa we've
been doing we like to joke that
we've been doing big data since
since we started in two thousand
one we just like to approach it
in a different way which is
really understand how is that
data yes belies what's the
imported data once the data that
you don't necessarily have to
patients into and then one of
the systems one of the more one
that data.
Yes use so I think so I think
the university slaughtered by
the opportunity to potentially
support this council I think
we've got a number of folks with
unique vantage points and quite
a bit of experience in terms of
that systems understanding and
out from having both workers at
the state directly on many of
the system and now working in
support from a research capacity
on understanding what are some
of the ways that we can
encourage better sharing things
like criminal justice public
safety.
Throughout this led to the
others filled at the the
university institute of I think
this could be a pretty you know
we love the research this will
be fun for us I think but I
think it could also help tribal
law in terms of what the state
is able to do in terms of making
value of the state things are
opportunities for responsible
sharing data and shared services
that reduced expenditures are
better better friends streamline
and rationalize Policy for the
individual agencies understand
what's what's going renewable
for sharing so something that
we're happy to be here and that
that.
The committee center questions.
Okay to the audience do we have
the.
Members of the audience who'd
like to make comments in support
of the bill.
Okay.
Beginning with my right.
Members of the staff Christian
structure this for the New
Mexico counties we think that
this bill is a great idea and
especially for county sheriff.
Around.
Public safety issues like that
said we support subsection thank
you.
madam chair members of the
the discusses the registry
office of the press or
technology councils for bill
this is about using the this all
a lot of our problems and I
think serve you better start the
interim talk about evidence
based policy this really is a
separation uses the data
processor for that agencies to
come.
The moves on a director
government affairs chair New
Mexico tech support this.
Thank you for to the webcast.
Comments in support of this
bill.
To the webcast comments in
opposition.
Seeing and audience in
opposition of the bill.
Good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Sandra Payne I am
chief technology officer for the
administrative office of courts
while opposition is slightly
stronger use I am here to
support the concept of data
sharing but expressed concerns
that there may be unintended
consequences of this bill the
courts are several years into a
successful effort among justice
partners that both protects and
ensures data your little
endorsing the effort that simply
are exist for would divert
limited resources and possibly
cause us to start over thirty
years.
Thank you committee members.
Representative.
Chairman of the to pass okay we
have a motion for just a second
we have a second do we have any
opposition.
Seeing none
Please show all present showing
in the affirmative you have to
pass thank you madam chair.
And house bill three zero one
has been rolled.
requested by the sponsor so we
will go to house bill three one
eight Representative.
Era.
I think that.
Representative we don't have a
quorum and so we're both but we
can hear presentation.
Audience.
Share good morning morning madam
chair good morning committee
members who are here
today and see House Bill three
eighteen introduce smile expert
witness is Kathryn Clark she is
setting case county clerk
is
here Representative.
This is the following thirty
three counties.
So today
I wanted to.
Come together into state really
quickly madam chair just bring
credit to all of our county
clerks again seven thirty three
counts of thirty three point and
they have brought us through you
election cycles during the
pandemic and during some other
extraordinary times the fires in
northern New Mexico.
And I just want to give them
highlights.
The lady that they have with the
able to do as the hold our
purses and hands and with that I
will introduce in tell you what
they have recommended in this
bill.
Thirty three three teens and
then selection code.
And it increases the cap amount
of action board members earn
election date.
Two four hundred dollars can
find alternative methods.
Hello it allows.
To begin processing the
registration from thirty five
days after election day to the
Monday after the approved
approval of the county support.
If.
The code to require applications
for absentee ballots to receive.
To be received fourteen days
prior to election day the card
is sent to a different address
Destruction the state records
administrator store these
records during the retention
period upon request by the
county clerk which costs for
storage aid from the state
election fund and authorize that
Mr to destroy those records
after expiration of the
retention.
Period pursuant to the
administrators procedures
governing disruption record.
And it doesn't.
The
incredible function V. three
eighteen thousand feels current
law and it acts a new section
providing the records relating
to the voting are exempt from
public inspection except as
provided in New Mexico into
sixty days following campus
contest for recounts.
After that time during any
retention period and prior to
destruction inspection is only
allowed pursuant to good posture
in Concord District Court.
The person whether or not
officer official custodian who
willfully violates this secrecy
of the ballot.
Steals destroys consumes
mutilates or alters any record
or prior to be retained by this
section is guilty of a
misdemeanor for each such
record.
Exempt.
Digitize forms of paper ballots
and records related for voting
from retention and to provide
records related to me for any
early voter application voter
registration or act I wonder
where the action for
Representative to voting in an
election.
So that is the whole purpose of
this bill and so what that's why
again for cremation on so with
that I'd like to turn to my
left was witness are.
Santa Fe to give any other
information as we're trying to
wait for.
Important.
Yes thank you thank you madam
chair members of the committee
these are the this is three
priorities from the clerk
offered for their support this
bill and other county attorneys
and the efforts recognized that.
Very serious concerns about it
for a and it rang of our records
so the reason why the person
identified these issues is the
first is that what recognizes
that extremely difficult to past
of whole workers on election day
that is the majority of the
voting that happens in the state
to work sixteen to twenty hours
a day and only be paid two
hundred dollars is it is a lot
of work is organizational
challenges they have to the
teams that have to do a phone or
if there's a lot technology now
in voting and you're having a
very difficult time especially
with the threats against full
workers recruiting people to
work and so we want to raise the
cap of two hundred dollars four
hundred dollars another issue
that we're seeing as clerks
that we are having to wait to
process your registration we
used to actually have the books
the voter registrations and
that's what we call closing the
books that we used to close the
books when the first savoring
happened on early voting and
then we have to wait until
everything was sorted out post
Candace and you find survive
election because you don't have
books anymore it does not make
sense to delay that voter
registration piece so once he
approve that Alexion during the
county campus we want to get
back to processing of
registration because online
voter registrations have been
tossed for thirty days and
there's a huge backlog that
takes us months to catch up on
so just trying to make the
administrative actions easier
for us.
And then the third piece is that
unfortunately we are the state
in which the postal service
sends all of our callers for all
of our counties out of state off
often out of state and then back
into the state so we see a seven
to ten day turnaround so current
law motors can ask for an
absentee ballots up until the
Friday before Alexion day but we
know those those ballots will
and we are required to send
billions of dollars more right
on time so what we're going back
to twenty language that some
scented SB four which says that
you can only request an absentee
ballot if you are in state forty
days before because we know we
don't want to set up voters.
We want to be able to send out
balance they will have seven
days to get there and seventies
return we do have drop boxes in
many counties where voters could
drop balances in some counties
of the job losses are pretty far
apart we want to make sure that
we're not setting up lotus
off and so we moved the deadline
for us just like it was during
the twenty twenty election you
did a job getting the word out
letting people know that the
deadline is coming up and we
were able to make sure that
during the pandemic a lot of
people who buy more also noted
that deadlines works and it make
sure that ballots will get to
where they're supposed to go on
time.
Then finally the different
changes we have a service more
concrete changes to the federal
law we wanted to look at cases
where people want to have so
right now he's in the statute we
are destroying we completed the
retention period and restoring
paper ballots the only have to
notify the chairs of the major
parties that cuts out the public
anyone applying to state so
we're trying to create a
structure in which people and
learn about the destruction of
the doctor follow with the
public records administrator
recommends we will destroy those
ballots at the time.
Another issue we're seeing is
that people are using it as a
weapon so what we're going to
elections you're trying to get
ready for election they are
making all sorts of requests we
would like to have so currently
in law they can't request we
were trying to do our canvassing
and preparing our results so
we'd like to make clarity that
essentially what we're trying to
conduct elections not the time
to requests from the certainly
adequate during the retention
period that is the time to
request paper balance permits
applications and any of the
materials that we have sent the
secretary state those of the
paper versions often we see
people asking for what's called
the past record which is on our
results computer but what's
important to understand is that
the results computer does not
are not the actual official
results that's what we upload
on's Alexion night so that the
public can see what our service
please hold our results are
still have not processed or
provisional ballots and still
have not process R. balance of
your received after that job
losses of close but we still
have access to I mean you see
them for the job losses close we
can have time for us to point to
process them for any balance
that we're here so are official
results actually come from the
physical tapes from the tech
years right so what they're
asking for in these official
request is actually has not much
to do with the official results
so we're doing is we're
clarifying we want to make
anything that was available for
the secretary of state to campus
the election available for for
you with that that saying that
anything that was the digital
Clemente that's actually for the
unofficial result is not part of
what we must retain.
So madam chair.
Well the first question okay
thank you Representative and
thank you for taking us through
that is now reporting on record
so those folks who are here can
see it and hear it and we're
gonna go ahead and take public
comment today because you were
on the agenda for today and you
might have folks here who want
to get testimony so I don't want
to move that even though we
don't have a quorum for voting
today we will do the public
testimony.
If you are finished with your
comments Representative thank
you madam chair we are we will
stand for questions okay then
we'll go to the room is anyone
here to speak in favor of the
bill.
Please stand state your name.
Thank you madam chair and
members Catherine Christiane The
New Mexico counties and and
actually this Madam is I think
important for all members here
are the first what we think the
sponsor for critical piece of
legislation forward for the
clerks and the county I think
it's important to note that yes
all thirty three court clerks
are supporters that also all
thirty three counts are
supportive of this legislation
The New Mexico counties selected
this piece of legislation has a
legislative priority for this
session specific.
For the reasons that
I stated in her testimony but
also highlighting the properties
because the courts are being
inundated with requests you
cannot complete their critical
work to complete Alexion's that
is why the accounts have
selected this is a critical
piece of legislation.
Thank you very much for your
support.
Thank you.
There anyone else here in
support.
Is there anyone here in
opposition.
We'll go to see none will go to
the zoo is there anyone on the
soon to is here in support of
the house bill three one eight.
And is there anyone here in
opposition.
Okay I see none of either
because we do have for this
morning we're gonna have to roll
the vote on this bill to a
future date.
Chair can you say
when will it into tomorrow or
Monday.
Since we started.
Presentation and let's go ahead
and.
Both of our day tomorrow which
is full and so is Monday but
probably the better day would be
tomorrow.
Related.
Take care to quickly learn thank
you.
Twelve thirty or one o'clock
posted really appreciate that
thank you so much thank you for
the opportunity to present.
You.
Thank you.
I think there.
Yes some of these problems.
Yeah.
Thank okay.
Yes that is the.
Casey vice chair thank you madam
chair thank you ram this house
every.
Sure.
We have this is the difference.
The staff to to them.
Madam chair and not work this
past season regional.
Okay this one for discussion
going okay we have a motion yes.
houses over relations immunity
they're substitute for house
bill one point three.
And I will second.
In the present.
Thank you madam chair house bill
one forty three as.
Combination two issues.
Governor and and lease
agreements for charter schools
so we separated out into two
separate bills means for you in
the committees that are just the
element W. to lease agreements
and charter schools guiding
practice around that.
The bill was inspired.
Madam chair and committee by two
thousand thirteen LFC report
that flagged some loopholes in
our statute around how tired
leases are done and suggested
that we close them so this bill
this committee substitute you
are looking at ten to do just
that.
Home
page for.
Public school capital outlay
council.
To give information about local
market rates.
and I would just note the word
main online six this is not a
child this may.
Nine.
There's a lot of.
Existing page here I'm trying to
highlight the changes for you.
Nine.
The new charters need to be in
average condition.
And this please note is new
charters only it does not affect
existing charter schools.
In the state.
Page eleven.
Just as an employee.
The language person shall not
serve as a member of the
governing body or as an employee
at the charter school.
And then.
Which gives power to the
charming Authority.
To review approve and report to
the department that PED
department all charter school
conflict of interest disclosures
once a year.
So these are the fourteen ages
that are proposed manager I am
expert witness is setting new
the LFC US extensive knowledge
of the original report and how
this committee substitute
addresses those concerns.
Share.
I don't know if you wanted to
highlight the other section that
talks about restricted uses for
the system.
Thank you.
One more page.
Seventy.
Sixteen and seventeen.
Which is actually one of the
main points of the LFC made flex
of the regional LESC report.
That.
The.
The state makes out with
taxpayer dollars for charter
school leases should be used for
this language says shall not be
used for operational
expenditures that seems to be
where some of the problems
arise.
Funds that were intended for
facility increases in.
Used for operational
expenditures
so this language specifically
states for propane is that thank
you.
And just to add a little context
and share the committee.
E. as as you're probably well
aware the state auditor recently
released a special report on the
great academy which is a charter
school in the
Albuquerque Albuquerque district
there was findings that the
charter school had effectively
use some of its lease payments
to provide bonuses and
additional payments to the
founder of the charter school
and also concerns about issues
a police officer in the.
And charter schools.
Your honor and come forward and
ask you to consider language to
address potentially these issues
maybe not completely closing The
Little Falls the trading
additional guardrails in place
in statute so that these issues
could be red flagged this bill
attempts to do a lot of these
particular issues in various
ways
not state the perfect solution
but it tends to get better
approach to identifying
potential instances with this
product I had it in additional
questions on the two thousand
thirteen evaluation that of
Representative the hero into
earlier or the special audit
from the state County.
Thank you madam chair that.
I don't know if we have people
here to stand for questions but
public testimony maybe thank you
Representative all right let's
go to the audience let's hear
comments in support of the bill.
How about in opposition to the
bill.
Sir.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that all of
public charter schools of New
Mexico
we has been a sponsor of again
this bill we haven't seen the
committee so but as we
understand it we do have a
couple of concerns
first is that this is creating a
double standard between charter
schools and traditional.
it's mentioned that the
that new charter school.
Get into facilities that are
rated less than average with and
and see hundred Mexico
conditions index.
Correct is that our funding will
be poll for that and I just want
one what happens to traditional
public schools and school
districts when they are below
average of the NCI the have the
ability to get millions of
dollars in extra funds to get
into facility we see that is
really troubling that a certain
class of public schools are
being singled out to boost
funding within other classrooms
created this division being
created fill up this is getting
rewarded for having standard
like that we have no issue with
the schools that are conflicts
of interests both uniforms
lawyers as well we do have a
problem with that in the find a
church schools especially when
the most recent iteration of
widespread fraud occurred in
Albuquerque public schools with
an employee who was funneling
funds to their own business so
we're really confused by this
only applies to charter schools
and not to traditional public
schools to safeguard the funds
for all public education we
stand opposition thank you.
Sir.
Find our representative Senator.
Sentifi.
Our our schools are very much
opposed this legislation.
It's really very discriminatory
especially if you don't remember
public schools.
Further comments.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I was out of on
the executive director New
Mexico kids can't.
And we believe there's lots of
good parts of this I'm bill
particulate differences really
emphasized making sure that our
school boards and governing
boards charter schools
superintendents are aligned on
the that we because most
important which is the student
outcomes of the students in our
public schools today we however
have lots of concerns about all
of the components including the
training requirements I think if
you ask for members right now
across the state if they find
their current training valuable
they will tell you that many of
them don't find valuable so
requiring more of a training
that isn't really helping them
become better school board
members is our primary concern
I'm as well as a few other
details for thank you.
Okay further comments.
Okay we'll go to the webcast we
are here Thomas and supported a
bill.
K..
Passes your comments.
As a that.
Middle college high school.
We got the ability of madam
chair and.
The honorable committee members
this is doctor Robert hunter
from the middle college high
school.
And
We are New Mexico's oldest early
college high school we serve
primarily a native students from
Navajo Nation the pueblo of Zuni
over seventy percent of the
enrollment is from either one of
those locations and we do a very
successful job getting our
students on to higher ed more
than eighty percent of them go
on to college and remain in
college after graduation from
our program but just wanted to
highlight I haven't seen the the
sub for this particular bill I
want to just echo some of the
things though that we're noting
in this particular the draft
that I have seen and like what
Matt had said you know the the
double standard that we're
looking at so for example that
conflict of interest language I
think that's fine I you know
governance and administration
should not be engaging in
conflicts of interest the issue
is when it applies just to you
know the charter schools I mean
Matt highlighted what happened
APS mean I would I would say
that our local district L.
McKinley of might be the next
big story you know you've got a
board president who owns many
businesses that contract
directly you know with the the
district and these are areas
that are very much of concern
and it seems like you know the
bad press one bad actor like
great academy is it is an issue
and you know we don't want to
get it covers of interest but
school districts most definitely
are the ones are going to be the
the high profile stories too and
they need to probably
be included of course the
condition and New Mexico or is
that a concern of ours as well
because you're looking at a
situation where we could get
funding pulled whereas you know
regular school districts they
get prioritize for additional
funding if they're below that
average score so and the concern
about the standardized lease
provision if it still exists in
here it really I think in it
this incentivizes potential
these providers because they
have to work through the
burdensome of slow processes of
the.
Get department it's going to
make a Tina Turner these a lot
more difficult you know we only
have a limited avenues for
leases to begin with so we're in
opposition of this because of
the the very blatant double
standard that it presents I mean
if it could get cleaned up at
the amendments could be enough
that we can apply things
equitably and not have a double
standard you know but the public
schools and I think we did a
great job with students I am
getting better results and so I
don't think we should be
punished for you know those
kinds of things and I appreciate
your time.
Thank you next we have Serra
States Gerald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce just some
comments on the way we
understand the substitute bill
it's already a major challenge
for public charter schools to
find and secure facilities this
bill would complicate that
problem further it's also an
unnecessary hurdle and we're all
for conflict of interest
disclosure and public charter
schools but it makes no sense to
single them out these kinds of
provisions should apply to all
public schools whether charter
or traditional and could help
prevent abuse and fraud in both
contexts so we respectfully
oppose this legislation it's
unfair and it's targeting of one
type of public school over
another and because it would
make it harder for charter
school leaders to provide school
buildings for the families they
serve thank you.
Thank you and I'll go back to
the audience one more once more.
Any comments in either support
or opposition.
In line.
Committee members you want to
have a discussion sure we wait
until tomorrow when we have.
More.
Is.
The.
And madam chair with the
committee stuff to you know be
posted online so the folks who
don't have access to it can
read.
we have to it doesn't.
Thank you yes okay.
I don't know that we can't we
don't have one that's right so
and change to make.
Public people can email me.
The the copy of the committees
that okay already and then.
We will hear this bill and
tomorrow tomorrow.
At the beginning about twelve
thirty or one thank you for yes.
Thank you okay let's.
We are very happy good day.
