Because.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move out of the
business messages in addition it
is so ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill nine Senate bill eighty one
in requests the currents of the
house respectfully submitted
shady behind Senate chief clerk
this is ruby entered.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I move we go that
order business third reading of
legislation to no objection it
is so ordered.
From someone.
Mr speaker I move that we
suspend the twenty four hour
rule with regard SB six.
To no objection.
It is so ordered.
On your desk you should have a
supplemental calendar and just
for the memberships benefit and
for those watching at home to
consultation with both
leadership offices we've
we've agreed to spend twenty
four hour rule noted to bring
Senate bill six which is an
important bill for communities
impacted by the wildfires in
northern New Mexico to the floor
this evening.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker is now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve or one PM house
called to order Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended of the journal show
that all those president this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session there's
some tension is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended as of the record show
that the journal has been read
in full improved subject to
revision and approval of the
rules in order of business
committee if there's injection
it is so ordered.
Gently from Bernalillo.
This is the primary cause of
that order of Business third
reading of legislation attention
is so ordered.
Has a supplemental calendar
being passed out.
And it is also online I
understand for all of you
webcasting or proceedings.
Is a gentleman from.
Colfax morbidity was son begin
and towels ready for item number
one of the supplemental calendar
Mr speaker we get me to the
point that the record reflect
that election Mr for place in
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
with members of the class has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker so
the Senate committee substitute
for Senate bill six does is it
appropriates are have been under
million dollars from the general
fund to DFA for the purpose of
providing zero interest
reimbursable loans to political
subdivisions of the state to
replace or repair infrastructure
damaged by fire flooding or the
breeze flows caused by the
hermit's peak calf canyon fire
and I'm ready for questions Mr
speaker there is debate the
gentleman from Chavis and in a
total Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Hi you Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you can you explain to the
body the protections that the
state has been I understand this
is getting money that's going to
be back filled by FEMA money is
that correct Sir Mr speaker
that's correct what will happen
is the state will go into
contractual agreements with the
subdivisions to get that money
paid back within thirty days
or they get reimbursed and
that'll go back to the general
fund thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman so we
will be guaranteed that we will
get repayment for this money is
that correct.
Mr speaker gentlemen I don't
know that there's a hundred
percent guarantees but the
people that are going to get
access to this money have
applied for FEMA money and there
any on the list for that so
unless the.
Get this money and don't pay
back the money they get
reimbursed.
We should get back the money for
the state Mr speaker.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
I know those people are in.
Right and I'm I'm not arguing
that point at all and I know
that we have the spring rains
come and then Roshen problems
and all of that to do I'm just
trying to make sure that I
understand.
You know there was a fire.
In southern New Mexico that
caused tremendous damage and
I was just trying to figure out
in my mind.
Why we were run and a bill.
That help those sins northern
New Mexico and southern New
Mexico.
Was a but can you speak to that
some Sir Mr speaker gentlemen of
the federal government has
already taken responsibility for
this fire and femara is
assisting with this they're
already going to the process of
getting claims filed this is
going to be a reimbursement from
that money.
So that's the difference between
the two fires
really the federal government
has already taking
responsibility Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I appreciate that that's just
what I wanted to make sure that
I understood that the man has
taken responsibility and the
responsibility is at least a
hundred million dollars.
And so that this money it's your
understanding and what you're
telling the body is that you
believe this money will be
reimbursed a hundred percent is
that correct Mr speaker that is
the hope in the that's what
we're hoping for like I said
this is just a bridge away to
get the money to these people
who need it that money's coming
from the federal government but
there's going to be a delay in
that time frame so what we're
doing is we're trying to get
access to this money right away
thank you Mr speaker.
I appreciate Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you very much.
Debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
supporters on evidence here
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield to me I yield to
my good friend Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
just a comment just want to say
thank you for reading this piece
of legislation up is of the
utmost importance to these
people have been devastated by
the fires Mr speaker but
gentleman that was caused by the
federal government and
you know there is a delay on
everything at the federal
government does this piece of
legislation will bridge the gap
is that correct Sir.
Mr speaker Representative Garcia
yes thank you for for the the
kind comments.
Thank you Mr speaker by
gentleman like I said of thanks
for bringing this up in the
little people are well.
Suffering from these fires will
be really thankful also thank
you very much thank you Mr
speaker.
There's further debate Katrin
grant any that were presented to
us us.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
entitlement please deal with my
good friend.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker really my I
I appreciate you bringing this I
know there's a lot of people who
were harmed during the fires and
so many people are are
struggling and so this is a way
to fast track that that money to
them to the municipalities and
the people that were harmed Mr
speaker I really just have a
couple questions first of all hi
our.
Our folks down in in
southwestern Mexico we're also
harmed.
In in the black fire and so my
question is and I think I know
the answer but I'd like for you
to explain why of the people the
folks in the book in my region
for cover under this bill to
satisfy their needs.
Mr speaker and gentleman from my
understanding is the the black
fire wasn't large enough to
qualify for FEMA funding but I
know the state has a substantial
resources to support as much as
they can for the fire so the
that's the big difference
between the the two fires Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman did it
have to do with the cause of the
fire.
Mr speaker I'm not familiar with
the because of the black fire I
just know that the the hermit's
peak fire the federal government
did take responsibility and
there are assurances that
they're going to reimburse this
money sort of like I said this
is a bridge way to get that
money to them quicker
with the fire in your area from
what I understand it wasn't
large enough to qualify for FEMA
to get reimbursed from the
federal government but it from
what I understand the state is
doing or did what they could to
support as much as they could.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I think a lot of it
happen to the fire itself
happened to fall on a lot of of
federal lands but it but it also
we had flooding Mr speaker that
destroyed a lot of the acequia
is a lot of the diversions and
kept farmers from the even
currently to this time to this
point right now someone don't
have water to their perspective
rate of farms and ranches for
their both their livestock in
their farming land so
my understanding Mr speaker
gentleman is that the reason is
not covered is we have a
definite responsibility from the
federal government on your fire
course on mine in my area not my
fire but in the fire in my area
if it falls under yes different
circumstances and that therefore
it wasn't able to be covered but
I just wanted to hear that from
you Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman I
hope this helps your people
resolve some of the financial
burdens that they have thank you
Mr speaker there's further
debate gentleman from some again
in twenty Representative
Castellano
religion enabled.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I think this bill is very
important for our part of the
for the New Mexico we have been
devastated by the fires and
flooding last year and I think
this bill is going to help our
entities get our people back to
some kind of normality so I
think this bill is something
that the body needs to really
look at and hopefully understand
that this one is needed Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker yes thank you to our
I just wanna say thank you to
our course co sponsors
Mr Senator Campos over here Mr
F. Castellano thank you for
everything
And yes you are correct.
Thank you Mr chairman you let
someone debate
explained to the body.
Losses on these loans Mr Johnson
Mr speaker Mr speaker Sir
These are entities have already
filed claims with FEMA they're
at the on the list that's
already
been gone through so basically
these people that have already
been put on this list are those
that are the entities that are
of course they have to be
political subdivisions because
if we open this up to everyone
we'd be putting half of our
state's budget we're doing what
we can as a state to support
this in the bridge to help as
many people as we can but those
are the people we're helping and
the process will go through
through that list and up that's
our starting off Mr speaker
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker also can
you explain why there's the
emergency clause the speaking
German.
Mr speaker gentlemen and co
sponsor of the we run.
The sun again and more on all
the communities affected by this
fire to have that money as soon
as possible
the spring runoff is coming we
want them to be able to fix some
of these waterways
a classic as roads and eighteen
that they need to they feel is
important enough drinking water.
What the access to that money so
these things can be addressed as
soon as possible Mr speaker
gentleman thank you Mr speaker.
also a gentleman I just want to
comment that this summer we had
a sub committee from LFC go out
and I think madam chair
Lundstrom but the subcommittee
together to help work on these
fires but like Senator rules
thanks for the best.
Senator Campos and his email is
very ill had just come back from
surgery things out there Mr
speaker and gentleman and I
think that just shows the
dedication to the LFC had under
chairwoman funds from.
Senator will send it also
couples being there for our
community with Mr speaker and
John I just want to thank you
guys from the bottom of my heart
and the people that I serve for
supporting this bill thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman as for
the debate the gentleman but
affects three Harding quase and
again and you Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I it was I was honored to be
able to go out and and tour this
area
with the.
The senator and also with our
federal delegation.
it's devastated of people's
homes are just gone there and
burned out cars
some some homes the only thing
left is the propane tank I
thought they would that would be
the first thing to explode but
apparently they have a relief
system the fences or go on the
grass is gone it it's not a
pretty sight in many of these
areas the hillsides are back to
mineral soil so the first I they
probably have already slated by
now I'm sure they have had
enough rain that that those
hillsides sloughed off
it's going to take a it's a long
road back.
But
Gentleman one of the things that
about the funding of first off
the only
thing of the only people.
Eligible for state funding is
subdivisions of the state of
because of the
The.
Just because of the law that you
cannot give public money to a
private individual.
Secondly I it is my
understanding that this may
appropriation this money has
already been appropriated by the
federal government is set and
they're ready to repay these.
loans it just takes awhile for
it to get through the process so
what we're trying to do is to
get the money out there and then
be repaid once the federal
what's the into the jump through
all the federal hoops is that
true.
Mr speaker gentleman correct.
So Mister speaker speaking on
some of from someone that's been
out there seeing the devastation
to my friends my neighbors to
ranchers the people that live
there I would urge this body to
vote for a favor this bill it's
much need thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Seen over the big German close.
Mr speaker I just like to on
behalf of the Sanchez I just
like to thank the Senate this
body in the house for their
support for this for the agency
the governor this is very
important to the people that
suffered from this fire.
right now.
I move that the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six do now pass.
Final passage.
Of the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
weight and emerges across the
vote is now open.
What's about to close.
What is a close vote of sixty
six in the affirmative zero in
the negative Senate finance
committee subs to present a six
way if an emergency clause has
duly passed this house.
The lady from Bernalillo are you
ready an item number one.
Speaker can.
Yes Mr speaker can you get me to
that point the election is
served please and house bill one
thirty one of our past has been
taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentlelady to explain the
bill Mr speaker we have a floor
substitute how do you want to
handle that.
The lady what are you moving
okay I move about.
House for substitute for house
bill one thirty one.
Has been passed out.
Can you read the two to five
number please Mr speaker at two
two five two nine oh point one.
They got it.
It's on as well website so we'll
hold off a few seconds for it to
appear on the website.
Right folks the floors of
student is on the website the
gentlelady to explain health
source of the number one to
house bill one thirty one thank
you Mr speaker this is a health
care bill which means it's
incredibly complicated and hard
to follow but what the
substitute what the original
purpose of the bill is to allow
people who have limb loss or
limb difference to be able to
get the equipment that they need
to stay active and we first
started out with it being a
mandate to insurance companies
but there is a part of the
affordable Care Act that says if
you mandate things to the
insurance companies then the
state will have to pay a
different oil and so we we
worked with the office of the
superintendent of insurance to
figure out another way to make
sure that people who needed
these prostheses and or thought
or thought IX would be able to
get them so essentially what we
did we made it non
discrimination
nondiscrimination so that you
know if you would and lack of a
better word an able bodied
person would be able to get a an
ACL the repair a person within
amputation should be able also
to get what they needed to be
able to be active so so we did
it to avoid what's called the
frail under the affordable Care
Act and that's what the that's
what it made it into a non
discrimination as opposed to a
mandate.
There is debate on the house
forces substitute number one the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker doesn't gentlelady from
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
I yield.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo my understanding of
the bill prior to this floor
substitute.
He is we were putting amended on
insurance companies in New
Mexico to cover these additional
prosthesis is that correct Mr
speaker German yes Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo one
of the changes that this for
amendment does.
These were asking now insurance
companies to not treat.
People that need for six
different from any other type of
surgery the CCL shoulder surgery
and things like that is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
that's exactly correct Mr
speaker gentle lady miners thing
is if we don't take this
process.
If we don't take the floor
amendment they would pass this
bill out here it's actually the
state of New Mexico that would
have to pick up the difference
in the increased costs is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
yes Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so by adding
section six the
nondiscrimination standards of
this cost is not be borne by the
state of New Mexico is that
correct Mr speaker yes Mr
speaker thank you.
These are for the debate on the
substitute.
Is there objection to adopting
this substitute.
I see none house floor
substitute number one to house
bill one thirty one has been
adopted.
So we're on the floor subject
there is debate the gentleman
from what that Representative
block.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady yield Mister speaker I
gladly yield to my co sponsor
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and thank you
all the other co sponsors to put
this bill forward I know that
there were many hours and many
days and weeks and years worth
of suffering and time and
dedication to getting this
across the finish line here in
the house so I first want to
thank all the advocates and
everybody who who put their time
into passing this bill I know
that they sacrifice a lot to get
here I know that Mr Kyle step
here who's on the to sitting
here with you he's he's just
done so much good stuff to make
sure that we get this across the
finish line so I just want to
appreciate everyone who is put
their time and effort into this
and I am so blessed to be a co
sponsor thank you Mr speaker
thank you generally.
There's a debate live from
Lincoln center Representative
Vincent.
Thank you Mr speaker is delayed
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the man with the heart three
times bigger.
Okay so
I wanted I would just want to
tell you thank you for bringing
the bill Kyle I I appreciate it
because I was I was really
educated Mr speaker on.
People that have for thought our
or thought or thought thanks
anyway
you know they give you a basic
leg and there's not a lot you
can do with it.
Also a little kids come in I saw
does come in and what made my
heart happy was they come in
with the forty.
It is you have a different leg
that works really good but you
come in here you have a forty
two year and Mr speaker.
It did kind of total my
heartstrings a little bit
because I can't imagine what I'd
do without one of my legs but
now I know that I'm gonna come
to you if I if something happens
to me and I'm gonna give me one
of those good legs Mr speaker
thank you thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentleman from Katrin sent us a
quarter of an NCAA
representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker of the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield
Mister speaker I yield.
Mr speaker I'm mad.
I'm mad because I didn't sign on
to this bill when Kyle asked me
to but it wasn't a good bill Mr
speaker in my opinion until this
ammendment came down.
So I I'm happy that you amended
this bill.
And I don't really have any
questions for you other than to
say rock on tile thank you Mr
speaker.
Deleted your welcome to sign on
up until third reading is over.
There's further debate gentleman
from Chavis representative
Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady with
these changes that you made is
the insurance industry now
behind this bill.
Four eight some of them.
Mr speaker and gentleman just.
Mr speaker and gentleman at
Presbyterian has been involved
and they have been helping
they're not quite at the upon
the point of standing in support
but they are not in opposition
and I will say that the
advocates and the office of the
superintendent of insurance has
worked really hard with the
insurers to make sure that it's
it's something that they can
they can support.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate your willingness to
work with them and get to a
point where we can find
something that that.
Will at least be livable and
will address the needs that are
prevalent in the state so thank
you for making the changes.
As for debate in lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval
Representative Kate's.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle person from Bernalillo
yield automatic Mr speaker I
happily yield to my co sponsor.
Thank you very much I just wanna
also saying that it really as a
as a freshman we all I know that
all the legislators come here to
change lives this bill really
does and it's just been an honor
and thank you I thank you to
everyone the amendments of the
the insurance companies
everybody never stop talking and
really showed how this
legislature can work so thank
you Mr speaker thank you this
for divisional improves on the
weather present event on this
thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I gladly
yield to another co sponsor.
I was just wanted to let
everybody know that I was handed
this document with fourteen
some supporters of ours
including the Carrie Tingley
hospital the foundation the
American physical therapy
association and you and more the
Pedic's with everyone who is
behind the bill and I want to
thank all of them and the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady to close Mr
speaker I doubt now move that
house floor substitute for house
bill one thirty one do now pass
world final passage of house
floor substitute for house bill
one thirty one the vote is now
open.
Close.
What is the level of sixty eight
in the affirmative during the
negative house floor substitute
for house bill one thirty one
has duly passed this house.
Gentlelady from Los Alamos on
the violence on the fair you
ready and item number two.
Mr speaker you take me to that
point that the record reflect
that election is a server
placing House Bill thirty one as
amended on final passage as we
taking it is now subject to
debate amendment or substation
the gentle lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
thirty one as amended.
First removes an outdated
requirement to publish a name
change in a local newspaper for
people of any age.
And when the safety of a parent
or child is jeopardized this
bill allows parents or legal
guardians to seal of the name
change records for themselves
and their children under the age
of fourteen with that Mr speaker
I am happy to answer questions
there's a bait the gentle lady
from billion towards
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady please yield Mister speaker
I happily yield thank you
gentle lady I have some
questions cause us some
questions about this in the
committee and I got an answer
that didn't quite satisfy me so
can you explain to me you're
showing us where a child that is
fourteen or over that if they're
going to change our name that at
least one of the parents or
guardian or CYFD must be
notified.
The gentle lady it is in the
bills.
Mr speaker Representative can
show me where in the bill
gentleman.
The gentle lady give me one
moment.
Gentlelady it is an existing
law.
In section a of the bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady can
point to the line that that is
on please.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's
starts on line fourteen.
Mr speaker hold on one second
only the I don't have numbers on
this amended part can you show
me on here where what is the
beginning of the sentence on
that Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady the line
is one residents under the age
of fourteen years petition the
District Court for a name change
on notice shall be given to
legal parents or legal guardians
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
what I'm asking is if somebody's
fifteen can they go in and
change their name and not notify
a parent or guardians or CYFD.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct and that has been the
case since nineteen eighty nine.
Well Mister speaker gentle lady
I have a huge problem with that
because.
That would mean that if a
fifteen year old.
And I completely agree with not
putting the newspaper because
there's lots of reasons and not
put in the newspaper if a child
was the if there was a single
parent or be leaving an abusive
parent or their weight pro I
totally understand that my
biggest problem with all this
which is one of questions I'd
asked if somebody's a fifteen in
over.
If they are running loose on the
street.
And they're run away that means
I can go change your name
without telling anybody and
that's hugely problematic if
they become a victim of sex
trafficking thank you change
your name to do problematic if
they ended up moving in with the
groomer that means you can
change your name and hugely
problematic and I'm just
interested why with if you're
bringing this forward and you
had opportunity to amend this to
change it to where they have to
have permission why that wasn't
something you would considered
in this bill Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
lady I'm amending the bill
provisions that we believe are
important to the current policy
that we're trying to advance
which is protecting victims of
domestic violence and members of
our L. D. B. L. G. B. T.
community.
And Mr speaker generally with
that I agree because they
shouldn't have to put their
information the newspaper
because the newspapers only for
debt the problem and I have is
that a fifteen year old that
runs away can change their name
a fifteen year old those being
sex trafficked and change your
name and a fifteen year old that
moves in with the groomer can
change your name if at just
percent my note if I was doing
this bill I would address those
issues because I'm working on
tons of CYFD built in the
biggest issues a kid running
away and there's no way to
locate them or find them and
this just to me adds more to the
problem and I would have been on
board with this had you had
changing of that rolling that
fifty fifteen year old can't and
not going to change their name
and change your information and
B. two protected by sex
trafficked victims
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's the only questions I have
in the thank you it is for
debate gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
shields.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
you've heard my concerns
regarding sealing of records in
the past and and I just want to
rise to continue to.
Object to the
ability or the open ended the
ceiling of those records and Mr
speaker and gentle lady
you might explain to the body
that there is no and once those
court records are sealed they
would be sealed
I guess until one request them
to be unsealed is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
bill does not change the current
practice under current law
people can seek court permission
to seal the record and of Mr
speaker gentleman they can also
seek permission to unseal the
records.
Mr speaker and gentle lady Mr I
just one correction Mr speaker
gentleman under court rule one
O. seventy three line.
Rider Mr speaker and gentle lady
of the the court has to make
certain findings in here it's in
statute that the court finds.
The the the notice.
The name change will jeopardize
the applicant's certain personal
safety so as to be a finding by
the court but as we discussed in
committee I'm concerned that
that.
These records.
Are sealed and that the.
Frankly the business community
who may need to have knowledge
of that name change in
transacting business interest
with that person who's now an
adult that there's no provision
in here for these records to be
automatically unsealed up on
their attainment of the age of
majority is there.
Mr speaker gentleman from Travis
no there isn't and that is
current law.
It's not current law Mr speaker
gentle lady it's in your
amendment here on lines fifteen
through twenty one on page two.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis if the name changed
jeopardizes either the parent of
a child who had applied for the
child those records should stay
sealed unless those individuals
believe the situation has
changed for example perhaps the
predator whomever has passed.
That would maybe be a reason for
why they would seek to have the
records unsealed.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
understand why we might want to
seal the the miners
name change records.
What I don't understand is why
we're ceiling for for
potentially in perpetuity the
records of the name change when
that person becomes.
An adult.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
because those individuals may
still be in jeopardy and they
have the ability Mr speaker and
gentleman to pursue remote the
unsealing should they deem the
risk to the longer exists in I
can't explain it any other way
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady I just
because I deal with these
records they have unintended
consequences and one of the
consequences is when records get
sealed like this the.
Minor who may now be an adult.
They're going to suffer some
consequences because of those
sealed records that they would
not otherwise suffer and that's
the request I made in committee
was to maybe put a sign Madam
ceiling it's not the it's not
there but still support the
legislation I just have a real
problem with.
Court records being sealed in
perpetuity because.
There is a legitimate business
reason for people to have access
to this information thank you Mr
speaker thank you generally
there's a gentleman from a
dental representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Los Alamos please you
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Otero are you guilty you.
Thank you Mr speaker so
generally does this bill allow
for changing either first or
last.
Mr speaker.
Yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
madam gentle lady for the
existing dancer.
Thank you Mr speaker so does
this bill allow for a minor
under fourteen to change his or
her name without notifying
either parent if the court deems
fit Mr speaker.
Mr speaker a gentleman from
Otero yes if the court
determines a child's late may be
in jeopardy safety may be in
jeopardy.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady well I'm just asking
that question because in
consumer public affairs
committee I ask the question
twice and I got a no and a no
from your expert witness of it
something changed since then Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Miss Mister speaker gentleman
from alter I can't speak to what
happened committee I'm speaking
to the what's in the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker than thank
you generating okay all on move
on so
How many other states Mr speaker
gentle lady to have similar laws
such as this.
Mr speaker and gentleman from a
terror I've been advised that
there are.
Accidentally twenty two.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
thank you generating focus on
reading of the bill here and it
says a.
On page two a line.
Seventeen.
Says if the court finds that the
notice to one or more legal
parents of the applicant whose
under fourteen will jeopardize
the applicant's personal safety
the court shall not require
notice is there a definition of
what jeopardize the child or
applicant's personal safety is
Mr speaker in this section.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Otero that is within the purview
of the court to determine based
on the evidence Mr speaker and
gentleman that is presented.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating
I just have concerns of this is
and put into the bill in a way
what could be a reason that
something would be in jeopardy
Mr speaker gentle lady I guess
could a child for instance just
say mom and dad are being mean
to me and I I just feel like I
should change my name and run
away for instance with the
courts take that into
consideration with the child
says or would there be any other
kind of proof that would be
necessary for name change Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
judge the judges and the court.
Will determine what is
sufficient evidence to establish
jeopardy.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating so.
For the parents of any recourse
whatsoever from this child's
name change to would they just
be cut out of the process
entirely Mr speaker gentle lady
of this bill would go through.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The only time a parent will not
be notified parents or parents
will not be notified is if it's
established in the court Mr
speaker and gentleman from Otero
that the child or the guardian
of the child's
could be at risk.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I'm guessing we
don't have a definition of at
risk.
Mr speaker gentleman the term
actually in the bill if you wish
me to use the exact word is
jeopardy jeopardizes the state
child or the child's group for
the applicant's personal safety.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I believe
previously said that the judge
would make that determination on
if it would jeopardize the
safety is that correct Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so in the bill it
says the on page two line I.
The name of the petitioner for
the petitioners child.
There difference between the
we're child and minor Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman is
there do we use the term minor
in this bill I don't believe we
do you Mr speaker of use the
report child I just want to make
sure that we're encompassing
everybody in that age group that
we're trying to target Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker.
A gentleman from Otero.
I can't answer whether or not
there's a difference between
tiled and minor because actually
bills have different definitions
of the term minor depending Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Montero what the purpose of the
bill is and how it was crafted.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so previously we
said that the the judge of the
the one that decides.
Jeopardize means are are we
concerned at all of any kind of
inconsistencies in the legal
rulings across the state if the
judge has such discretion Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman no more
than we would in any court
situation because Mr speaker
gentleman judges make
determinations all the time and
they use their judgment and I
will agree that some judges have
certain judgment and some judges
have other judgments.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so the bill the
reason for this bill I'm sure
that there is a reason that
people came forward and said we
need this there's certain
instances it that would have
made us have to have an impetus
for this legislation Mr speaker
I do we do we know any
statistics of how many people
change their name.
that would be affected now in
the last year the last available
data Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman what we
do now in terms of data is that
approximately more than two
thousand the name changes were
sought in twenty twenty two of
those Mr speaker and gentleman I
cannot delineate for you which
individual cell there safety was
in jeopardy that was your
question.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady well you know I did
some reading through this bill
and it just concerns me to see
the a fourteen year old could
potentially be able to change
their name without any parental
involvement or consent and I
think this is just a very
slippery slope that we're going
down and I just Mister speaker I
think that this is bad policy so
with that I'm finished Mr
speaker.
Related clues.
Mr speaker I do move that house
bill thirty one as amended do
now pass final passage of house
bill thirty one as amended the
vote is now open.
Eight months Cruz.
Please include level of forty
three in the affirmative twenty
four in the negative house bill
thirty one as amended has duly
passed this house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm are you
ready an item number three.
Mr speaker would you give me
that point.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill sixty two on final
passage has been taken it is a
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker and members of the
floor I would like to move house
floor substitute for House Bills
sixty two.
And the two oh two number is two
two four.
Nine one six point two.
The gentleman I believe it is
being passed out.
We'll give it a minute wait in
just doubt it will give it a
minute to get it on the website.
Everybody have a substitute on
the floor.
Came getting thumbs up it is
also on the website.
I don't want to explain house
floor substance.
Mr speaker and members of the
house so I was approached by the
credit unions and they noted
that when they re possessors car
lot of times it's not in their
name when they sell it and so if
you look at page two line two
and page two line fifteen you'll
see.
the the on it says a dealer for
the what we've added the holder
of the security interests filed
pursuant to section sixty six
three two oh one New Mexico
state statutes nineteen seventy
eight.
And with that I would stand for
questions on the substitute.
Is there debate on the house
floor substitute for house bill
sixty two.
Has your address is there
objection to adopting healthful
substitute there is debate
deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker will the gentleman
yield.
Mr speaker of the yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker and thank
the gentleman I guess mainly
what you've changed as the
issue where a credit you can
transfer the car.
And I'm wondering Mr speaker and
gentleman if you addressed any
of the other
objections that were discussed
in our committee.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
was a lot of discussion about
the number of vehicles and I
just removed it so that there's
you know it's in statute
currently.
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
not a limit now on the number of
vehicles in this legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
correct okay that was one of the
issues Mr speaker and gentleman
what about the issue.
another family member being able
to complete the sale of a
Canadian incapacitated family
member it's very helpful.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo the person could feel
fill out a power of attorney and
that already exists so we don't
need to this legislation there's
also a statute known looking for
a were it says like the parent
can sell the car for the
child.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I appreciate that.
Anymore debate on house for
substitute.
Through objection to adopting
house floors of the two four
house bill sixty two.
I see none House for some food
for House raise has been
adopted.
Back in the bill.
Is there debate there debate on
the house floor substitute for
House was sixty two.
I see none the gentleman to
close Mr speaker I now move that
house for substitute for house
bill sixty two do now pass where
final passage of house floor
substitute for House Bills sixty
two the vote is now open.
Some of those.
Those are closed then vote of
six to the affirmative for in
the negative house floor
substitute for House was six to
ten has duly passed this house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation to no objection it
is so ordered country.
House bill four sixteen and it
is a representatives Hernandez
and Lundstrom and act making
appropriation to the Economic
development department to
conduct a site readiness and gap
analysis assessments to identify
properties able to be developed
for industry.
House Bill for sixteen
introduced Representative
Hernandez and Lundstrom house
bill four sixteen have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill for seventeen
introduced by representatives
Trujillo Roybal Caballero
Granada and Chavez and act
relating to higher education
requiring a minimum compensation
for full time or part time
faculty at public post secondary
educational institutions making
appropriation house bill four
seventeen introduced by
representatives Trujillo global
company out of corona and Chavis
council for seventeen have been
read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill for eighteen
introduced by representatives
Trujillo Lujan Ferrari Sariñana
and how to meal an act relating
to cannabis amending and
enacting sections of the
cannabis regulation Act
criminalizing the unlawful
synthesis of.
Tension hydro cannon.
And all requiring the cannabis
control division of the
regulation and licensing
department to address health
risks associated with cannabis
consumption through training and
awareness initiatives House
before eighteen introduced the
representatives Trujillo Lujan
Ferraris Sariñana and how to
meal.
House before eighteen have been
read twice by title is our
printer effective house health
and Human Services Committee
then the house Judiciary
Committee
House Bill for nineteen
introduced by Representative
Castellano and Sanchez and act
relating to administrative
procedures requiring state
agencies and local agencies
with the with expressly
delegated authority for
licensing and permitting to
periodically publish a list of
the time frames in which
licenses permits and other
regulatory approvals have been
finally acted upon for have
remained pending without final
agency action house bill four
nineteen introduced by
representatives Castellano and
Sanchez House Bill for nineteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered prints reflect that
house government elections in in
the Affairs Committee then so
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for twenty introduced
by representatives Ferrary
Thompson Andrea Romero how to
meal and Lara and act making
appropriation to the early
childhood education and care
department to reduce rates of
adverse childhood experiences
House Bill for twenty introduced
by Representative Ferrary
Thompson Andrea Romero how to
meal and Lara.
House before twenty have been
read twice by title is our
printer referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill for twenty one
introduced by Representative
Herndon and act relating to
professional licensure enacting
the psychology introduce inter
jurisdictional compact house
bill four twenty one introduced
by Representative Herndon.
House before twenty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee then the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill for twenty two
Anders divide Representative
Herndon an act relating to the
environment creating the clean
truck incentive program and the
department of the environment
establishing duties of the
department of environment
environmental improvement board
creating a clean truck incentive
program fund making
appropriation house bill for
twenty two introduced by
Representative Herndon.
House bill for twenty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered prince referred to the
house energy natural resources
and environment committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee
House Bill for twenty four
introduce a Representative
Trujillo an act relating to
labor clarified in the
appointive authority for the
apprenticeship council updating
personal references House Bill
for twenty four introduced by
Representative Trujillo House
Bill for twenty four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
the house government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill four twenty five
introduced the representatives
for echo and the Penske.
An act relating to housing
allowing for an additional
dwelling units on a lot within
the single family zoning
district under certain
circumstances providing that
restrictions on an additional
dwelling unit in and and
instrument for the sale or
transfer of an interest in a
planned development or homeowner
association are void house bill
four twenty I introduce the
representatives portico and the
Penske House before twenty five
have been read twice by title is
our printer referred to the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee then as
a house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for twenty six
introduced by Representative
Ortez Senator Stewart and
Representative Chandler and act
relating to the environment
authorizing the environmental
improvement board to adopt rules
to establish an assess fees for
a clean transportation fuels
standard house bill four twenty
six entities by Representative
Ortez Senator Stewart and
Representative Chandler house
bill four twenty six seven min
read twice by title is our
printer referred to the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee then the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill for twenty seven
introduced by Representative
Alcon an act relating to public
safety creating a presumption
that posttraumatic stress
disorder is approximately caused
by employment for law
enforcement officers and
emergency medical service first
responders house bill four
twenty seven introduced
Representative Alcon.
Yes House Bill for twenty seven
have been read twice by title.
It's going to print in front of
the house labor veterans
military affairs committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill for twenty at eight
Representative Representative
Hochman Vigil Harry Garcia
Representative Brown Lundstrom
and Harper.
An act relating to
transportation creating the
transportation trust fund which
shall make annual distributions
to the state road funds for
certain projects prioritized by
the department of transportation
making appropriation house bill
four twenty eight introduced by
representatives Hochman Vigil
Harry Garcia Representative
Brown Lundstrom and Harper.
House before twenty eight have
been read twice by title is our
printer effective house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
then as the house appropriations
and finance committee
House bill four twenty nine
introduced by representatives
Zamora and receive an act
relating to corrections
including cannabis and the
definition of contraband
prohibiting cannabis and places
of imprisonment providing
exceptions House Bill for twenty
nine introduced by
Representative Zamora and read.
House Bill for twenty nine
minutes twice by title is our
printer for to the house because
we're Public Affairs Committee
vans the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill four thirty
introduced by Representative
Zamora and Harry Garcia an act
relating to local governments
restricting local governments
authority to regulate fuel
retailers and related
transportation infrastructure
House Bill four thirty entities
for Representative Zamora and
Harry Garcia.
House bill four thirty have been
read twice by title is our
printer effective house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
thence the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee
House bill four thirty one
introduced by Representative
Zamora and Harry Garcia an act
relating to local governments
restricting local governments
authority to impose utility
service restrictions house bill
four thirty one introduced by
representatives Zamora and Harry
Garcia house bill four thirty
one AM been read twice by title
is ordered printed affects the
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee then
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill four thirty two.
Introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero an act relating
to the environment and acting
the plastic waste reduction act
prohibiting retail
establishments restaurants and
entities that deliver goods from
making available for delivering
goods and single use plastic
check out bags providing a
penalty house bill four thirty
two introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero.
House Bill for thirty two
minutes twice by title is
ordered printer effective House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee then so
house consumer and public
affairs committee.
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
three.
And act relating to radioactive
waste amending the radioactive
and hazardous materials act
prohibiting the storage and
disposal of radioactive
materials.
Transuranic contaminated waste
for low level waste in a
disposal facility and tell the
state has consented to the
creation of the disposal
facilities prohibiting the
issuance or certification of a
permit for the construction of
operation of a disposal facility
for spent fuel a high level
waste unless the state has
consented to the creation of the
disposal facility and a
permanent repository is in
operation amending the
definition of disposal facility
amending the duties and
composition of the radioactive
waste consultation task force
declaring an emergency Senate
conservation committee
substitute for Senate bill fifty
three.
The Senate confirmation
Committee subs to present a bill
fifty three is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house government elections in in
the Affairs Committee then the
house Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill fifty six introduced
by senator schools and act
relating to renewable energy
eliminating a requirement that a
renewable energy distributed
generation facility the size to
test apply no more than one
hundred twenty percent of the
hosts average annual electricity
consumption Senate bill fifty
six introduced by senators tools
Senate bill fifty six submitted
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee then
is that house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty three an act relating to
recycled material metals
requiring a secondhand metal
dealer purchasing or otherwise
receiving a catalytic converter
to make a record of the
transaction that includes the
sellers or offers information
and a photo copy or image of the
seller or offers personal
identification document legal
document demonstrating ownership
and catalytic converter allowing
a local government entity to
impose reporting requirements on
secondhand metal dealers
regarding the purchase or
acquisition of catalytic
converters Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill one thirty three Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one thirty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee sense the house
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill two hundred
introduced by senators Ingle and
Munoz an act relating to
procurement providing an
exception from the procurement
code for multi term contracts
for professional services that
involve a regional water project
with an estimated cost of more
than five hundred million
dollars Senate bill two hundred
introduced by senators Ingle and
manuals.
Senate bill two hundred eminent
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house.
Thank Nico Jurassic as in water
resources committee then set
House Judiciary Committee.
Gentlelady from earlier percent
chasing.
This is because we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered
announcements.
Happy Valentine's day everybody.
B. birthday one more time to our
madam chief clerk.
Just letting this go home early
tonight so we can enjoy dinner.
The lady from earlier percent
Thompson Mr speaker we will have
the house health and Human
Services tomorrow morning in
room three fifteen a lot of our
members wandered the halls on
Monday so we're back in our old
small room.
They were signal further knows
what's.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero seconded
House Education Committee will
meet tomorrow at eight thirty in
room three oh nine thank you Mr
number signal deleted from Los
Alamos it he was on the line and
some favors of Chandler.
Mr speaker your house Judiciary
Committee will be meeting
tomorrow after the floor session
a at one thirty error fifteen
minutes after the floor session
which ever happens I guess later
in rural three OO nine three oh
eight this time yeah that I
don't want to be corrected more
than once Mr speaker thank you
members take note the gentleman
from the university of small
thank you Mr speaker your house
Appropration the finance
committee will meet at nine AM
tomorrow in room three oh seven
will be taken of HB to.
Members signal the gentle lady
from Santa Fe Representative
Serrato thank you Mr speaker
your house commerce and economic
development committee will meet
tomorrow at one thirty or
fifteen minutes after four
sessions whichever comes later
and three seventeen thank you.
Thank you Julie members signaled
the gentleman from San Juan
McKinley Representative Alcon
thank you Mr thank heavens that
presents a clock aboard.
Of course.
I'm gonna have.
You L. Spence.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move house stand in
recess until eleven AM tomorrow
Wednesday thank you for today
and to the staff thank you for
spending it with us today have a
fantastic evening in the house
will stand in recess until
eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.
