Much of the growth here.
The jobs here.
Okay we have a quorum we have
house keeping Senate bill fifty
three will be role.
Temporarily at the request of
the Sanchez and willing to and
it will be back on the calendar
with that let's begin with House
Bill five one zero.
Meryl or lanes.
All right they're not here let's
go to House Bill three eight
hours.
If.
Okay.
Thank you very.
Yes Hey.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee house bill two eighty
four doesn't have a committee so
that is the fact.
Do you want to look at that
first Madam.
Yeah let's go ahead and that.
Committee substitute for House
Bill.
Three eight four.
I will thank you.
All we have infected.
Opposition.
So no opposition discussing.
Okay.
Committees of the original house
bill and if you will see the
frequent updates The New Mexico
license.
And these updates comparable
work in our anti.
Various for stakeholders.
All four participated in the
making of these changes in your
work.
Is that okay.
normalized there was the
superintendent out of town this
morning the co sponsors Senator
Ivey Soto.
Is the original.
It's a expedited licensure.
The staff to use force.
Your hands are licensed in other
states anyone come and work in
New Mexico so it's exciting
Lewis thank you the thirty day
time frame to get those people
working in.
With.
Social work.
Added to that in the communities
of.
With a long negotiated
agreements with the board
members.
Is the same thing for physicians
you cannot be overstated Health
right that is the state of New
Mexico.
I'm there to other parts in the
committee so this really long
bill now.
Section one through twenty.
Are all of these uniformed
licensing act.
And a lot to do with language
with the
needs and making them feel like
the yes and she's updated
language.
So that's actually one twenty
seven.
The other additional living in
there is more.
We have in the past Mexico a
interior design licensing boards
it's been do wrong Hey.
What.
We're glad to hear.
the interior design work is been
for many years so it's here
sections the transfer their
powers were to design licenses
back to the general are at the
heart.
This is the fourth so those are
the alright.
Of the committees that.
And madam chair
Co sponsors a few words.
Request.
And Services last year we passed
house bill one ninty one which
provides expedited licensure
for occupational professional
licenses.
That bill alone has been said
about on as giving Mexico making
Mexico green in terms of the
military and family friendly.
It is not specific to military.
FINS and so.
Using so.
We we have left out the social
workers veterinarians thank you
for and then we also just
Representative Figueroa said
after much discussion with the
but the medical office are
including that in.
On the interior designers there
are enough licensed interior
designers to justify the for it
doesn't make point.
And so that so so we can
continue to have optional
licensure Richard designers
we're moving those to the to the
art of the because otherwise
would have to get rid of all is
insurance altogether and create
some real problems in terms of
serving clients that require
licensure.
We have to step.
Okay thank you good morning
superintendents.
Good to see you okay let's go to
the audience those that
supported this bill please raise
your hand.
Those in opposition it's going
to be.
Webcast.
In support of the bill House
Bill three eight four.
All Carroll go ahead.
Madam chair and members of the
committee hi my name is Bob
Carroll and I am a member of
veterans and military families
office we support HB three
eighty four because it makes it
easier for the spouses military
service members were fully
licensed in one state
expeditiously obtain a license
to practice in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you all.
Jessica Johnson go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members this is
Jessica Johnson with animal
protection voters we strongly
support this bill in particular
the veterinarian licensure a
portion New Mexico has for years
now experienced a shortage of
veterinarians and all sectors of
the field including animal
shelter medicine twenty four
hour emergency and urgent care
general practice and especially
service in rural areas and
tribal lands for small animals
and agriculture alike so we
support any effort to bring and
keep veterinary professionals
working in New Mexico it will
result in greater welfare for
animals who find themselves in
need of medical care thank you
thank you just a.
Thank you do we have any
comments and.
Opposition to create for.
Okay seeing that thank you
committee members of.
Representative right of Madam
chair of I've got a couple of
questions and I'm waiting
senator Reid over the FY all.
See how we're going to address
that see if you get and then
let's make sure that the
complete application what the
FIR says otherwise it says if
you submitted an incomplete
application you'd have to
processes within thirty days.
That.
Where is the superintendent
excellent answer for that there
were
madam chair Representative right
so you see thing about social
work usually we do say the the
application and honestly it's
not it would not be unfriendly I
can't say that but for our
department it would not be an
unfriendly amendments but the
reality is is that social
workers are now online
application and anything that's
online if you don't see it the
appropriate information it's
hard to stop and you're going to
go forward you can't actually do
more submitted an application
that is not complete.
Madam chair that takes care of
that in New Hampshire.
what is the other thing that we
were in office.
The system is is do you have
enough time to have public
hearings and make the rules.
Madam chair representative on we
do have enough time last year we
did seventeen and that took as a
whole year to.
One board is not going to be
consequence to us at this point
and we already have the
application created online.
Do we need technology there may
be some weeks for it but one
board in comparison to a whole
year to do seventeen I believe
we can have that.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative on in our new
yes thank you madam chair
purpose especially for questions
actually just move it do not
pass on all House Bill three
four two thousand Committee
substitute for House Bills
report okay we have a motion and
a second.
We have a motion for a do not
pass on house bill three eighty
four and a do pass on house
government elections in the
tears the substitute for House
Bill three eight for the second
do we have any opposition.
Saying that if you have a to
pass Representative that
is.
Members of the state.
Okay.
Romero or laying so let's go
ahead and go to Senate bill
sixty two.
Thank.
The.
Yeah.
Okay Senator.
Thank you for your morning
ladies
we are here to percent Senate
Judiciary Committee LFC percent
bill forty two this is document
from the secretary of state's
office.
Madam chair members the
committee bills it's a
continuation of the work we have
been doing to.
Required the limited disclosure
that we can.
Madam the amounts in our statute
just the committee will remember
in twenty ten the U. S. Supreme
Court
basically this is United
decision stated that independent
expenditure committees were not
subject to campaign limitations
and it's just the one thing we
could do is required disclosure
of the donations and so that is
something that we have been
working on twenty nineteen we
did pass a bill that.
It funding of four nation math
with is a really important piece
of that statute again process
requiring disclosure this bill
reacts to.
Gaps that we as soon in the
statute passed in twenty
nineteen and tents to close
those gaps and candles far as we
can in terms of of disclosing.
Contribution self echoing back
there yes your turn your phones
off or and so what I like to do
manager just walked walked the
committee through the different
sections of the bill and.
I.
section one of the bill is a
definitional section broadening
the definition of the
expenditure of we actually have
tried to go as far as we can
funder that the guardrails of
the person.
you defining managers of windows
can be made and what can be
disclosed as required for your
is this expenditure definition
of fixes cars we believe we fell
under the constitution of
section
Act requires disclosure of of
who is paying for electronic
communication that sent out to
five hundred and more calls were
electronic communication similar
nature we're all familiar with
the roll call of those currently
do required to disclose who's
making the roll call as we move
on to long planned online
campaigning on both sides this
will require similar disclosure
when you're online again
something that I want to be
clear here these rules apply to
both sides in this game and I
think are needed both sides and
and we can talk about that we
need to.
section three closes campaign
yeah that exists and I believe
I've got this right this is the
thirty day gap so we found that
when someone sets up an
independent expenditure
committee right before an
election all right now they
actually don't have to of
report.
Contributions made until thirty
days after the election that is
a different rules and exists.
Is
this simply.
Was that
races saying role as
expenditures committees section
three also does something that
was in a bill that two years ago
Senate bill three eighty seven
when you have donations being
made entities are made
independent expenditures it
requires on page thirteen line
line it creates a process where
you can create a segregated bank
account so if you are.
You for your cooperation and
you're receiving contributions
some of which are your non
profit some are being used for
political reasons independent
expenditures some are not for
those that are not part of an
independent expenditure process
you wanted a segregated Capt so
this is very clear that the
money's not the or and I think
with a large entities that
participate in elections that
happens as expenditures House
third in some question about
that litigation on that this is
the same bill that passed the
Senate just made it to the
Senate to the house floor stood
round time of the dealt with
this issue so that's what's in
section three of section four
does that mean up.
That is the date of the filing
date working at the report also
a state holiday the report
should be filed no later than
the next business day something
already secretary of state does
but this just.
Statute.
section.
Section five section five is is
important
have a it's an issue that has
not yet come up.
Gaps in our campaign law is
someone just received a loan of
up to their campaign they're
allowed to do.
Right now there's nothing in the
statute that says they couldn't
charge interest.
And so hypothetically you could
see a situation where someone
owns their campaign.
Million dollars charges eight
percent interest and then pays
the interest back with campaign
contributions we don't want
that.
It's just closes that we pull it
also.
Stands out of federal litigation
involving.
Roose and loans to campaigns and
so this just makes it clear on
page twenty one lines for it's
unlawful for any person to make
expenditure to repay a loan that
is received from the candidates
that includes a.
So we're just verifying that
division right wise on page
twenty two.
Action six of age twenty two
line seventeen.
We're now requires that if you
do have a long to your campaign
the terms of the loan that
candidates thanks to the
candidate's campaign.
And service of any loan I need
to the report so once again just
trying to shed a little light on
rules that are made to campaigns
section seven deals with
legislative session fundraising
I think is important to clarify
number of stations
it'll make the same rules apply
to incumbents also apply to
candidates so during the
prohibited areas it's running
against incumbents all right now
they've got a different set of
rules this will require the same
rule apply during that period.
It makes it very clear page
twenty four hour line for that.
For a.
Challenger law candidate for
incumbents is not accepted
contributions to this law this
employer income better candidate
campaign committee or for
political committees during the
prohibited.
We had some confusion in the I
should say confusion there was
some ambiguity in the law.
We have a campaign committee for
a political committees during a
session making donations to some
members this makes it very clear
that happened during the session
it doesn't mean all that you
can't accept a contribution that
you didn't solicit member you
can't solicit contributions but
if if an individual makes a
contribution to you during of
areas we can maintain place
the ability to accept that
contribution your reported just
like you would otherwise in the
bill originally is drafted we
try to go farther than this five
year was have bipartisan push
back to trying to close this
completely and there also were
some exceptions that we oppose
the deal with smaller current
contributions by changing this
language making it less
restrictive we avoid that so you
can receive a hundred dollars a
month up from I can't from the
individual candy from all this
or campaign committee that some
individual it's perfectly
appropriate to accept that
during that period of time the
other thing on page twenty five
of the largest and highlights is
in this deals with our scope
read the section easiest way up
line nine four income better
candidate for governor
lieutenant governor the period
beginning January first fire any
regular session the legislature
this is the time they cannot
raise funds but here's what's
important for the case of a
special or extraordinary session
the lesser of a period beginning
after the proclamation is the
issue for seventy two hours
prior to the start of the
special for the session and
ending on the earlier of the
twenty first day following
adjournment of the regular
special or extraordinary session
for the first calendar day for
the first calendar day after all
bills passed by the legislature
and signed the deposited with
the secretary of state
this.
The situation in our law right
now we saw this with multiple
special sessions the special
session for the governor would
trigger a twenty year kind of by
twenty or twenty.
Twenty day period were
contributions could be received.
In that sense once the
governor of this side of the
bills this will also now apply
to a candidate for governor.
I so basically that's the gist
of this build us I do think that
it's an important step forward
happy to answer questions and I
don't know if this I want to say
a plus service you can.
madam chair members of the
committee as always the senator
doesn't create presentation of
this bill he is covered things
thoroughly I just want to
highlight again for the re if
they reoccurring donation piece
that is something we already
have an existing administrative
role which says that if there
are small reoccurring donations
are set up prior to the
prohibited period you are not
required to stop the stations
during.
Want to make up with their
issues and that's it.
Thank you Sir we will now go to
the audience those in favor of
the bill please raise your
hands.
Okay.
Thank.
Grandpa because.
The sponsor for for.
Of the staff support.
Looking at and more the
confidence of the public four
forty
as those longer maybe it does
what number you called from the
expanding the definition of it
expenditure contributions as
well as the.
Oil spills over into
contributions based on a request
over to allow for instance and
financing realized.
Go go ahead and spend more.
The cycle of the updating those
languages.
Critically important and that
school.
Thank you to the webcast we have
any has a race for.
Richard Mason go ahead.
Okay madam chair members the
committee my name miss Mason and
I am the budget Alexion director
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico the league stances
from support of SB forty two and
at thanks to sponsors for bring
it forward the league of women
voters in New Mexico believes
that methods of financing
political campaigns to public
offices to ensure the public's
right to know and that.
Option and how do we influence
and maximize fiscal
accountability and transparency
SB forty two thousand just that
so the league stands in strong
support of SB forty two energy
issue to given a do pass thank
you.
Thank you shall say on the
webcast do we have any
opposition to the bill.
CNN back to the audience any
closing comments please.
Chairman August.
Nation of public policy research
institute based in New Mexico
Albuquerque as passed by the
Senate as before you to.
Mexico's already actionable
reporting requirements for
independent expenditures even
worse bill doubles down on all
the right information is
currently challenging in court
for being unconstitutionally
broad.
Importantly independent
expenditures include auto
election campaign ads but any
less very refer to a candidate
within thirty days before
primary or sixty days before
general elections that are
targeted to the relevant
accurate this includes messages
asking elected officials to
support repose legislation
portage stands on policy issues.
Existing law already chills
organizations speech about
issues the governor because of
the expectation of privacy
nonprofit should have to choose
between speaking out about
issues are words or mission and
the rotors and their supporters
and violating those individuals
privacy this is especially so
age of cancel culture Americans
can be targeted for retaliation
based on calls for instead we
get jumps closure associate
orders on public records with
Mrs in necessarily support
attend Fund Mexicans gives
nonprofit causes has reason
rarely given specifically for
the purpose of taxable services
communications errors the
committee will close this
legislation thank you.
Is the other this with
convergence for prosperity
American prosperity we believe
that civil liberties Services
foundational country including
freedoms.
Press freedom of conscience and
the right to peaceably assemble
among others make it possible
for every Americans like you in
the state courageous stance and
drive social progress we were to
protect the rights of all people
lender voice to public discourse
by twenty together charitable
civic and community
organizations Senate bill forty
to work in direct contrast to
the civil liberties by forcing
organizations to disclose the
individual's port that this is
violations of our first
amendment rights issue Garza
protection version of the find
there's no guard rails for the
first ten minutes is all right.
When I try to force the NWC
Peter here let's member this
during Jim crow the Supreme
Court held that the friction
approx protects what is
initiation for being exposed to
threats intimidation.
Those in power forcing Division
stretched.
Their donations mortar
Association there's a long
tradition was an almost
anonymous for that tribute and
we should.
We have the rights to religious
freedom.
The association's minority views
or disagreements of those should
be protected.
Transparencies good for
government that individuals have
the right to privacy thank you
thank you.
Any further comments seeing the
committee members.
Representative walk thank you
madam chair thank you senator
and first.
Good job in a very the bill is
preceded so.
On page all start hearing these
for talking about taking
contributions from lobbyists.
During the.
Madam chair Senator.
It's so the total ban on any
revisions any of this that
they're etcetera etcetera and
chair and representative yes
during that period you cannot
accept a contribution from this
this employer candidates
campaign or political committee
it's already the rule with with
lobbyists and lobbyist employers
thanks for clarifying that that
also applies to incumbent so we
can't B. Riley Jackson most
ourselves and making donations
for poor campaign committees or
political committees leadership
act for example can be taken
during during session.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator so.
What if there's a scenario like
I live far away with three half
hours away someone sent me a
check while I'm up here I don't
know I got it until I get back
home after the band with does
that count if I cash the check.
After I received it Madam chair
of the of the stop and make sure
we get this right is the same
rule already.
So if you get one of those jacks
mail before the session which I
think happens in Europe so.
you madam chair members of the
committee for the purposes of
recording what what is it is
actually received.
certainly there are provisions
in the law of what to do in our
nation that is non compliant so
you can return to the donor or
you can get a state license.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator so.
In the center that you brought
up if it was given for that
purpose it it time frames let's
just say I leave for Santa Fe on
January tenth or something Madam
and that check was given to me
on January fifth.
But I didn't get it until after
I came home after session with
that being a legal definition of
actor shares so I'm I think that
is correct January first is the
trigger dates off would be a
okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator so this is.
For Cisco backward.
It is dated for before the
prohibited date that would be
okay etcetera etcetera madam
chair representative what we
care about in terms of
compliance with the law cares
about is the receipt of the
check certainly in any
hypothetical situation what I
heard everyone to do is go to
the secretary of state's office
to address the uniqueness of
those of those situations but
again it's it's compliant we
that C. R. right does speak to
voluntary compliance so if there
is an issue you would either
return it to the donor for and
give it to the state elections.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator and so.
With the options that we could
give it to it would go to the
fund or go to the downturn they
gave us we also give it to a
terrible.
Entity madam chair Senator.
Madam chair of Representative
the two options are to return to
the donor sailors if it's not I.
I see thank you madam chair
thank you senator okay that kind
of clears it up funds.
It's going to make crystal clear
that we're following.
With you so going forward madam
chair talking about.
The prohibition on a hundred
dollar monthly.
Please check or but to say on
the matter.
Withdrawals or whatever chair
Senator what it was like a
hundred dollars for the donation
but there was a fee as well so
madam chair let's just say
there's a three dollar fee for a
hundred dollar donation for
process.
And we make that three dollars
that goes back to the vendor if
it's above a hundred dollars
even without the eleven
chickens.
Representative says there's
nothing wrong with getting a
recurring hundred dollar
contributions during the
prohibited period okay there's
also nothing wrong with getting
any contribution up to the
limits that allows during that
period provided it comes from an
individual it is not from one of
the entities listed on page
one for those of any bank and
providers using solicit the
can't do any solicitation but
some seven thousand dollar check
during the session there is
nothing wrong with that in this
under the substitute version we
I will say initially introduces
bill to try and narrow that down
and there was like Larson.
Back to the house and so funder
this version there's nothing
wrong with a recurring after the
fee issue would be senses just
like that the issue outside of
this deal with that level of our
state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senators so that an individual
could send you a check during
that period but if you catch it
later you wouldn't have to give
it back to the fund anything
that would just be able to take
care that would be okay that
comes from individual and you
didn't solicit us.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that is it up for me on
that.
So then going here.
The file of these reports so
madam chair Senator.
How this affects the C. three
organization that does not
disclose their donors but is
involved in political activity
center.
So madam chair so C. threes off
and basically there's a long
line of cases the rubberized
right out of New Mexico is very
interesting over last mile
arrival in the state Senate
during the two thousand eight
election cycle see threes in
gauged in educating voters
against incumbent state senator
I'm here in Santa Fe and Gary
king filed suits New Mexico you
for analyzed and then secretary
of state I believe it was a rare
up challenging the fact that
they were disclosing donors of
those educational pieces Mr gas
and have reference this thirty
days sixty day rule which is
really important thirty days
before and primary sixty days
before a general election that
is the window when I one C.
threes can't go into that window
educate it starts to trigger
a disclosure requirements white
lies in the Bible one see three
expressly advocates for or
against a candidate at any time
basket for this for.
So so far one C. threes on
nonprofits on both sides and
nonprofits that are or educating
about issues the cancer society
etcetera they've learned the
work does and just be careful
and get close to election
involving.
Candidates that are running that
the education can transition and
trigger disclosure during those
thirty and sixty day windows
which is the constitutional
framework Mexico lost your aging
lost a lawsuit fan judge Judy
Herrera a federal judge from
Santa Fe hi establish the peace
with these guidelines and that
has that was October the tenth
circuit and is generally follow
what we're trying to do here is
again.
Deal with independent
expenditures the school but
working within the
constitutional guardrails which
are very important so I would
agree with Mister Jackson what
I'm trying to do anything here
we can't do there's gonna be
debates and this is why lawyers
get involved even when you're in
this.
You're gonna have those kinds of
discussions.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator.
So.
I don't believe the three
legislative advocate for Candace
our campus is that correct my
getting that right if you are
getting that right see three
self educated folks and there's
nothing wrong with saying as
part of the education of the
motor this is what
Representative locked this is
how he voted on a certain issue
and it's just it but once they
expressly that it deceived
recess and you should not elect
Representative block that
traders the difference and so C.
threes get educated but they
can't expressly advocate okay
thank you madam chair Senator so
in our state laws currently and
then the ones we're trying to
put in place how the.
Compliment or how do they work
with the the IRS standard.
Senator so the representative I
think.
C. threes have to be careful
about the extent to which they
get involved in the education
with the Legislature involved I
can't tell you exactly what the
procedures a percentage
divisions they're allowed to do
so they don't lose their I only
see three status
of what we're trying to do here
what we did twenty nineteen what
this bill continues is to really
make clear clear lines to help
those C. five one two three so
they don't get themselves over
the line into express advocacy
because once they start doing
express advocacy is C. three
they're gonna get trouble with
the IRS and so again that's what
this this bill just continues to
kind of define it ourselves.
Okay thank you madam chair
Senator so are there any
provisions federally like thirty
days sixty days for primary or
are those federal laws so there
Representative those are
certainly federal case law
that's the Germans and judge
Judy rose a federal judge so
this is all.
Continuation of the evolution of
the federal case law osis and
United so again is within
federal first amendment case.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator so then regarding I
ease and these new bank accounts
that we would get the ability to
open.
Is it mandated that they have
two different bank accounts for
IAD's and for regular spending
or is this just something they
could Mr chair so madam chair
opting into tools of two.
What what the bills on page
thirteen create us to to
requirements of that will exempt
from reporting and I I think
quite frankly this addresses
some of the concerns expressed
by Mr gassing and we apologize
to this bill it actually creates
a process whereby.
Entities that are doing I that
are doing it and expenditures
but also have the owners that
don't want to be part of that I
can get exempted from reporting
when they do two things one of
the current thing under the law
which is a thirteen page
thirteen line.
Other dollar requested in
writing that the donation not be
fun idea for the festers or make
contributions to a candidate
campaign committee or political
committee and we're adding in
the donations deposited into a
segregated bank account that is
not used to fund in part or
court expenditures or make
contributions to a candidate
campaign committee for
political.
The reason for the second
requirement is Dale situation
here in New Mexico involving the
ethics commission some
litigation you know did the
donor actually say this it
wasn't completely clear and by
putting in the requirement of
segregated account I think you
just it helps everybody slide
seven of those guard rails so
that so that my ease and and any
entities participating doing
both lanes of housing options
appeared fairly afterburners
that don't have to be disclosed
by setting up the account.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator so I guess.
So if you to different bank
accounts and let's just say you
had a donor that gave you money.
Before that thirty day or sixty
day and they wanted to skip
general donation they didn't say
whether they want it to be
political donation or just the
the general medicine that
nonprofit so madam chair Senator
could you technically except
that donation as a C. for.
Not have to report that person's
name but transfer whatever the
balances that you want to
transfer from the first account
to the not the new account
without having to disclose that
person's name madam chair so
madam chair yet they were.
What do you have a hypothetical
transition I might be able to
the spot on this one okay you
know once we get that in place
how would how would we deal with
the kind of transition source
certainly madam chair members of
the committee we have identified
that we will be updating the
administrative role in order to
address situations like that.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator but that is not in the
bill.
It would be rules that regulate
madam chair members of the
committee the secretary of state
already has a campaign finance
rules it will need an ending
related to this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
So.
And I do.
Would just be defined as.
Any contribution supports
or opposes certain candid.
That's correct madam chair.
So madam chair audio Baxter was
stock already insisting Law.
Probably got the definition
actually in this bill as well.
yes on page six
line eighteen independent
expenditure standard line made
by a person in the campaign
committee to coordinated
expenditures I am the act
Esparza twenty nineteen.
Right area there three make
paper advertisement that a press
the advocates election the other
clearly identify candidate or
passage or defeat of a clearly
identified ballot question the
Senator no other reasonable for
Tatian peel to vote for against
the clear that that I can about
question for C. refers to a
clearly identification it about
questions published in the
Senate disseminate relevant
electric Mexico within thirty
days before the primary sixty
for the general I was the
candidate about questions on the
ballot so it's the same rules
and talk about four or five oh
one C. threes except CD eight
get real trouble that cross the
line C. forestall they just need
to disclose when they cross the
line but these are the
constitutional guardrails and
this is you know the current law
office as far as we can go
in in windows when disclosure
can be required.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator seven.
What.
I'm guessing I'm asking what
donations currently are not
being.
Reported that this would close
the loop on regarding the staff
IDC's.
So again this this so we're not
changing the definition of
independent expenditure for not
changing the thirty day sixty
day time off work clarifying the
segregated bank accounts a good
clean up in my opinion the
health of societies that that
have makes money that's part of
what this does so we're really
not yes in this bill we do I I
will say this we do change the
definition.
Madam on page six and again
that's consistent study read
within the definition of in
manager Fund but really the
purpose of this bill is to
close.
Lows some some loopholes that
existed and pulling up different
parts the campaign because of
the fundamental funding
requirements for our use of what
we establish in twenty nineteen
and those remain the same and
the keep the next one nineteen
incident the last bill passes we
didn't know definition of what
is best for so that constable
role.
Thank you madam chair and
senator so we're changing the
definition of a if folks are we
we're not missing any regarding
the contribution is that
correct.
Age yes madam chair on page four
the existing definition is that
contribution no changes that.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
so I can I can.
What would be an in kind
contribution that would change
with that was so I like to be a
website or something for
candidates I would still be
reported as an independent or.
These risks.
Well it would be in kind but
there's a whole bunch of
underlying.
Questions we need to figure out
about maybe the income by what
is the was it what time did it
get may all the things we just
talked about so but yes those
same rules would apply.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator so then I would like to
continue in the bill to the
loans so regarding if you give
yourself a little what
additional evidence which the
with this.
Forty five.
Gentleman yield.
Bottoming out exactly what that
would look like just so
everyone's clear.
The staff.
A for that for.
Twenty one twenty one.
Thanks so right now we need to
disclose under current law the
amount of each and rate that
that person that that is
what we're adding needs to be
disclosed the terms of that you
all they candidate makes the
candidate's campaign committee
and evidence of any law the
family the candidates campaign
committees so again this would
be your role in yourself.
Money that we need to be some
documentation of facts loan what
that looks like
in all to
The disclosed evidence of the
loan to make sure that actually
happens which again right now we
don't.
We're taking everyone there were
and I think this was a again
request that came from the state
ethics commission and does
follow up on some of the federal
litigation with senator Cruz
case that involved that so with
that we have in stock madam
chair and and Representative and
this is also areas which there
will be rules further from.
Asian process.
Okay Madam chair of
Representative McQueen has he
also is a co sponsoring this
bill will vary outside.
Assuming.
I don't
you madam chair and
Representative so.
Because I I gave myself alone in
this last election my campaign
and what I had to do with the
with the secretary of state's
website was give this one to.
How much is it and what the
amount was.
And so on that check madam chair
I wrote in the memo this is for
campaign loan to be refunded Act
X. or Y. K. the manager this
would just codify that rolled
into statute is that what I'm
getting from the manager.
Madam chair representative there
will be additional wells that
will have to be contemplated
regards to new processes to
terms exposure.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and Representative well
I I think currently it appears
to be working yeah but you know
you guys do a great job with.
Yes.
I'm just wondering what are the
rules would be put in place
other than when you got a loan.
It was in terms of the loan to.
Currently Madam do we know any
other detail that we would need
for that.
Enter Madam chair representative
that will take place in the
world making process what I will
say that while we haven't seen
this in New Mexico it has been
seen in other states and so it
is necessary at this time that
we that we take that stuff in
law to codify and then also to
to have goals in place.
At the end of the that this bill
one thousand eight very clear.
Can't say here's what well and
it's a five percent interest.
Right now there's nothing that
would grant that would basically
use campaign contributions.
Self that I think would be a ten
year low so you literally set up
process where.
Nassar will be banned once okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Good thing I think that's one of
the things I like about this
bill because I think federal
candidates have done that you
gotten super rich off of just
giving themselves loans and then
putting a twenty five percent
interest annually and.
There is your salary right there
here so I think that is a good
loophole closed.
Madam chair Senator
Representative.
So.
Regarding lieutenant governor
and governor came on the K.
twenty five I believe.
With this just put them in line
provided on on the the
legislative.
Would be banned Madam chair of
the answer is yes basically.
Twenty five one twenty as the
list.
Of introduce our cover.
Scribe office this bill so yes.
Okay thank you madam chair
thank.
Senator the couple more
questions regarding path I am
certain legislators they may
have a leadership Pasco Act run
so madam chair Senator would it
be banned for those paths to
receive contributions during the
legislative session.
If they're not necessarily
related with the person but
they're just past that they have
with that also be banned from
getting contributions in that
time frame so that Germany in
this I just make sure if this is
Dale existing law and make sure
we get this exactly right yes if
you want madam chair
Representative.
Not to your next question we'll
see what.
Sounds good thank you madam
chair and senator so.
On page twenty four lines twenty
one draft.
The.
This would apply to non folder
Education Committee the only
limited to two thousand dollars.
You madam chair K. twenty four.
So that just repeat the question
yes so the limits madam chair
Senator.
It's two thousand dollars is
that is that the women of
Previous page that I want to
make sure that you are on the
twenty twenty two hundred.
those are just the right.
Twenty one Nibert is unlawful
for any person to make an
expenditure to retail that is
receiving the CAD and closed the
rate of interest so
Received from the candidate so I
do think and we read this I do
think you could get.
You could get a loan from the
bank corrects and may have on a
lot of let me let me just.
So Madam chair representative is
it is not specific so in this
one and it says it says received
from Canada it includes right.
So it doesn't speak to a bank
loan although there would be
reporting required related to
that in the thank I believe the
the difference between you right
after make a lot of your
campaign of hundred thousand
dollars right for me I think we
have some.
Loans that are six figures we
made a half century you're
welcome currently to a member of
the legislature from themselves
A loan that's not from yourself
is under the confines of the the
limit so that's much much
smaller so this is really target
those individual loans to
yourself that you would just
again I think Representative
blocks that I got a call.
Yes.
Shares and seven the only thing
I would.
You know that you may want to
think about getting a loan from
the candidate but the interest
can't be paid from the funds
from the campaign fund yes it's
just a comment I see we're going
with that you know madam chair
and senator when we go to twenty
two we were talking about.
Language
you know out of reporting.
Falsely reporting one to I mean
that's a huge fraud in this bye
bye.
He ended up in there and.
What what the issue madam chair
and senator if I need.
Contribution of of lock during a
session is act now for division
Madam chair faced twenty four
line for are you cannot accept a
contributions during the
prohibited period hello this
a lobbyist employers and
incompetence which would be you
or candidate or campaign
committee for political
committee so if you've got
passed you could make a
contribution of the past during
that period other either
incumbent for candidate was run
on now once we we put the
candidates in your the level
playing field which I think
makes sense so again same rules
would apply but.
Yes that that and actually there
was a situation during session
where political committee was
used during the session
contribution to a member of one
of the chambers
by November water chambers and
asked note that this makes it
very clear can't do that.
Okay thank you.
Thank you Representative now we
have a motion on the table for
the past Representative a little
second by Representative Casey
please follow Representative
human donor yes.
Representative off.
Please.
Yes.
Representative.
F..
Representative will yes.
Representative right yes
explained.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative off.
More likely.
By Senator yes.
Madam comes yes.
Thank you Representative Senator
you have the path
Representative.
Chair and senator I think this
fills a lot of gaps that we've
seen in the past
the only thing I would consider
is it the candidate who is
sending an office has was state
was five thousand dollars that
you could make a contribution to
them I want to say that as we
know the end of session letters
or expenses
you know to go ahead and help
but I guess what you can do is
back up and going to get a loan
and then.
You know in the end trump get
the money to pay it back but.
That's the only.
Problem that I see with and I
and I mean we can't fix it so.
What.
Thank you madam chair Senator I
your bill's up here but.
I think there's a huge loophole
where you could have a pack and
you could be running a lot of
money to pack it's not
affiliated with during session I
think it may be expended in more
than just directly tied entities
that might.
The manager.
Senator.
Representative.
Hi good morning.
Good morning.
Okay we were very important
thanks for how
you practice zero.
thank you.
I.
Yes okay.
so madam chair Representative
it's my great honor to.
You'll hear a little culture a
little by little history today
in some of our incredibly
talented.
Artists in our community
Representative all out of pocket
most of it and will those
communities.
as a as a real
just a real player he's been
around you know as a lot in fact
he's I don't know if you have
any special.
Speak to speak for him but
there's a really happened he
sells it says recruiter
Christmas so in honor of our
culture our history our heritage
with red and green to lead the
most important conversation we
can have anyone coming in or out
of our state everyone is here I
would like to have a performance
of the proposed state key less
on the proposal here's an
opportunity to really spice
things up here in the state and
with that coach letting revolves
to seeing green here if if
that's the rules of the
committee yes.
And you have to do and.
You can also.
Russell.
Well.
Yeah.
The loan.
The.
Engine.
Walgreens.
To ensure.
Good morning.
Well the.
The.
Okay let's go to the audience
those supported a bill your
hand.
On the webcast.
Any hands raise for the bill
will stay on the webcast for any
comments in opposition to the
bill and back to the audience
for opposition to the.
Okay committee members
Representative Zamora madam
chair coach has.
And representative.
This song Committee fits New
Mexico because it doesn't only
have the culture of New Mexico
and it but it also has a
diversity.
I can see Julia Roberts.
And and that's what it's all
about all of this vehicle along
and and still put our culture
out there.
Thank you coach Representative
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair and thank you
students for all that and coach
I was here when our speaker
bamboo Haaland.
carried the legislation to make.
Better create new Fishel New
Mexico question.
We have a lot of songs over the
years
One member of the proposed for
years health voice on and we
finally have a competition for
the cowboys on because I think
one of our constituents just
wrote something and so she was
doing that but I honestly don't
think we could do better.
you in the Cochin Representative
lady representative for health
proposed
thank you very much.
Sounds a little I happily news.
For the past.
Little a second by
Representative your new and.
Have no opposition thank.
If you want to stay yes your
your house bill one seven one
absolutely.
Free download thousand four.
Only this continues the theme
for way and this is about he's
here Representative health
problems the seven
Very passionate due to is
Process.
proposing and Office of peace
building and as we understood
the violence not just to Mexico
but across the country.
That we can sort of call today
the relationship.
And ourselves within our
government within the powers
that be this is basically what
the proposal on creating this
office on the.
Creation is is they just want to
be really up front that.
on this.
The importance.
Discussion I think when it comes
to
what part of our state and what
offices we will
this is really
important option for we're going
to see proposed at this is not
mine but this is actually very
active.
These.
These
are Medicare and look forward to
questions again this is not a
budget so I don't I.
Your time on this proposal does
have an appropriation and it is
not.
Okay let's go to the audience
those in support of the bill
research analysts those in
opposition.
Seeing that go to the webcast
we're hearing.
Comments in support of house
bill one seven one.
Comments in opposition.
And more go ahead.
Unfortunately we cannot hear you
of course.
And I would say to you you are
the only one.
So.
Do a little bit more time.
Okay I'm sorry I can't hear you
thank you.
Already committee members.
Which is Representative read
yeah madam chair and
representative
what I see.
This time apart by what we do
already is.
You know we have for the should
not even you know whether it be
in the courts for.
schools
Madam chair and representative
where is this the service state
or jurisdiction is currently
being done madam chair
Representative closes they can
get to that in the in at the UNM
it's it's it's in the as an
educational facility Services
within the few studies program
on something that is more
festival in the thing with with
government entities and wraps
looking at some of the the cross
Act The
Schools versus you know
introduce when we look at our
prison system every basically at
half off for something like that
but that is actually proactive
and have to be can be within the
actual.
Madam chair and and
Representative I I conceptually
this is a good idea of the
practices we when we start
looking at thankfully violent
crime
you know it's going to be
difficult to get the family
members or maybe the surviving
family members together with the
senator said have a conversation
I know the DA's office does some
of that
Very limited because of the
harsh the eight you know.
But
Madam chair representative on
page two hundred nineteen twenty
talk about anymore.
For the director I I think that
that needs to expand to the
individuals who will be.
you know kind of leading this
this
mediations later on a.
I have kind of an understanding
of that
And with that I I would say.
I I don't see in here where the.
Third quarter.
One call.
Does it meet with parties first
to find out their positions if
it's acceptable to move forward
because of this I think you're
gonna end up with a situation
where.
you have individuals that.
This is just not going to work.
You know
Madam chair representative I
think the educational component
is really sort of the leading
edge and this is why I talk
about you and I was sort of the
basis so really the first after
of the director we need to look
at educational opportunities to
really go out into the community
and school districts and educate
these
as a student units that we
hadn't had a few studies for the
most popular class of kids were
taking on to high school and the
often not many of us
precariously absolutely agree
rates are similar to meditation
they were learning how to you
know basically control your
emotions things that are I think
we look at the educational part
of this
there's a really large component
of this bill and so I think we
start with that and then look at
how this could be integrated
into other the government on
increasing that awareness within
our communities value New Mexico
has and and the director is
really pushing that into
first curriculum and then into
you know other aspects of how
we.
Madam chair representative.
Three and I hope to find.
Talked about the.
I know.
When he was going to scroll
In grade school they have
classes on.
And in fact.
In the
of the for students and he was
one of our.
Communicate with both sides to
kind of the the peace builder if
you were
and and so I think part of that
speech done but of what is the
difference that you see here
with your proposal that what
they're doing currently features
the universality other and again
just having that place where if
you wanted to have a program on
into the school system perhaps
or maybe even into the workplace
for savings that there was a
thank you very much for
something like this if there was
a mechanism in place to have
that focal point to bring it out
because it's really hot we're
facing about what is how do I
design and he's forced Thailand
you know help folks find more
reasons that for us so it's it's
really more so about that
externally facing bodies that we
would be able to have an answer
after the program that they're
suggesting that today.
Madam chair representative when
we go to page five and we want
to one eight the service he's up
there.
And I I I mean.
Social workers counselors
mediators and we're talking
about the
we're getting people who reflect
that concern for the integrity
of the environment I'm sorry I
don't understand why we need
that person we need someone who
can provide any sense.
I think madam chair ideas that
with.
Being that all of these things
are connected the destructive
three major certain parts of
this and having a diverse
Council
Folks who are you looking at
different aspects of life that
have.
Those environmental factors are
certainly impacting depending on
where you live so I think the
idea for that one Representative
was basically to have able focus
for us in the within the council
but it is a diverse forward
but the whole idea is to have
different personalities ideas
backgrounds on coming together
to talk about I hope to be piece
for the state and.
Madam chair representative with
you go to page six and I would
the the Representative will you.
between the ages of fifteen and
twenty four I'm worried about
the fifty eight if it was a time
for yeah you know we are.
concerns but the fifteen point
the young obviously we're in an
era for rental consent but why
would we go to fifteen.
Chair representative you know
even in my for time here the
legislature speaking to students
as young as fifteen when you
talk about non violence or
cultivating the state has really
important and the voice in an
hour or so a very mature
students to participate Iraq
self as a high school student
was a lot of clinical natural
helper we talk a lot about
suicide prevention as a kid and
so you know I think that having
that broader age range just
allows for again more diversity
of the interests of the council
As young as fifteen I think
there's a really.
Yes we have.
The on the council yeah.
Madam chair representative to
see the bottom six to seven
hundred and the a minimum of why
C..
When we get to page seven online
I find the systems and make
recommendations to the director
of the governor concerning these
related policies and practices.
that almost seems to me what
staff do the.
you know what are we coming out
of PED or the court to sophomore
F..
I.
Well chair representative as a
status we did ask for
appropriations to convene this
for
and this is make sure that you
know they were health and and
that sort of reference of being
able to to have a position of
significance in our state and so
these recommendations again
recommendations on the our staff
they're coming from the
community trying to again create
more peace in our in our state
and animals.
Our communities.
M. Madam chair representative
I'm I think we need to work on
this will move more not quite
ready.
That's
Representative Chasey thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative it state
Representative read to the cost
he has served with us on our
criminal justice reform
subcommittee and you know we've
had some very compelling
testimony on the start of
justice
to serve he'll the fabric of
society what I learned from.
My work repeal of the death
penalty is I don't ever try to
speak for victims of the site I
just try to support them because
you have people who are.
We have a wide spectrum of their
views but there was a national
organization.
worked with was supporting the
effort known as murder victims
families for reconciliation and
I been to one of their national
meetings and there's some really
compelling stories the
Father of one of the dictators
of the Oklahoma City bombing.
And she just graduated from
Marquette University and was
working for one of the federal
agency said in Oklahoma City
and.
he had never thought about the
death penalty but she was
supposed to.
And it took him a year.
Agreed to come over to say I
want to honor my daughter I'm
going to.
Go with her to.
And ended up.
Be friendly the father of
Timothy McVeigh next it was a
really powerful story
on your living room is funded I
just can't remember this person
was I and I don't remember his
last name but also and that that
would be offset that time from
Santa Fe whose daughter Amy was
was murdered by.
Really desperate.
And very.
African
You and.
In the course of the years of
the bills working with those
very people
Amy's mother Linda started
traveling the world with one of
her daughter's killers who.
To grow up and become an
advocate for
this wrist restoration and they
were part of the you know South
Africa ended up with that forget
the name of it now that
it was called restoration that
they have that a large council
to try to heal a lot of the
Williams.
And so I think there's a lot of
values to this
I just
I think.
That kind of.
Get annoyed and the and I also
understand how the media likes
to make fun of things they think
we're doing that is selling it's
not silly to try.
You know.
The fabric of society back
together and I think that's what
you're trying to do
I I do I'm not offended by
fifteen year old I taught high
school and by top freshmen and
sophomores and so I had.
In discussions of really fine
literature.
Mark Twain in and
The interlocking bird with those
ages I just think there's it is
a rich environment you know our
mutual friends yeah
who's no longer letting that I
talked with her at Jefferson and
she's like a second mom to
Representative ring.
She was a real advocate for that
age group speaking up so I
wouldn't want it just out of
here.
It do all of our out of hand so
but I.
I think it's a good place to
start and I also really
encourage the
we.
The former senator Richard
Martinez was who was co chair
courts corrections and justice
ran into a professor from New
Mexico state I think they were
eating green Chile.
Actually and they that and he he
is he teaches and has classes on
restorative justice he was just
really great presented to our
committee I just I think there
could be without creating office
right now you could start with
some of the steps toward this
and I remember Representative
reading I think the first time
that issue was raised in an
interim committee on the CCJ one
of our former senators.
Women from Albuquerque had been
a victim of a crime and she said
I'm not sit down with him ever
and you have to put that's
that's okay you have to do that
people have to come here in the
willing.
Well in participants and so I I
think it's worth discussing I
appreciate your efforts I don't
give up on the whole idea.
Making restorative justice
Weaving the fabric Justice
Reform thank you.
Committee members of the church
if I can.
This.
No I I agreed and what I saw
with victims over time they
become more understanding of.
Market deal with it you know and
I think that's just general life
I think that when we look at our
civil court they've done a great
job I have done some research
yeah great job with mediation
and moving those cases I know
that the DA's office is doing
some and maybe maybe we have a
sit down with the DA's office of
the public defender figure out
how to do more because I think
that there's a great educational
that.
For the offender to understand
what he did.
To the family.
Those reconciliation commissions
and they're very helpful.
Thank you yeah okay we're done.
Senator block.
Thank you Representative so I
just have hopefully just west of
the money given to the creating
questions but first of all why
this is under the department of
finance and administration Madam
chair representative because
basically it's it's some sort of
bodies are often do DFA creates
programs that go out into
communities to do specific jobs
so this is kind of one of those
little satellites that Beyonder
if that
You know I.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
So.
It wasn't in the budget why not
in the budget is that we are
proportionally representative
Madam chair representative we
just.
In times before okay so as for
all the great advice given we
are going to work through the
interim to make sure that the
house okay thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so was.
Finance.
This is our first hearing okay
thank you madam chair and then
so I see this is the governor
who appoints.
It.
After that.
madam chair representative I
believe that yes okay.
And then I'm looking at the the
council the make up of the
council starting on page I.
The from mind calculation
appears there's about seven.
Members of this council
appointed by the governor madam
chair.
I think I'm actually eight.
Really.
Madam chair representative all
together so the but there.
Because I think there's one
representative appointed by
this.
Secretary of public safety
there's one madam chair and.
And then what about the faith
leaders madam chair movements
that.
Here Representative
Essentially it would just be
about so the way that our
council specifically work is
there's like typically an
application process
you know folks who I can get
recommended or recommend
themselves for the position and
then governor's discretion to
appoint for the council.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative yeah I just
regarding faith leaders I just
would be very careful about not
representing eight chair
representative we could at the
Christian faith Jewison's and
most on our I just wouldn't want
to exclude anybody from that so
that might be something to
consider.
Just the main questions I had
about this bill hopefully didn't
go too long Madam chair.
I see that you broke.
Representative short is.
Time you ask questions.
Okay committee members what is
what is your the committee.
Representative Chasey madam
chair with the Sanchez I
respectfully move to table okay.
We have a motion for to table
with respect and we have a
second and.
Position to the chin.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative
madam chair this morning has the
less someone like you cares a
whole awful lot nothing is going
to get it's.
It is so if they.
I think it's the timeline I
wanted to mention that the
Navajo Nation.
An amazing.
Maker.
And we have peacemaking for
years of traditional.
Estimate and community leader so
it takes both sides and
sometimes the entire family or
community or there and there's a
peacemaking process.
I've been through it and it is
really good process.
We have to log.
Neighborhood speeds.
I think we should all right at
the
In response to some of the.
Over the top criticism about
this.
Okay.
All right next we have.
Senate bill one eighty.
The.
Senator.
Secretary you make.
Thank you madam chair.
The manager of this bill should
look pretty familiar of.
this bill that is.
Last year
this
the year before.
But also in this bill your
response.
is simply a pared down of last
year's has to set.
The changes that are in this
bill are for actual experiences
of Mrs laci ministers
and one of the New Orleans and I
tested because a lot of this
stuff that was adopted
temporarily during the twenty
twenty.
so I will go ahead I'm not going
to this is a long because it has
some of the high points in the
right change but we can
definitely do that in the
discussion if he was not.
In this are moving the date that
the county firsthand how real
the registration.
Right now it's thirty five days
after election day this move it
to the Monday following the came
from here.
This increases would have on
what firms compete for workers
on election day two hundred
dollars four hundred dollars and
this is critical because
The card that.
And and especially here our
election Mr having trouble.
Eighteen and recruiting are for
workers and Madam chair in a lot
of these counties most of those
who are doing this for this
order work are in their
seventies or older on a working
long hard days which is
appropriate compensation.
This bill reinstates good ones
that the the legislature Richard
Dawkins the twenty twenty
election around city ballots
been sent out so we can make
sure that they're.
This is the first time.
It also there are I see in the
public record Alexion's
consistent protecting national
critical infrastructure voters
personal information so that
we're balancing public access
with election security and our
constitutional protected right
to secrecy of the ballot.
A little bit about timelines for
absentee ballots in addition to
adopting those timelines from
twenty twenty there's another a
number of other security
measures were absentee ballots.
Twenty twenty that are Dr
prudently and tell including
housing books use the last for
the social security numbers.
Last for the social security
numbers as their ID rather than
just their name
It's now the main here for us
because a lot it's pretty easy
to find someone's name here
birth an address but not the
second the the last four of
their social
it also provides for secure
preprocessing.
County for staff it gives an
opportunity for voters secure
errors and they messed something
up on that.
and it's also a section
reasonable folks were are
dealing with all these ballots
see that.
We make sure that are not
working late into the night with
all of us are more likely to act
in the state.
Another of twenty twenty
temporary fix that this bill
makes permanent is establishing
the use of voter Committee
assessors it all counties which
was really successful and.
It's been the first thousand.
In this order
To you in opposition section one
dash four one one E. should be
re written to address current
and accurate voter rolls.
And to establish residency
requirements for voting this is
a big problem in that bill right
now.
Section twenty five A. two
removes the date staff or time
when the ballot was received and
there's no reason to remove that
that's an important part of our
election process one of our
biggest concerns.
Is section sixty two C. for when
the state is going to accept
grants and funds from outside of
government that is just a way to
buy our elections and we don't
need to do that New Mexico has
enough money to fund its
elections adequately we should
not be accepting outside money.
I would urge the committee to
vote no on this bill thank you
thank you Carl.
Laurie go ahead.
Go ahead yourself can.
Can you hear me yes madam chair
good morning madam chair members
of the committee I respectfully
oppose Senate bill one eighty I
was a poll watcher and was
denied permission to view the
voter roll because I was told
the secretary of state had sent
a letter to the precinct judges
instructing them not to allow us
to see the rules this affected
my ability to do my job as a
whole worker section one dash to
dash twenty nine of the election
handbook says that this is a
permitted activity section one
dash to dash thirty says the
Nile of activity is a petty
misdemeanor and it still was
done and not ever address the
bill gives a partisan secretary
of state full story over
training all the watchers and
challengers this bill
I do not understand this bill
being proposed rules are
currently being broken by the
secretary of state by concern is
this is going to increase
partisan games and decreased
election integrity thank you for
your hard work.
Thank you Laurie.
David.
I'm sorry that my name is Erin
can you hear me.
Yes we can.
Our polling data over the last
two years has repeatedly
confirmed that over sixty
percent of the country no longer
trust our election system and
that number is going up and not
down this chart distressed fans
all parties that is a public
crisis that this committee
should care about it is
precisely because of bills like
SB one eighty that public
distrust continues to grow this
bill removes all public
oversight from all election
records that is irresponsible
for the legislature to even
consider people have been asking
for more transparent actions and
more security like commonsense
reforms such as voter ID and
removal of internet connectivity
electronic poll books I've
attended at least half a dozen
hearings for this bill and
reminded the legislators every
time of the crisis of public
confidence it exists not one
legislator has addresses
elephant in the room and any
other comments or questions on
this bill I'm asking this
committee to strike the portion
of the bill that would make our
elections completely opaque to
the public for at least have the
courage to look the people in
the eye and explain to them why
there during the crisis of
public confidence.
Thank you Aaron.
M. ward if you've had your.
Might be set up.
Am I audible now you are.
Okay great thanks first of all I
need to make clear that I'm not
opposing SB one eighty but M.
seeking amendments and there's
no option given for that.
So to get right to the issue SB
one eighty contains language
that would increase signature
requirements for minor party and
write in candidates this
completely disregards the fact
that ballot qualified minor
parties already have gone
through petition process to big
ballot qualified in the first
place further the language
requires minor party minor
parties to have a percentage of
registered voters multiple times
greater than statutorily
required for money for major
parties and this makes no
percent no sense at all the
percentage required per
percentage
four major parties just
registered voters is one third
of one percent.
And allow me to share some
information obtained from Mr
wing or ballot access news
thirty three states in this
country allow qualified parties
to nominate by convention of New
Mexico of these thirty three
states New Mexico is the only
one that requires the nominee of
a convention to submit petition
to ensure that's time thank you
very much.
Okay go outside to have anybody
outside in the hallways for
opposition.
House Bill.
Senate bill one twenty one
eighty as amended.
Okay let's go back to the
audience for comments at fifty
one eighty as amended please
raise your hands.
Well
madam chairman Kapler and the
Santa Fe County for I'm speaking
on behalf of life.
You're the third largest
populations that have a high
turnout large counties are
voters are yes they're gonna
have to board I see we would
like to point out that this bill
to support changes that the
courts all thirty three have the
support this is a bipartisan
group of course which are the
longer the time for us to to
request higher ledge the table
workers allowing for to start
processing restrictions on the
legislature and verification of
for a for a request in our
having specifically support the
variety and reflection of the
Legislature transparency the
last for the social security
number tax would like to think
Senator Duhigg percent over four
hours walking us through this
bill is very important for us to
hear from her make sure that
this bill was I discussed and
any concerns were addressed
thank you so much.
Did I see and I think further
comments in support of the bill.
Please.
After morning madam chair
handles us doing anything and
speaking on behalf of my family
so we today we are the second
largest county in.
more for the media legislation
under the last administrator and
that means the data to work at
our office as tired as.
And and frankly of a really
great job are watching this
right now they're watching this
in hopes that you make the
process of moving this forward
better fees here and we can have
security and access at the same
time I would encourage you to
move this bill forward so we can
continue our great work in
collections of the national very
crowded thank you.
Okay let's go outside hello Sir.
Thank you madam chair members
committee Graham coming because
New Mexico we are in strong
support of these changes
To make sure that our phones are
actually registered as of right
and or information is protected
for for our elected officials
complex services.
Mental registration process
wells legislative the operating
fairly for our lunch and workers
are operated by the time the
thing about this.
Most recently I've.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is rendering
the time accounting clerk in
Union County one of the smallest
counties in our state I
represent basically twenty five
hundred registered voters well I
am very grateful to Senator
Duhigg for dancing this bill and
addressing a lot of things that
affect us is watching this
traders there are a couple
sections in there that would
affect my County specifically as
a small county with limited
staff right now I have a staff
of two in my office I like the
Senators she possibly consider a
couple of requests that we
asked.
Was.
The sixty one section one six
fourteen specifically extending
the time here absentee ballots
after election day currently in
the bill addresses going to the
Friday afternoon which would
continue to change our election
results even though they're not
facial until County campus that
is still be those numbers
connected to continue to change
and the other section that is
once again
specifically would impact people
who are declaring for positions
and what we call our regular
local elections currently they
come in and out of the clear for
a specific position whether it's
a two year or four year term the
wording in this section we now
changed where everybody would be
on the ballot all grouped in
together your positions and then
work your time is up.
Thank you for your time.
let's go outside of their.
Chair.
Needed more funding is one of
the ones and the third and.
Of the bill on behalf of one to
County.
F. as close to it although I do
not like your yeah those places
age sixty five J. which is due
to the death of the votes to the
Friday after the election this
money we knew of we have a
collection of books.
Wait until the Friday after the
election date to give the final
votes I understand the
can see go for that but gives
those results after.
Of the last days of as much and
I believe prolong analysts and
process for our office can
continue continues to change
that speedboat count in no way
after the election however the
majority of this bill is really
good to allow my office the
ability to administrative better
election overall I want to say
thank you for the support it
measures.
Thank you let's go to the
webcast.
Andrés no go ahead.
Good morning madam chair members
of committee my name is Andreas
that I know I'm executive
director at a late we stand in
full support of this bill and
thank the sponsors for bringing
that forward and the secretary
of state for all of the work
she's put into this.
Thank you Andrea.
Representative I will go ahead.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Roberts on the third the
quality county court which is a
class B. County I'm speaking
solely on behalf of my County
and out of the Courts affiliate
I'm in full support of SB one
eighty and recommended to pass
this particular legislation
administratively assist by real
office during an election along
with post election duties I also
like the record I like to
The sponsor particularly for
this legislation on being very
open with discussions coming
from a rural county
understanding the issues that we
face during elections and that's
all I have chair thank you.
They only my SS go ahead.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Naomi
Maestas and county clerk pulls
almost County the only class
each county in the state.
But a very voter Center
community the comments I made
today reflect my position to be
clear I'm not speaking on behalf
the clerks affiliate as county
clerk would be less administered
elections for lost almost the
last six years what has worked
since in the offices two
thousand five I would like to
express my support Senate bill
one eighty as it helps
streamline and improve the
efficiency of administrative
processes leading to better
outcomes for all involved
Senator one eighty includes
needed measures that will assist
and ability to continue to serve
our communities securely and
transparently for instance the
post election voting system
checked after every statewide
election supporting voters
rights and their ability to
engage in the democratic process
I ask you to recognize the need
for these very important
administrative changes to
support the tradition of great
election administrations in our
state by voting in favor Senate
bill one eighty thank you for
your very valuable time.
Thank you ma'am.
Richard Mason go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that Dick
Mason of of the election
director of the league of women
voters of New Mexico the lady
standing strong to order SB one
eighty as amended thanks to
sponsors from Bernalillo forward
the last a hundred and three
years of the district for
effective fair and secure this
system.
An adult that allows a maximum
opportunity for qualified voters
to be participate with the F.
legislature and the secretary of
state to continue with your the
necessary changes are made to
ensure that Mexico voting system
remains one of the best and most
accessible in the country so
they stand in full support of SB
one eighty and urges you to give
it to pass thank you thank you.
And lord go ahead.
There.
Shares.
Hi back again
so we are requesting of from
Senator Duhigg and
Representative to strike your
yes vote so we like to go on to
the next speaker thank you.
Sorry about that sorry go ahead.
This.
This call okay good morning
madam chair members of the
committee ladies and gentlemen
how do you do this is Kathleen
Burke calling in from
Albuquerque and I am the vice
president of the board for New
Mexico open elections New Mexico
open elections supports the work
of the secretary of state of New
Mexico and in large part
supports this bill however New
Mexico open elections opposes
increasing the signature
requirements on minor parties
the minor parties in New Mexico
are already at a disadvantage
due to higher signature
requirements.
We would be very happy to hear a
discussion of the amendment to
change this part of the bill
thank you ladies and gentleman
thank you.
So so go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is still
out of jail and I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
open elections I would like to
see to echo the sentiments of
Kathleen.
That we do fully support this
bill except for the only small
portion which double signature
requirements for minor minor
party candidates currently for
statewide offices minor party
candidates must collect six
thousand nine hundred signatures
with this bill they would need
to collect nearly fourteen
thousand signatures we believe
that this is unfair and that we
would like to see an amendment
to strike that portion of the
bill thank you so much.
Thank you.
Okay and I don't believe we have
anyone outside.
And supported making comments in
support of the bill committee
members.
Representative.
Chasey thank you madam chair I
was wondering if
perhaps Senator doing in the
secretary of state could address
some of the comments because I
was a little particularly on.
I was confused about some.
Something to do with funding do
you recall that comment about
the funding Alexion's not.
Statement that and
Let's just start.
All yield to the secretary of
madam chair and Representative
Chasey.
I don't know what we address
outside funding and in the
context of this bill is one of
the comments were addressing
things.
That are either existing are
outside of the context of the
cell but do we did receive we
have in the past receive grant
funding from the center for
election innovation research and
center close tax life at the
county to help
get the word out about the
elections process is furious
twenty twenty election experts I
wish we could say that we have
more opportunities for getting
funding more regularly but that
was the issue.
Madam chair go ahead so Madam
chair representative I have is
part of your daily talk about
like capital outlay and stuff
like that I I I suspect that is
one one four.
For.
Twenty four I thought on section
hundred sixty four
the manager.
Sorry but in federal grants and.
So that's that's after the only
thing that really addresses the
issues.
And madam chair.
I see.
I'm also confused about the
sixteen and seventeen year old
serving election point this in
that current law yes so that's
this is not a change with this
Senator Steinborn.
And the I think we have that
bill and he was still in the
how legislation that eventually
cost and so it's been in the
loft for at least five years
okay thank you madam chair
The
The during the issues with let's
accounting clerk.
Talked about the absentee vote
count be a little problematic
for him although he supported
the bill overall and I would
dress his.
Was page sixty five.
Madam chair representative a
largely defer to the secretary
of that but I will note that
this is the same process we are
we do professional.
Both of already so this isn't
like a ton about certain come in
after election day of six
figures and I am.
I.
Madam chair and senator so.
If your you're getting a mail
ballot that needs to be treated
like a provisional about.
Is that correct madam chair and
representative so let me clarify
that the section is doing so in
the context of the section we
are creating a current process
for absentee ballots that do not
have sufficient information for
the county clerk and election
board to be able to receive and
process those ballots and so
basically this is again yeah
this is the same process that we
did this in twenty twenty seem
to work really well so we
provided a path to hear so
you're missing a signature you
transpose the last four of your
social you may be missing them
entirely whatever you the county
clerk notifies the voter the
voter can therefore here now I
providing the required
information
now what Senator said is
absolutely correct me right now
any rejected absentee ballot
that's missing information is
treated like a provisional
ballots and I will also say that
this the Friday following
election day deadline is just
for the care process that even
then any rejected absentee
ballots will go into the
provisional ballot process which
requires hearings and and things
like that for folks to resolve
them so this is intended to
build in a little time for that
process to be completed let's
say your we go to by mail in
your you know if you were out of
state and you were able to get
that information back time so
madam chair and Senator madam
secretary you're actually
providing more tied.
Madam chair representative for
providing a the.
An easier process to hear
balance friends rather than
going to the provisional process
which is what it is okay thank
you madam chair and I think.
The only other question I
thought you might want to
address it was raised by several
of the folks who were
necessarily opposed to the.
overall
legislation was the
increased number of signatures
for the smaller parties.
So madam chair representative so
indeed a funny because those.
Not funny interesting this
version of the bill you know if
this requirement has been in
water and other versions of this
bill time this is the first set
and take a look concern is that
being said what the section that
is and it's.
We have.
Minor parties and we have areas
districts within the state that
currently under current law the
really is no path to getting on
the ballot as a major party
candidate because of the way the
law is currently written you
have to have a certain number of
signatures right and so if you
don't have a number and not
familiar pre registrants
register.
Within that district then you
the only way you can get on the
ballot is by running isn't it
and so basically this is just
clarifying that okay if you are
in a district for which you
don't have enough more party
registrants to a team that
adequate number of signatures to
get on the ballot here is you
don't have to be able to now
thank you madam chair sentences
the questions that I had after
the test.
Representative.
What do I'm sorry Representative
vice chair and then
Representative I.
Thank you madam chair I my
concern was the increase in
signatures from my part of
applicants so I'm just going to
clarify what I heard and make
sure I understand this would.
The change on page eighty three.
The only come into play if the
district or the jurisdiction.
Did not have sufficient minor
party registered voters to meet
the requirements that's correct
and chair and advice here chair
Mister so you don't mind eleven
provided that if there are fewer
members of the million for you
registered to vote in the state
for statewide offices or in the
district.
Then.
So under current law madam chair
and secretary what happens right
now in those jurisdictions if
those people simply cannot run
for office or they can if they
meet the position requirements
for independence correct so this
is simply stating what we
already do what must be done.
Madam chair and representative I
think it clarifies right because
we have it in kind of a couple
of different sections right now
and it's not necessarily like
spelled out in clear English and
we can argue whether or not this
is very.
Madam chair.
Okay.
Thank you.
Madam chair and thank you
secretary clarifies the concern
so as long as there are
sufficient number of minor party
registered voters they follow
the normal path of the current
percentage require that for
Madam chair I strapped thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
now we Representative little
thank you that would do pass.
I have a motion where do pass
the second.
Question.
Please thank you madam chair
thank you Senator so I quite a
few questions the end of your
bills over a hundred and seventy
seven pages so.
First of all regarding the home
address for confidentiality for
candidates so what are you doing
with this home address are we
putting it public or.
Are we just stripping it
completely madam chair so madam
chair representative what this
status this was a offered by
Senator.
it directs the secretary of
state to create a program which
will be a voluntary often
program for Latin for to the
facials they can say I don't on
election paperwork and financial
disclosure paperwork.
If that is going to be provided
to the public I don't want my
home address on that on going.
And so the details of that
program will be worked out for
rural making process that's.
But that overall is what that
section.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator some soon with that you
know I get it I get why you're
putting in my concern is how can
the citizen independently verify
if there.
The representative lives in
their district if they don't
know what their addresses madam
chair so Madam chair
representative one this only
covers documents that
secretaries has control over
people's home addresses a source
and they are they're all over
the place
so there's any person and any
number of other sources and the
system could go to to find that
home address this is just on
election documents and on and on
financial disclosures.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator so.
Where else.
Usually the secretary of state.
Into the schools are in the in
our.
Every report that we get mentor
we have an address so.
My concern is let's just say we
have a someone.
Running for office and
Bernalillo county.
They're represented in the
county but they live in let's
say I'll pass so madam chair.
You know how how to constituent
madam chair know where they are
supposed to live in and where
they may actually live they can
independently that.
A suicide managed so madam chair
representative in your example
some of those running for office
here in New Mexico including
down on their.
Election papers into the
secretary that they live in
Texas I have the whole first.
Well I mean hypotheticals they
put an address and Bernalillo
county but they're really dress
is somewhere else let's just say
Madam tears Senator there be no
way to verify what they're
purported to dress in a on that
part Madam so madam chair
representative so where in the
instance that this might come up
with the.
Which I've I've done a number of
those K. and so we all have.
The specifically
covers judicial proceeding with
the language in the amendment
that said.
According this information is.
It should be more than that it
will be
because sometimes we do and to
verify that information for the
purpose of residential count I
will tell you we look at a lot
of stuff other than just what
someone on forms W. secretary
we're looking across our
having done this basis so hi I
have full confidence that we
will be able to do this cases
whether whether we have these
protections in place or not.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Secretary.
Madam secretary Senator so okay.
That kind of answers my concern
I do get the amendment from the
good Senator but.
I think it might be something we
want to address later on so
thank you madam chair so going
forward here.
I know my sections from is that
I think there's a there's an
amendment that happen on your
side of the aisle or your side
of the capitol so.
Your former page seven section
for T..
The current rate is seven
section forty it's regarding.
The implementation of secure
internet application.
You madam chair
This is this is going to cut
back on additional challenges
this is a program that's already
that that we've got in place
that City of Albuquerque when I
as the city clerk there with the
help out the secretary of
state's office so that folks can
go ahead and collect Kulik
try to petition signatures that
are easily checked against our
rural so that you know all your
all the signature you can't even
get to start to to do the
signature unless your first
verified as a as a registered
voter in that district this is
being offered so this is a two
to five modernize our position
gaps process which has resulted
in the thank this part is very
necessary but it also is a great
benefit to to those wrong
because no signatures from.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Secretary etcetera so that that
clears it up for me I was just
wondering what that.
Look at it so it wouldn't be
regarding the actual
implementation of the elections
only be verifying if they're
registered voter in the district
that they can sign it is okay
thank you madam chair actually
like the idea the good.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Senator.
I did this based on the current
one so page eight section six
the public record disclosure
procedures.
On.
For the election could provide
for disclosure or non disclosure
public records relating to
elections
So can you just tell me how this
would be it for a.
Read.
Look for a lot of we have now
hello this restricted regarding
election.
So it used to be sections that I
don't know if it's not the so
madam chair
Representative so and and also
asked the committee to note
lawyers not here's thank you
Jeff objecting to any of us
Which should be significant.
I
so what this does is it says
basically that when it comes to
to R. lection.
I and we're gonna figure we're
going to.
To address.
Our public records in the
election code on it.
Indeed this is us to the
sections to make sure that we
are protecting national critical
infrastructure to make sure that
we are protecting our our
constitutionally.
Secrecy about this is that
because of the records that that
we're dealing with elections are
are you ought to other public
records and so this is building
a flexibility state sometimes
more nuanced approach to these
very critical records are as we
as as as we go forward.
Thank you madam chair and
senator so.
So could under this new
legislation could summon request
the act the actual ballots.
And scanned ballots chair.
Madam chair representative
balance themselves are public
records and and we already have
some fairly specific
requirements of the election
code around the inspection of
those in the region.
but this is I can and.
Ballots and so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator madam secretary so
regarding these.
It properly Getty.
Warning the above laws out of
the match with this bill and
then to have a requirements
better manage.
So madam chair representative as
far as mission within
persistently so has the number
of this
and one of the the last
accepting this listed is is what
is often referred to as a catch
all that is otherwise
legislative plan so this is
going to be one of the otherwise
provided by loss
as far as.
Representative there's the in in
terms of where the stuff tells
The Hobbit or any other federal
law in fact what we're doing
further is verifying
collections virtual
infrastructure so there's
nothing in this perfect
particular provisions that is
going to me the state on
compliance or any federal law
for.
And in fact what we do is we
further clarify line
definitions of the lection so
Representative two elections is
terminology.
Okay thank you madam chair.
So.
Assets systems and networks.
Regarding that selection
critical infrastructure so madam
chair Senator could someone if
they had a question regarding
voting C. for instance with this
ban them from doing an
independent audit with
professionals to see if that
voting machines counting
correctly Madam chair
representative that is not
permitted currently and it would
continue to not be provided
however as the senator noted in
her opening we are increasing
the post election on fire ants
for building systems to after
every statewide election
currently it's only after the
general election okay thank you
madam chair.
So then it would be changing in
the slot from being at the court
you can follow court and say you
have to go through the secretary
of state.
Office to ask for an audit madam
chair is that correct Mr chair
representative there's just not.
There is no such thing as a
request on it there's a post
election recount there's
election contest there's a post
election system chapters all
legislative for and for FY just
particularly.
Session in the bill doesn't
affect any of those.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I did see some more
money.
Information.
Where a would have to go through
the secretary of state.
Did we change anything that
would have to go through the
secretary of state instead of
the Courts madam chair.
Senator.
Madam chair representative for
the not the actually think of
and alternatives that Act access
to the courts is kind of one of
my issues.
Turning so I would not be
putting things that.
And any bill that I'm doing that
would restrict our system.
Rights to us the course to get
to the question.
Okay thank you madam chair and
senator sensing on section
seventy two.
Regarding recounts of the sos
instead of the District Court.
Madam chair.
Three Madam chair.
Right I think
right Madam chair representative
So I think one of the challenges
that we have now is that.
What we're doing with the
section if that.
Rather than filing the
application with the words.
Yes it's going to the problem I
Sir right
and so I think that's definitely
part of the piece here but at
the end of the day Madam chair
representative whether the
application I mean all of the
requirements are still in place
for an application for a recount
of the check all right do that
we already have automatically
council rejects for for the
close races Representative.
In which there so that the first
alright about discretionary
right so the request but
secondly the requirements are
also in place of the application
is filed the the the the the
deposit is made because again
you know these are pre paid for
on a less the outcome changes
this is just a streamlining of
administration process but I
don't.
Madam chair representative I I
see why what someone thought
that that taking that language
out then you can go to court but
you can't it is so critical to
to feel any of this seven years
state just
doesn't mean that the property I
officer.
Thank you madam chair Senator
than filing officer would be the
county clerk would be directly
to the secretary managed care
Representative sectors.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator.
So.
Election security programs
general responsibilities I think
that section eight page.
So madam chair so.
Senator secretary so is the
security program that is being
put in place would this be done
through directly the secretary
of state's office the county
clerk's or would there be
independent private contractors
involved in that chair madam
chair Philip this is a purpose
are you.
In the office of the secretary
secretary of state this is just
combine the program that they're
already doing to make sure
since.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you.
Senator secretary so currently
do we have any independent
contractors that are involved in
this process so or just directly
secretary of state person after.
Madam chair representative my
office does occasionally
contract with vendors to provide
certain kinds system for example
one of the things this program
provides table of our office and
and to any counties who want to
take advantage of it is you know
training for our how to the way
you now or or Nancy fishing tax
rate and so there's a company
they provide this program we
acquired the legislative
downstream so there is some
programming that we do work with
outside vendors one of the other
things that we do as we work
with
Federal DHS to do Education and
possibility testing resistance
we also do our own contract with
response which you know is a
company that works with a lot of
different states so there are
some things that we work
outside.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Senator madam secretary so
my concerns regarding right
RiskSense for instance their
foreign.
Corporation I believe there is
not the United States
corporation so madam chair
secretary I think maybe we we
added some language in here to
ensure that these are domestic
corporations that could be
something that chair
representative they are domestic
the ONS number one number two we
we actually put language in
every contract that we do as
cyber security specific language
so whether vendor wants a
contract with our office we have
very detailed provisions that
they are required to comply with
insurance documentation of to
ensure that
we're working with the company
where
you know we're not going to have
outside influence or weeks or
anything like that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary.
Okay that's good and so then
going page nine or ten rather
sorry this phone is located here
but.
Section eight regarding
documents and communications
madam chair.
It's regarding
Critical infrastructure at risk
exempt from disclosure
so what we do here madam chair
this this section.
Madam chair representative we're
we're trying to avoid giving the
keys to the castle to to hackers
and others want to infiltrate
our election system so for
example we would find detailed
information on the inner
workings of our election system
so that hackers can't can't
penetrate our systems have
security protocols in place you
can describe what those are
generally but madam chair
representative is before giving
folks all the details of how
they can get into our systems
are tamper with them then that's
you know obviously and the
countervailing interests to the
security questions and so it's
protecting those types of system
acting detailed that.
We do that we're building
testing right you don't want to
make that a public document
because that everyone's going to
know this is how you get into
the system right office that
sort of thing thank you madam
chair thank you madam secretary
etcetera so that currently
approval.
I.
Senator right now we are.
Lying on efforts to protect that
information we think that every
needs to be further clarified on
this right and you know keep in
mind that provisions nine honor
rural roads and the for service
we
we have cyber security around
elections push that started
really about six years ago and
so we are trying to make sure
that we have are are basically
fully covered okay thank you
madam chair thank you madam
secretary Senator so.
What is non critical
infrastructure that could be
provided that madam chair.
Madam chair representative
elections in general are
designated as critical
infrastructure so there's tons
of information about the
election process about R.
lection system are you public
information right what we're
gonna do is we're not going to
provide sort of the into the
details of how our systems work
and where they are hosted and
those types of things right
obviously things like password
security protocols detailed
security protocols at Sarah.
Madam okay thank you madam chair
thank you Secretary and Senator
so the going forward on sept
eleven eleven fourteen we're
talking about election of
members.
So I think we heard we heard
something about minors
participating madam chair so.
It reminded both of resident is
that change the individuals.
Age requirement chair what all
the sections or.
it is that clarifies that we do
have sixteen is that serve on
election boards
but that are not registered to
vote.
Okay.
That clears it up for me it's
twenty six and sixteen.
So this increasing voter
convenience centers madam chair.
says the board of county
commissioners self that was
murdered Senator through the use
of consolidated present voting
thing life so
Are drop boxes polling places
regarding this consolidation
madam chair.
Yes Madam chair representative
why not of course consolidation.
Okay but they are considered
point faces chair
representative.
Yes services Madam chair
representative community
Action.
Dr structure and all that stuff
yes but not the.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator and madam secretary
so then these with this
convenience centers be made by
the county clerk's or would they
be than mandated by the
secretary contract.
Representative Webster.
Okay so it doesn't include madam
chair if those.
Job losses but the county clerk
could indeed choose where the
properties thank.
Yes.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary going forward
we're going to go to page fifty
five we're going along.
six nine five.
The least one today every three
days on the legend after the
polls closed the county clerk
deputy clerk election for member
or messenger stuff like the
ballots from monitor.
Secure containers and register
the date and container location
so.
Madam chair you madam secretary
Senator so is increasing the
amount of time the belts are
sitting in the secure containers
increasing the risk of potential
Something happening those
ballots center Madam chair
representative now.
This is because some counties
The drop boxes are going to be
really far apart
an inmate in the state probably
should be as the whole point of
them is for people to not have
to drive really far right to
determine their ballots and so
some of small case we all where
that mental health problems
staff we don't want them to be
spending all day every day
driving around to check the drop
offs.
The user's monitor and secure
containers that are being
videotaped the entire time so
anything were to happen to any
of those containers which I
don't think is likely to happen
but we would have documentation
and for the job that okay thank
you madam chair thank you
Secretary standard.
Then.
Regarding these containers so
what if something happened like
let's just say there's a fire or
something Madam chair.
My concern is we wouldn't know
who's ballots would be ruined if
let's say the container.
Destroyers you madam chair
Senator so how do we remedy that
chair.
Chair representative I I think
that's true if there's going to
be a fire and where we have to
balance that.
The only place that us to
warehouse demand fortunately if
there's a fire and things
ballots are very.
It's
certainly not one unique to
monitor to.
I will say madam chair
representative I love telling
the story of my my former
colleague from Orange County
California.
I actually did go with these are
these containers are so tamper
proof that he actually brought
out the fire department madam
chair representative to to
attempt to set fire to you know
they just ran for just as a test
and doctor box and it took madam
chair Representative an hour and
a half of the fire fighters to
actually ignite a fire fire
within the contents and even
then it's a very minimal damage
this that doesn't only option
and that's sort of the point of
having these very
you know robust timber group
containers madam chair
representative.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you madam secretary since we're
talking about these being
watched with video surveillance
madam chair is there some kind
of measure that.
Mandates the county clerk's
watch these ballots every X.
amount of hours madam chair
center madam chairperson of now
may I ask the special characters
in this room would would not
like a project that
especially with the limited
staffing.
But chair representative there
there isn't an independent firm
that sort of takes
responsibility for the adequacy
monitoring they are also the.
The that that there is fifteen
percent or goes off if something
happens so getting rid of a
format or whatever that the they
are murdered in fact I've heard
from some of them to put you
know learning in the middle of
the night every time the wind
blows you know here.
The ballot boxes a little they
can be a little bit sensitive to
anything to an extreme but yeah.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Four one can you please wrap up
your questions we need to be on
the floor.
Madam chair point of order his
status concern in the in support
Senator is important.
Agent so I understand that but
he also needs the fire ants stay
to the bill and not speculation.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you madam chair Senator so
continuing on here.
I'll go to page one hundred
twenty eight hundred twenty
nine.
Okay.
So madam chair
madam secretary Schardin so from
what I'm reading here on section
sixty six it says a.
Marked by voters they're
digitizing equipment and records
requisite to voting are exempt
from third party inspection
except as otherwise provided by
the New Mexico so madam chair
Senator madam secretary so.
I'm reading that as we can't get
access ballots madam chair is
that what I'm reading.
No madam chair and
representative this.
Balance as I mentioned before
there are processes for
inspection of ballots and that
is not being changed are dealt
with in the section Madam chair
representative we heard
reference to other kinds of
documents and some of the public
committee and that the concern
here is first of all like I
mentioned before that were
aligning with frontier federal
definitions and records
Representative were also removed
transfer prior email one of the
big challenges they have And
that we've discussed.
A lot over the last couple of
years is there are certain types
of records act state
because you're looking at it
potentially disclose yeah who
actually cast that ballot.
Representative so we're trying
to clarify that anything that
would for example.
Replies the privacy of the
voters right that that that that
can.
Redacted on this day
you know I think the other thing
to point out about this section
that is it really for someone
describes what our actual
requisite to the.
The manager.
In terms of also to it just says
their exams third party
inspection.
Until sixty days after and then
and then for good cost you can
go to court to get a court order
to to to get us so so if someone
has good cause to get this sixty
days after lecture after a
weekend and that the court local
services.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you madam secretary and senator
so they would be able to get
these but only after the six.
After six years of with Madam
chair representative with a.
A number from District Court for
fifty.
Mentors here madam secretary so
how does this change from
current law could I currently
right now go ask your office
manager if I could see the
ballots the ballot equivalents
and the the records currently I
would need a quarter that when
hearing center you madam chair I
think right now there's a
there's a
greater chance of disagreement
about about what the current
status of this find that their
patients thank you madam chair
thank you madam secretary and
senator I just think that might
be a little.
Our I guess his madam chair I
know litigation costs a lot and
it would be difficult for the
average citizen madam chair to
request these.
These ballots because you have
to fund court.
Or you have to argue you have to
wait for them to.
Here and even then it's not
guaranteed.
Here.
Representative you have to have
good costs.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator so I'm just thinking
like an open government group.
If they want to just do an
independent audit of the
election just to reaffirm with
the secretaries numbers are.
Madam chair would.
I just don't know what kind of
good because that group could
have in that instance madam
chair Madam chair representative
I think that is worried to be
done as of the District Court
judge one of this process.
Madam chair thank you senator I
just think the music more.
In my opinion to be able to get
that information and I think
it's like a tax on the people
who want to see what this
election is all about.
So I was stripping dean from
section.
Section.
Sixty four.
That's what I would suggest.
So.
I'm gonna continue here is much
in this so.
So madam chair.
Senator.
So this is the board of county
commissioners make this again
for the registration
certificates canvassing for the
county that one twenty nine
section sixty seven.
This is added to the
responsibility of the county
canvas twenty nine elected body
that could concern that could
somehow up.
Instead I do that kind of
center.
One thirty now says your pager
line on I don't know which
version bill I have here but one
thirty one the top of.
One six madam chair.
Shares of.
The yeah I.
This is Senator wanted.
Section sixty six
pages one.
One thirty one.
Winds it starts the online one
that's existing language it goes
down to the bottom of the page
chair.
Chair representative for
verification apartment section
verifies what is it again this
report yes Sir.
So I'm just wondering mentor who
who does this report is
currently the elected county
commissions or in a different.
Chair representative currently
the county canvassing report is
prepared by the county clerk's
on it is provided to the County
Board campus the county border
campus has and our existing
other sections off a number at
Duties and requirements that
able to fullfill as as needed
what this really does Madam
chair representative this
section is clear I what is to be
included in the campus report on
because we do have thirty four
counties and right now every
campus report is not exactly the
same and and Services yet they
still probably won't be
identical Madam chair
representative but the
information it needs to be.
Reporter is is what's being I.
I'm sure.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you madam secretary so we still
have to.
Canvassing board made up of the
county commissioners that's
correct that's correct okay.
Thank you madam chair.
So okay let's just clarifying
language than what we in the
actual report.
So madam chair.
Senator sections sixteen nine at
this.
Post election duties.
For missing refers so during the
twenty twenty two primary
general's several counties that
had significant is weight loss
ballots madam chair
there are multiple court orders
and I think we re the Santa Fe
Los Alamos Dona Ana Torrance San
Juan terrace and one wanted to
open ballot boxes so the
documents are available for
review so madam chair.
Madam secretary which is teams
that review process.
Madam chair representative I
don't think this changes the
review process what this does do
is it gives the county clerks
Love our poll workers.
The hard
they don't always follow every
single step exactly the same and
so what comes back to the county
clerk's office someone comes
back to our office to do the
cameras sometimes we find that
there is information missing and
it's been locked up in a box
accidentally Madam chair
representative so that's really
what this particular section is
training I just trying to make
it a less onerous process for
the first to be able to complete
their campus and and get those
returns.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you madam secretary
senator so.
With this language are we
insuring that every single
ballot.
Is subject to those kinds of
inspections and
Just making sure that we have
The Dallas County madam chair
that so madam chair
representative so like a good
example would be
Just think let's say absentee
ballots that were dropped at the
polling place.
Before seven on election I
accidentally got locked up and
Alfonse your question and yes
that would be an example making
sure we got everything out out
to.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you senator and madam secretary.
So page one forty seven I
believe it is go to section
seventy eight.
This is the secretary of state
sell ascertain and clear this
sincere and sufficiency of the
referendum petition within
thirty days after it's filed in
secretaries office so
I'm just wondering is there
there's no process for appealing
this ruling there.
Representative there there is
really the only thing that this
particular section is doing is
it's getting just thirty days
instead of fifteen we had
experience following it was the
twenty nineteen session where we
had a time of representations
filed with our office and we
just didn't have adequate time
to to appropriately evaluate and
turn around those responses and
there is there is a process
the senators noted many times
you can always go to court if
you disagree with my decision
but madam chair representative
this is just getting just
another couple of weeks to to be
able to do that adequate review.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you madam secretary senator so
but there would be process I
would be able to.
Ask you for that information
chair.
Yes madam chair representative
doesn't otherwise change the
process okay other they give us
a little more time.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary
you know I have so many other
questions I in the second time I
will stop their I appreciate it
thank you madam chair.
Thank.
Members
Representative.
Representative a little for the
past and second Representative
Chasey take one of okay sure.
Which is.
Madam chair right if the roof.
Madam chair and of Senator when
we go to page seven.
Talk about one twenty four the
if rob
I think if I understand concerns
without.
The securities.
And I don't have a problem with
that but I think that we need to
be able to be open enough to if.
have the selection for and the
process is things like that will
we still be able to do that.
Madam chair representative yes
and to the extent that any of
that stuff balls under any of
these that kind of critical
language before you could still
get it for free because of the
court I think that that's going
to be a pretty narrow now number
of Representative that that does
actually apply to over also just
about how the election is yes
runs of things like that that
that's all.
Madam chair and and
senator yes.
I really love our election
process okay let me tell you
that you know when you look step
to step that we do I mean it's
very good but unfortunately we
have a perception by some
Not trying to go there what I'm
trying to say is when you go you
have to show you have to go to a
quarter to go ahead
and bring the standard you're
almost bring in that the
probable cause statement that I
need to see this because of this
reason in our member of state of
statute which really set out for
open government I just want to
see I want to know what it is
and I I think we ought to really
look at that.
I think getting the standard too
high is going to is difficult
just leads to more
speculation.
Thank.
Chair representative helps note
that there's only so good cost
standard is pretty low standard
then again that could cost her
only applies to some dealing
with our national
infrastructure.
Yeah so so it's not for.
Yes madam chair and senator
taking a page eleven analysts
one twenty five and you'll see
this line throughout but you may
want to include my roommates of
local from the in on the floor
as.
One.
I mean we're you madam chair I
understand we're trying to make
it fair but you know you may
want to include that.
And some of these questions has
already.
While I'm doing this and I'm I
don't know what page is fun but
madam chair and
Madam secretary.
I heard a comment that if you're
running for statewide office
you're gonna allow online
signatures off the internet for
the nominating petition so madam
chair representative that this
is for for any threat any of
that is measured by the
secretary of state's office.
counselors
and there's an online this is
actually the online application
that you would use to collect
the signatures
and the reason you're using this
online applications let them
just because it is checking them
get so and it's madam secretary
she would put in her
information.
Essentially it looked up in the
database for the record madam
chair I don't find.
The type of the.
and then it would check against
or.
To make sure that she was a
registered voter in my district
before she would be allowed to
do an electronic signature
through that application for
much she said she is not in my
district she would then not be
allowed to proceed at all
to give back what would be
that's a contract.
Madam chair and.
Senator I think the
verification give off and what I
think is missing is going now
and you know communicating with
the public you know I mean when
we have to go out we have to get
a hundred signatures and that
means a couple hundred but you
know when we do that we really
get into our into our district
can talk to people and I look at
the statewide elections where we
have numerous people running.
You're now going to have all of.
You know or follow so you think
want to do any work
and so I think that's been a
complicate your election a
little more.
By doing that.
I don't know
that.
Madam chair representative I
would just note that any
candidate who did nothing by
email blast and didn't go out
with the people there districts
probably pretty cool stand that
is not yeah.
madam chair and of Senator was
go to page six of fifty six and
let's go to line two it is a
violation of this section for
any person to possess a key to
unlock for secure data I have no
idea what he looks like
possibilities I think we ought
to put knowing in their.
Madam chair representative so.
Someone is.
Housing would accidentally have
Pete two of waters here
containerful of ballots but boy
when I want to hold them no one
should be have Mackey I
knowingly or unknowingly unless
there's yes.
Chair and ends Senator is such a
unique need that it's not.
From any other standard key that
used anywhere else.
Chair representative I I mean I
I don't know that I opened years
along with my house key I hope
not but chair representative
point is to say that.
What's your size.
Of the
we don't want that he's running
around out there copies.
Distributed.
Madam chair and secretary madam
secretary actually if you took
your key and went to several
doors eventually it would.
Representative.
The
chair.
The madam secretary and we went
to chip some or that are
parties.
Work the same way.
So that's that's why I am a
little concerned because she end
up with a fellow on the out of
show us.
I've got a key to whatever it
goes to.
I I just vision madam chair and
representative scenario where
the average person walking
around would be discovered to
have I think that copy of the
key that exactly matches I mean
I just can't imagine the odds
involved in that yes I I I hear
what you're saying but I think
it's a pretty unlikely scenario.
Madam chair in the and madam
secretary I mean if they're put
the key in the box then we got
it the general fund.
I have a problem that you could
just have a key that fits a
anyway let's move on madam
secretary
Madam chair madam secretary page
fifty six over on.
One one twelve we're removing
the date and time of receipt.
And then I think we go to fifty
seven and on line nine we put
the.
You see but I think we should
also include the time.
I'm just.
So Madam chair representative.
Leave the reason that we need to
change and again this is how we
got it in two thousand had to do
with
There are already substantial.
processes chains of custody
process in place that document
when.
Certain batches of ballots are
received and so and then they
get they get scanned into this.
Received by the county clerk's
office they ever could stand
into the system as received
which does require day and time
Madam chair representative I
think what we're trying to get
away from is the other item
around like my office one week
after bills and every single
page gets data time stamped
it.
It's it's echo really onerous
process and so madam chair
representative that's what that
doesn't mean that there isn't
going to be ample documentation
when ballots are received back
to the clerk's office okay.
Thank you madam chair so.
Madam chair and madam secretary
on page sixty nine.
Winds of one hundred twelve what
is the appeal process date on
that you remember.
chair representative for
provisional ballots.
The test for that section
missing corrected information so
chair representative and is this
is an existing one ten days
after election day.
That that just kind of.
Madam chair and madam secretary
was sixty four point twenty four
twenty five.
So you're going to begin
counting ballots at nine AM on
election day or I'm missing that
okay.
Just put your rate of these
Madam chair representative you
know we we do have provisions
that allow for South specially
in the larger counties that have
tens of thousands to begin
feeding them through the machine
just like your ballots during
early voting we're just saying
generate results reports.
In other words what at the show
right yeah.
It's very young white.
The two excuse.
Madam secretary and of course
code of page sixty said it was.
And.
On page eight I mean at one
eight so you don't complete the
work by eleven o'clock okay
we're I understand you're gonna
take a break and rich we're
going to get a hold of the
county sheriff's office get it
W. to watch over now are the
madam chair and members Terry
are the
poll watchers or service present
as well.
So madam chair representative
when that when the absentees
more down that's that's that's
it ballots get packed away
locked sure steep gets posted
until the appropriate time to
gaming so no we're not gonna
have anybody hanging out in the.
In the warehouse X. share steep.
And members of Madam chair madam
secretary I thank you all of I
think you are closer to the
sheriff's deputy in the state
police and I mean what I say
that is at some point four and a
half.
Point.
But you know and and as you know
they have a conspiracy among to
is smarter than one I I will
mention Mr chair representative
keep in mind your absentee
judges are still going to be the
only ones that have the keys.
I
chair.
Madam secretary I know those
ballot boxes are real secures
but.
K..
madam secretary madam chair
members secretary on page
seventy one twenty four twenty
five metros to the next stage
why are we going to allow them
to have the federal meet the
federal law requirements.
Or am I missing something.
chair representative what it's
saying is that so there is a
federal requirements that says
if you are muted the state
registry for the first time
you're doing it by now and you
don't find a copy of your ID
then you do have to show a copy
of your ID
and that's basically just
clarifying.
Okay okay that's.
Or that if you already did
right.
Madam secretary madam chair and
madam secretary age ninety one
line fourteen what I'd like to
see is all of our servicing for
all parties.
And I'm wondering why we we
don't make a mall Center DTS and
for.
May I think madam chair
representative because we have a
whole primary process to go
through and I think that
you know I mean it's a very
question it's one of my answers
are like that so we've always
done it.
Welcome them secretary I think
that's something we have to look
at is maybe it's all the same
date but
And madam secretary madam chair
madam secretary page ninety
three so one nineteen through
twenty one off of so you're
running for county office you
gotta go ahead and get ten
signatures
If I do a credit important then
they may not be verified if I do
the online forms they would be
verified so I'm wondering if we
should put ten verifiable.
Signatures or is there a
definition of signatures
somewhere back in the code.
Madam chair representative of
so.
Our first on verify signatures
of that there's a whole
challenging process wherever
that happens but I I think that
if we start opening the doors
requiring them to verify
signatures that go way that that
most marketers.
Two guests there's always
happened and this Senator is
this is just if you don't hear
that fifty dollar I the proper
state office.
And madam secretary I mean Madam
I think that's all I can do for.
Please hold while.
Representative on your boarding.
Representative block.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative talking.
Yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative.
No Sir.
Representative Zamora.
By Senator yes.
Yes.
I
have and if your house bill
forty two and we will not hear
in the morning eight today.
Chairman.
Thank you so much okay.
Since.
That
is.
Yeah.
It is.
