Representative Scott.
please ask.
We make decisions.
Once.
faraway lands this call as soon
as.
Purchase.
Representative Pettigrew please
Representative leaders in the
From Santa Fe.
Good evening Mr speaker Mr
Was a hundred male party Mr so
and I'm still like it.
There's a lot of dancing.
You know as mentioned in prison
from Bernalillo Sandoval
Representative kids thank you Mr
speaker I I rise for the point
of personal privilege state to
put thank you Mr speaker.
fun.
And even most of them have a
little rhythm.
And can dance and I would just
Our staff that had to come in
today.
And I wanted to do a shout out
to Representative Romero for
being able to make that event
happened thank you thank you
Isn't it appears.
Generated from million Torrance.
with only two weeks left I want
to start by NAS it's been a very
particularly challenging season
for all of us session for all of
us thank you for the work but we
got fourteen more days and
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
sheriff's offices filed a
criminal complaint alleging
multiple counts of child abuse.
When they arrived to do a
welfare check on the home they
oxycontin pills fentanyl pills
and more all accessible to the
children the pandemic was
arrested a couple days later to
show that their child's school
child abuse after police
responding to report of a
domestic violence founded booze
and better three year old child.
Into an office accounted child
been subjected to prolonged to
move to cut it so hard to reduce
prolonged tie modules salts
which included additional verbal
threats of harm the girl had
identify the very real.
Trauma that is happening to our
children.
And within fourteen days left we
have a unique a momentous
bills have been introduced that
provide best of.
Can solutions to address the
canton ongoing crisis I'm very
frustrated bills are not getting
the traction they deserve no
need what they deserve we must
prioritize and pass these pieces
of legislation that have been
vetted introduced and now we
need to be heard I'm good for
We need to change it is real and
we work together across party
lines and put our children first
and we can provide the relief
these families and children
deserve.
And yesterday had a very
We must come together prioritize
and fix this problem now we must
increase transparency and act
meaning food policy reforms
anymore.
We can't let a dead children.
Die in vain.
And we have to fix this broken
Speaker
we go to that order of business
committee report seeing no
objection it is so ordered there
to read.
referred house bill three.
Eighty five has had it under
consideration point the with
recommendation that do pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted.
aye.
All the supposedly the I. seven
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill four thirty
options we're in adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill four thirty four of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Posing a test of the committee
reported up to.
submitted a list of Thompson
chair production.
Reduction of federal committed
for in house before six one of
those who favor state of a state
line.
imitation pretty good deleting.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill
speaker move adoption reduction
of federal committee report on
house with three seventy nine
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those may be as of the committee
productive.
Mr speaker government elections
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption option
available committee report on
house bill four twenty six as
amended all those in favor say
if I was a nine.
it's referred to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
adoption where that option
available committee report on
Senate bill ninety four as
I'm sorry house bill two eighty
five has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it do not
pass but the house Education
committee report we are an
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
two eighty five but a favorable
committee report on house
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill two eighty five
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
of finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andr√©s
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill four forty eight of
four fifty nine has had it under
consideration point seems
recommendation to do pasts
respectfully submitted D. Y.
Gallegos D. Y. Doreen Y.
Gallegos chair.
development committee to is been
referred Senate bill sixty eight
as amended has had it under
consideration point the with
recommendation to to pass
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
up to the.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty seven as amended
has had it under consideration
for Senate bill two forty seven
as amended all those
embarrassing if I was and I.
Those opposed may the as of a
committee report often.
Mr speaker you appropriations
submitted native small chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are an
adoption of a federal committee
report on house judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill two ninety seven of those
in favor signify by saying aye
Bill three fifty seven has had
it under consideration point in
with recommendation but it did
not pass but the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill three fifty seven
but a favorable committee report
on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill three
fifty seven.
Of those offenders if I was a
nine.
consideration point same with
recommendation that a do not
pass but that house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill four hundred to pass
respectfully submitted Nathan
small chair.
signify by saying aye those
opposed may just have it is for
that again this information was
in line.
under consideration point
investment management to do pass
respectfully submitted it and
small chair Mr speaker move
adoption for adoption of federal
committee report on house
Education Committee substance
Mr speaker your health services
committee to ms been referred
house bill three oh five has had
it under consideration point in
with recommendation that do pass
and this referred to the
report on house bill three zero
five of those in favor signify
by saying aye.
This is a yes have a good
productive.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill three
federal committee report on
house with three seventy six so
those are members of this and I.
All those was may be as a good
report opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
Thompson chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're not option
available committee report on
house bill four fifty one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
This post may be as of a
see for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair Mr speaker move adoption
run optional Federal Committee
portent house bill five hundred
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
seven has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that I do not
pass but that house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill five
twenty seventy pass finance
refer to the provisions of
a federal committee report on
house health and Human Services
Committee subs to browse the
five twenty seven of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Posibles maybe yes I have a
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair Mr
speaker move adoption we're an
adoption of a federal committee
report on house bill five of
those embarrassing if I just and
I.
seventy House memorial seventy
six House memorial seventy seven
has had them under consideration
consideration point the same
have been duly enrolled in gross
Move adoption Mr speaker we are
on the option of federal
committee reports and house
memorials twenty five.
Forty seven as amended seventy
seventy six and seventy seven
The record reflect that the duly
enrolled in gross copies of
house memorial twenty five forty
seven as amended seventy seventy
six seventy seven were signed by
Mr speaker I move we go to that
port of Business messages no
objection it is so ordered click
to read message from the Senate
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house that the Senate
has passed Senate bill two.
amended Senate bill two oh two
as amended Senate bill two
twenty three as amended Senate
bill three seventy eight as
amended Senate bill three eighty
house and further amended by the
Senate and requests the
concurrence of the house to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted sherry data on Senate
Mr speaker that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered members are gonna take
up some third reading here
And then we might do some
introduction in between bills on
third reading to make sure that
we can get some of those Senate
bills in the hopper.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that order of
Forty two.
I am Mr speaker we getting to
the point that the record
reflect that election is Sir for
placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
constitutional language
prohibiting provided salaries
and approving the creation of an
independent commission to
establish salaries with that I
Yes all yield to the gentleman
from of that are.
Thank you gentle lady I
appreciate you for bringing this
bill forward in the this is a
We know what it's states Mr
speaker gentle lady so for this
spent tied to the inflation
index Mr speaker gentle lady
regarding salaries.
gentle lady okay so this
commission Mr speaker gentle
lady how would it be made up.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
all that all this consider since
individuals from.
Let me double check here real
quick.
Sorry I have the flu.
I have a.
Solicitous income citizen
commission on legislative
salaries if you look on the
here in New.
What's the commission please Mr
speaker gentle lady.
We're putting it in a
commissions that have just
directly having the legislature
make that determination Mr
and part of our research has
shown that
Mexicans preferred that it be
let up let this decision be made
by an independent commission
there's also a poll that came
lady from a Dona ana county so.
What are the parameters of what
this commission can do Mr
speaker gentle lady they have
you're looking at the of the of
the first legislation that was
introduced this year it did have
some parameters but those were
removed to shorten the
on page three this is per diem
expenses and mileage are still
included so Mister speaker
gentle lady.
We would be putting this salary
Three Mr speaker gentle lady.
I believe it's line seven Mr
that okay Mister speaker gentle
the people get mileage and per
diem.
Got it thank you Mr speaker the
gentle lady I appreciate that
answer so then we would not be
constitution this language is
the salary P. so legislators
would still be receiving per
diem and mileage in addition to
a salary if that's what the
gentle lady so we're not ruling
it out is that what I'm hearing
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman no.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and so with this also
there is language right now in
the New Mexico statute that does
allow legislators to receive
their pension in addition to a
salary but if we wanted to
clarify of the New Mexico
fund with these new salaries
becoming out of Mr speaker
gentle lady would this be the
general fund or would there be a
specific fund to fund
legislators Mr speaker gentle
gentle lady and so I believe
that those parameters are
important Mr speaker I know that
we stripped him out but I would
like to offer an amendment if I
could Mr speaker.
Stand by gentleman will roll
call vote please Mr speaker one
two three four five okay
Ceallaigh good.
Nine four nine point one Mr
speaker this what I have and
that is what is being passed out
stand by well it gets passed on
to the chamber.
Gentleman to explain the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
to keep this is an aspect Mr
speaker gentle lady and a and
body.
About why we are here Mr speaker
So going on page two between
lines thirteen and fourteen were
inserting the following new
subsection.
in an annual amount provided or
greater than the most recent
statewide median household
income for New Mexico as
reported by the United States
the amendment is unfriendly is
there debate on the amendment
agility from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman do you happen to know
what the median household income
is for New Mexico Family.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes I do
updated annually by the United
States Census bureau.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you a
gentleman
for legislators.
Mr speaker generating a would
change only if the census
bureau's numbers changed Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman so that
I think that of the reason for
having a commission though would
be to make considerations
Mexico for instance taking into
account Mr speaker gentleman
if there is per diem
You know other factors.
important for the commission and
salary to be set.
thing not in isolation of one
factor but actually to be able
to make considerations
Continue to listen to the rest
of the debate but I do have
serious reservations with doing
that thank you Mr chair thank
you Mr speaker and if I could
just respond real quickly Mr
lady so it would give the
commission up to the at the
highest amount Mr speaker gentle
lady the fifty four thousand
twenty dollars per the census
Mexican would make Mr speaker so
just for clarification so debate
on the amendment to deliver from
San Juan Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker the German
from to yield I certainly yield
standard at or below the median
household income is that correct
Mr speaker gentle gentleman yes
that's correct and the wave of
Mr speaker that I.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
exactly correct Mr speaker.
General Motors rose up I do
think there's a danger in
you know gross amount above what
the average New Mexican would
mate the average working class
family and once we delegate that
authority the commission we lose
in fact our salary is going to
be what the average New Mexican
and so thank you Mr speaker
there's further debate delayed
from earlier percent of Garrett
thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman from Otero county
under twelve or thirteen pages
and in consultation with the
secretary of state we put things
like this we we deleted them
voters would decide on the
secretary said you need to keep
it small but I will had stir
speaker I have a very esteemed
looking at the median income
for the census and he's
and he's a former legislator he
said you know I would look at
our team decided it really be
logs in Maybelline.
from Chavis Eddie into that or
percent of Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
Mr speaker I kindly yield to the
gentleman from leave the.
Mr speaker gentleman do you
think the average New Mexico
look at this and say.
Are you sure you want to pay.
A legislator that works thirty
think
at least it's a parameter for as
we wouldn't have the commission
Mr speaker going crazy giving us
two hundred thousand dollars a
many of our constituents for
Watson today.
And wondering when they look at
the legislator.
And they look at what we are
producing.
By the legislative body.
The forward.
Yes I mean not very many
now you and I both know that the
legislative work continues on
but there are no prescribed
Although I.
Would probably vote for your
amendment because it puts a cap
on it.
when I most people in the state
because most people in the state
when they called me they want to
know what I'm and we'll put in
when do I go back to Washington.
And how hard to work in the US
but I'm gonna tell you right
now.
They think we work for thirty
days one year and sixty days in
that's a conversation that I
look forward to having when we
get back on the bill thank you
Sir.
There is for the major lady from
Bernalillo doors Representative
Lord thank you Mr speaker will
reading this and I think
Representative Townsend for
bringing up that point I was
reading it differently I was
reading it as.
We should be paid with the
okay we got fifty four thousand.
Dollars and you divide that by
twelve that's four thousand five
hundred dollars per month.
So I guess what I'm saying is of
some sort of cap
Representative can and gentleman
I'm sorry Mr speaker and and.
to put I mean how do we know.
Otherwise if we don't have some
sort of cap what what what are
they going to make our monthly
the payment to be.
parameters so let's just say
they don't give us the salary of
a congressman that makes a
hundred and seventy four
thousand dollars Mr speaker
gentle lady and so yeah you're
thousand dollars a year for
flight ninety days where the
work Mr speaker gentle lady and
we we both know that there's a
lot more than that that goes
into it Mr speaker but we
reading through the cell cycle
where are the parameters what's
a percentage and the way that I
break it down I don't think we
should make any more than the
median household income because
we're not better than anybody
not get a better income than
anybody else
So I well I agree with the fifty
four thousand I would agree if
it was spread out like a normal
job we work let's saying that
now so I don't understand I
guess in general.
What the need is to be paid when
we're getting the median
household income anyway as it is
based on the numbers I just ran
because it is not fair to hand
this off Mr speaker down into
some committee that knows
nothing about what we do or who
we are and how hard we work but
at the same time I.
Mr speaker done and so what I'm
saying is.
I do not want to be paid more
than other people do I think
way what are rather seen overall
and everything which does only
placement why would rather have
the staff around to do things
for me to help me catch up a
read my emails and answer my
that forward we we can't have we
we do not deserve to be paid
more than what the average the
Mexican is paid and I could
never go back to my constituents
luckless.
Thank you Mr speaker to the
gentleman from Otero yield
Mister speaker I'd gladly yield
to the gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you gentlemen so are you
Mr speaker so is a gentleman
suggesting that we as public
servants and volunteers should
be paid.
Basically an average as to the
citizenry of New Mexico.
this bill that would go to what
the average New Mexican is Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
So.
Really we're talking about this
bill which is regarding
legislators and so I believe it
would only apply to current
legislators.
Mr speaker and gentleman but the
median income of New Mexicans on
that right gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
So Mister speaker the question
again in the spirit of this
please rephrase that question.
By extension.
Into the spirit of your
amendment gentleman Mr speaker
suggesting with this ammendment
that legislators which are
supposed to be citizen
legislators.
I'm living within the means of a
regular citizen Mr speaker.
this body its membership during
the same as the average median
income of New Mexicans is that
not correct chairman.
Mr speaker gentleman.
equate a legislator to let's
just say County executive that
may get a salary Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The gentleman.
Mexico.
And it seems to me that the
spirit of this amendment is
suggesting that everyone should
be paid to so is that not
correct drummer.
comparable to what their average
constituent may make Mr speaker.
Everyone would
then earn the same as I
understand that gentleman.
The commission that would be
appointed by the legislature.
That would be signed by the
governor to have the wisdom.
what you're suggesting gentleman
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker John that's exactly
correct.
Mr speaker German.
my estimation this was provided
list estimation Mr speaker
gentleman that your suggestion
that everyone should be paid
equally because I believe that
is what is a spirit what is at
There is a debate on the
amendment.
The gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
amendment places a maximum on
the salaries that can be
recommended by the commission.
required minimum work hours or
days.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that would be a great other
amendment we could add this bill
thousand dollars could.
The salary earned thirty days
with no additional requirements
to participate in anything else
speaker that the correct Mr
speaker and gentleman at that
some wild.
The in a thirty day session
Mr speaker gentleman I've not
done that specific math but I
will take your word for it.
Speaker and gentleman I can
assure you it's that is the
approaching twenty four hour
days but few of us would spend
twenty four hours a day down
here during the thirty day
session is that accurate.
Speaker.
I think that you're of provides
plenty of compensation for those
thank you gentlemen for the men
there's further debate on the
amendment to delay for granting
us and also defend does
representative Cadena thank you
Mr speaker with the kind
you I was one of the one of the
group of people that worked on
this legislation over the last
year and a house and a half and
I I want to say when we started
this we wanted the first
place for all the people that
was our that was our original
question and when we look at
this body and we look at how we
kind gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady so every
other year it's thirty days or
sixty days currently Mr speaker
one is sixty day session which
ends in about fourteen and a
half days Mr speaker and how
this is your first session so
you haven't been through the
interim committee now what do
you anticipate what committees
would you like to serve on a
this summer I'm curious Mr
gentleman that I chose interim
committees that we're we're you
know have a lot to do with money
my the committee I mean my my
districts of course I chose land
that from about twenty two
September I would probably be
gone three three days three
weeks a month that's what I've
been and then you have to give
then going back again so it's
really almost four or five days
a week sometimes when I'm
talking about those interim
committees were you aware that's
how your life is going to be
I can't wait to see when interim
Mr speaker gentle lady just just
for the record I'm not taking
requests for interim committee
assignments yet.
I tried everybody could try.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind gentleman what I'm saying
the most important part of the
work we do I want everybody to
understand that
when you get to this body you
better have your bills ready you
risk education right you do that
in the interim committees you
were aware of that right kind
gentleman Mr speaker gentle lady
yes I am aware of the hard work
that goes into folks during the
I'm glad you want to know that
Mr speaker kind gentleman it's
anywhere from twenty five twenty
five to thirty thousand
depending on how those.
expenses when we do our work in
the district so when I go home
and I have five town hall
meetings because I want to tell
them this is how hopefully SB
have town hall meetings and you
have them all over the district
kind Jim and you know how big my
district is.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have no
don't have the largest district
but it's pretty darn March I'm
just going to tell you that so
if I go from my house and
include and I go over to Cuba
will serve this rural part of
the state it takes me just.
About six and a half hours to go
back and forth that's part of my
gentle lady are we now talking
about the interim being more
difficult than current
legislature that we're now Mr
speaker gentle lady.
how people think and I kind of
thought oh oh come here two
months one month and do a few
other things.
That is not what you do you it
is almost I call this a year
Mr speaker gentle lady I do not.
I was retired Mr speaker speaker
kind gentleman but then I got
this job I am no longer retired
To to really do your duty if you
are that those interim meeting
said they're going to that the
legislation for next year where
you can have a conversation
between both sides of the house
situations the way you need to
do it so kind gentleman Mr
speaker when we did this bill.
because when we look at this
legislature the joke is and it's
not very funny worry the retired
rich are resourceful that's what
people call this legislature did
bill I understand the amendment.
Districts that salary
let's keep our conversation or
debate to the amendment please
and they said you know we began
I think with the twelve page
bill here and it was so
complicated that and really the
main question is should we have
going to do here then it becomes
a whole series of questions
that's why we took the secretary
of state's advice to compact
this legislation so that it
would be something that most
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
yes I understand that the
secretary of state surely was a
part of the conversation Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker kind gentleman so we
are trying to pass legislation
here today that will make sense
to people and then I think we
have these debates out in our
communities that's what I think
there is a debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman from Otero yield
least on my part of this
ammendment all you're doing with
this amendment is calling for a
cap on the recommendation of a
salary.
You're not mandating by this
amendment that we all get paid
fifty four thousand dollars.
A year or you and gentleman.
could certainly go under that.
Mr speaker kind gentleman you're
not calling for that salary for
everybody in state government
Mr speaker kind gentleman it
seems like a pretty straight
forward.
Amendment to this simply making
Mr speaker and gentleman I
appreciate you putting this
forward because I really think
that we need to make sure that
our constituents understand.
that we serve the public and I
think this is at the very least.
On.
Good.
There's a lady from Los Alamos
Santa Fe and Santa
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Otero please
yield Mister speaker I'd gladly
Give us a cap at about fifty
five thousand dollars Mr speaker
to gentleman is that right.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes it's
about fifty four thousand
the annually so that would be
fifty four thousand dollars or
under if the commission so
chooses annually Mr speaker
annually.
just salaries in an amount
annual amount per legislator
greater than the most recent
statewide medium whole how
And then the next year they're
charged with reevaluating.
Under the way this this
ammendment is written they could
again.
Up to the amount of the median
salary at the time of the
adjustment so I think if you're
of the state every year this
amendment does not do that
because Mr speaker and gentleman
the commission could increase
think perhaps this proposed
amendment fails and I would
request perhaps you might want
to consider withdrawing it Mr
speaker gentle lady so we look
at the amendment how it's
not be greater than the census
bureau's median household income
so Mister speaker gentle lady we
could theoretically have forty
and gentleman I respectfully
disagree and what it says is
shown not establish for just so
there will be an adjustment
might argue that this is
ambiguous but actually I don't
think it is it actually could
potentially double our salaries
gentle lady so if we look at the
the number.
For.
On here it doesn't have a actual
number on how much we're going
to put however Mr speaker it
does say that adjustment cannot
sixty thousand dollars so Mister
speaker gentle lady then that
number could not be adjusted
greater than next year which
could potentially be sixty
thousand dollars for median
household income therefore Mr
gentleman I think our membership
I caution them to read the
amendment proposed amendment
carefully I think it comports
more with my assessment Mr
know Mr speaker in the current
language there's absolutely no
safeguards so technically Mr
speaker gentle lady the
commission could give us all a
sorry the gentleman from the
representative of your.
Thank you Mr speaker to the
gentleman from Otero yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
gladly yield to the gentleman
from the.
you ran for office to do run for
an office.
With the intent to circumvent
the current New Mexico
constitution to be able build
Mr speaker and gentleman we've
heard we've heard debate from
people with.
gentleman Dylan Dylan no one is
attempting to undermine the
constitution this we were in
this open process and this is a
joint resolution which proposed
amendments to the constitution
that would be ratified by the
Mr speaker I appreciate
Bring me back in line thank you
very much.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Mr speaker and gentleman I I see
that happening over the last.
Professions that I was in New
two thirds of the way through
We make sure each district has
the same amount of money.
For road roadway maintenance for
roadway new development.
the thirty three counties of
actually give more back to the
state then they take.
So.
But let's deal with that a
median incomes in New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that's a really good question
and I appreciate you for and for
ammendment at least is trying to
at least put some kind of
parameter on this Mr speaker so
that we can be a little more in
line with the very voters that
but if we wanted to deal with
this Mr speaker and gentleman
from a quality standpoint would
we not ask all thirty three
counties to give back in any
cool percentage back to the
I think if we're going to be
putting some kind of parameter
on this for a performance based
mechanism Mr speaker I'd
certainly be supportive of that.
the quality of what we've done
with a hundred twelve of us over
the years we now ranked fifty
first in the country you in K.
through twelve education.
tax burden burden.
Public employees per ten
thousand population we were in
forty forty First poverty level
That ranking forty S..
That I can continue on the other
down the road but Mr speaker and
gentleman was such great
performance levels help me
be inclined to agree with you Mr
speaker gentleman we are failing
in almost every metric
imaginable Mr speaker currently
legislature Mr speaker does not
believe that they should get a
salary because Mr speaker I
don't believe currently we've
earned one.
Ellen I would agree with you one
is no existing guard row and the
concept that we would put this
out to the voting public and
sell this Mr speaker and
gentleman in such a way that
happen this is this is what
we're going to guarantee you Mr
speaker and gentleman we're
gonna take K. through twelve
education for fifty force to the
let's just pick the medium range
your amendment at least put some
guardrails on here and we know
Mr speaker and gentleman.
percent of the state in New
Mexico that actually pays the
taxes here thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman the lady from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment of no and we are back
on the amendment in a roll call
has been requested and granted.
The vote is now open.
eight has been tabled.
Jennifer what that.
Thank you Mr speaker so going
back to the bill Mr speaker.
I think that's the Sanchez do
you think that there should be
about doing it during enable
with with enabling legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
So do you think that the that we
should put some kind of
Mr speaker gentleman I think
that when the time comes to do
that enabling legislation we can
definitely debate that.
Mr speaker gentle lady so.
Mr speaker and gentleman right
now we're proposing to voters is
to say yes or no on whether or
not we created commission the
enabling legislation would come
there after.
process upon them to ensure that
there is hours worked to know
the number of the salary Mr
speaker to know what any other
kind of budget we may add or
legislation we would provide
them with those guardrails and
the commission would be able to
make those determinations based
on decades worth of studies that
has been done on this issue.
come after we come back after
twenty twenty four when the
voters have accepted the.
Have the said yes to the ballot.
Mr speaker gentleman I can speak
for voters at the systems to see
how what they think about that
right now.
Mr speaker gentle lady as a
voting yourself do you think it
legislation this is setting up a
salary commission I find it very
hard to believe that the
commission would.
in many of these darkroom
commissions that we're going to
be putting forward just don't
think gentleman I'm.
the ballot has to be Mr speaker
gentle lady I think this is so
important that we would need to
put this detail in there so that
the voters could sleep well at
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana yield
to me.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
that in a distinguished much
trusted poll conducted at the
end of last year that only two
Mr speaker and gentle lady
ninety eight percent of the
eight hundred people polled
believed that were paid and
probably many in this body have
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
you aware that we became a state
in nineteen twelve.
Joe Senator Stoffer and his wife
grace Smith and his brother my
great uncle
the newest offer became
you aware of the population at
that time.
Mr speaker gentle gentle lady I
think you might know so please
share.
three hundred and one of people
living in New Mexico and the Mr
speaker and gentle lady I'd like
to share the fact that the
Mr speaker gentle lady no.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
someone said that we can't
change the constitution thank
consulted in state if they drove
or if they rode horses or
buggies so I can't give further
details about that.
about six thousand seven hundred
are you aware how many people we
of Representative now Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Fifty thousand four hundred for
senators that are about thirty
thousand so Mister speaker
gentle lady when you say that
the responsibilities.
much time to devote to the would
you say that our
responsibilities have increased.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I think that our
responsibilities have increased
who aren't able to participate
because of the current system
that we have.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm glad
you brought that up because in
going door to door I probably
young people who would be great
whether it was the legislature
the city council the county
commission and they can't run
for office because they can't.
that Mr speaker and gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady I I agree
that yes that would make a
significant difference I think
part of what I think has been
There's a lot of privilege to be
sent to be had for for somebody
to say that it's okay to
continue on in the system when
we know so many people are being
left out of it.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
there's a sunshine portal where
every salary of every public
they are significantly higher
than fifty four thousand dollars
to the state Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
understand that in twenty
seventeen the a bipartisan group
of legislators passed a joint
aware that
Mr speaker and gentle lady
because the length of that bill
legislature.
That passed the resolution to
put the state ethics commission.
a powerful statement Mr speaker
and gentle lady that we trust
voters to make the decision as
to whether or not the
legislative body should be paid.
feel philosophically about
whether we get paid or not but
in the end it's up to the voters
to decide if if a commission is
where we need to go.
Thank you and and Mr speaker and
Says the citizen commission
because I don't know if
everybody read this whole thing
the citizen commission on
state and whose appointments
terms and qualifications shall
determine things Mr speaker
gentle lady yes.
And so in closing Mr speaker and
to think about Mr speaker and
gentle lady is that the
decision.
As to whether or not.
Legislators should be paid
and gentle lady I trust the
diverse generations of voters
that are in our thirty three
counties to make that decision
weighing in with their votes
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady there's further
debate the gentleman from Chavis
and you know that Representative
Mr speaker gentlemen I will
yield.
Gentlelady
It was.
A quickly went through some
numbers.
This morning.
Trying to.
Ascertain values of.
really.
The gentle lady I thought was
pretty interesting because some
if you take the current per
diem.
In the current.
And you are elected in the
legislature and use her for ten
years.
Retiring at.
Eighty five years old.
currently a total of about five
hundred ninety three thousand
eight hundred and eighty dollars
for the ten years that you were
in the legislature.
I for one think that everybody
is entitled to some form of a
benefit especially if they're
When we say we don't draw a
salary it is correct we do not
draw a salary.
But we draw one heck of a good
I mean I'm I'm a participatory
in the in the retirement package
as well.
It's about sixty thousand
dollars a year for the ten years
that they serve.
That does not include.
Anything that we draw from per
diem.
So.
I think we are paid.
The lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe I read them at some
point college yes.
I did too and I and I was
it's number fifty one James
Madison put a statement in there
and and it's about if men were
angels are you aware of that
statement do you remember that
one.
The gentle lady I think it's
really pretty
I think you will you will follow
me very quickly and and it's a
Legislators be held accountable
and that there be checks and
balances because our nature is
Everyone sitting in this body
today.
Knew full well when they were
elected.
that that we were not gonna draw
a salary and we were proud.
Proud that we were coming up
here and we were pay in our way
That's why we should.
So gentle lady when I was
reading that and I thought.
The fact that we were drawing.
He views or are retired thirty
five years.
The draw about six hundred
thousand dollars in retirement.
If you're retired twenty five
years you draw four hundred and
So to say we're not paid.
I I think I did simply without
gifted with the retirement
package that we all will are we
all should participate in.
For a body to.
Create a salary.
Bill.
H. A. R. A..
Just the people to vote on
whether we should have a salary.
And so it's not whether we're
going to we're not and it's not
whether this commission.
We'll.
And whether we had accepted my
friend from Otero those.
well with me either because if
you take per diem.
If you take our retirement.
If you add a salary to a.
I think the people of New
Mexico.
Like that.
Committee I.
salary not decide on whether we
should have one or not.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
commission would would set the
salary.
The people can vote on whether
we got one or not if we pass
this bill and it goes to on
their vote is going to be.
To set a salary not to whether
The lady I I
I think there are several things
that the body.
Mr speaker gentle lady just.
And gentle lady.
Those people are drawing a
state.
Salary or state retirement.
retirement is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman as I
mentioned earlier in my previous
comments there is language in
the statute currently which
employment as well as a salary
however in order for us to
clarify and this is why.
It's so important for the
enabling legislation to be part
said yes to this legislation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
That we be completely.
Transparent with the public as
to what.
What the total cost might be to
the state.
If the legislative if this
commission created a salary.
State annually for that to
occur.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman according to the FIR
less than one percent of the
state's budget and then if we
were to go a little bit higher
with the median earnings of New
Mexicans which folks have been
seventy thousand with benefits
the cost would be about ten
point five million which is
still far less than one percent
of the state's budget up vote
ninety four million.
So gentlelady.
Is it your opinion that sentence
it's such a.
It's it's only one percent of
Mr speaker gentleman could you
I'm sorry could you repeat that
again.
Is it your opinion Mr speaker
and gentle lady that is because
Mr speaker gentleman
I mean I'm I'm not here to
debate whether it's right or
wrong but my intention has been
on moving this legislation
how much we get paid but what
I've learned and what I've seen
is that we need to be able to
provide opportunities for people
who are.
so for me I I recognize that
there's some philosophical
differences around paid whether
or not we deserve it all of that
the time the cost to be up here
and throughout the year to be
able to do that with with the
salary and to fully focus on
their communities.
Speaker gentle lady I think when
you look back in history at.
The founders.
Even on our first state
legislate tore.
What we had gentle lady.
here and draft legislation.
That was good for society and
good for the will of the people.
I think it's important Mr
seventies part of the problem
but if whatever whoever's in
this room.
They should come with rich.
Life experiences.
They can relate.
Each other.
A little gray here in the.
Gen ladies just to be real
honest I think it's part of it
not I I don't think it's good
for this body to
To to be.
Passing legislation to pay.
Themselves I don't think the
I think if you would reflect on
the fact that you have tried
seven or eight times and it has
passed.
That there might be a message in
Times I get it and I'm willing
to do that.
But I think this body is a
rematch.
the house for ten years and goes
home and collects over the rest
of their life if they lived
eighty years old almost six
hundred thousand dollars is not
chump change.
gentlemen I thought seven time
was a charm but next.
Seven time is a charm.
Gentlelady from tiles
Representative Ortez.
I consider it an honor.
And a hard work and sacrifice to
serve in this body.
Lots of conversations over the
course of the last nine months
or so we would talk a lot about
this issue
they all thought we got this big
Ole salary and they were shocked
every time I talk about this in
town halls or just you know
talking with constituents like
when I look at.
What last year look like for me
financially I will tell you that
it was not good financially for
me.
big negative impact on on my on
my income.
So.
It's it's it's kind of it's it's
really hard for me to hear you
know
Because I think that you know
what my what my constituents
appreciate is that I you know I
voice is is you know
Representative and that my
experience my lived experiences
also representative of of the
experiences.
That they are having
I have I have I'm having a hard
time articulating this because
it feels so fresh this I do know
that we're we're doing this you
know we're we're exhausted we're
preparing for those interns and
word word you know we're
traveling I had to take a major
pay cut a forty percent pay cut
did not cover that pay cut after
I had to pay for hotels and and
for food right so you know I I
think for me I just it's so it's
their full time job to take
another to take a full time job
so you Mr speaker generated like
to ask you if you know of any
folks who have had to do that.
who I won't name names but if
you want to raise your hand feel
free but I I think that it's
become more and more common in
our legislature and in our body
decide to to run for the seat
and part of it is because of our
commitments to our communities
we know that that sacrifice
people are it's a calling for
we do it because we we really do
care about our communities and
so we just have to figure out
how to navigate I know that many
this place because if we gonna
debate longer than four hours so
I mean I I can only imagine what
it must be like to have to take
care of another human a little
and to do your other job because
you're trying to support your
little humans or your dogs or
you maybe they're bigger humans
but it's but we are we are of
We are asked to sacrifice our
earnings.
We are asked to sometimes to go
to to this body and that's what
we're doing now we're we're
trying to refer to reflect what
the communities look late and
the community needs the folks
So Mr speaker gentle lady do you
do you know of any other elected
officials
Do you have do you know if there
are any other people like that
who are on compensated who are
not paid.
Mr speaker gentle lady no I mean
I mean with yeah we we're we are
generally the only
body that does not receive a
salary.
Mr speaker gentle lady I mean I
think for myself I think it's an
equity issue but on top of that
and I think it's been it's kind
of been disregarded in this
inability to serve I mean for me
it's not I don't we I'm I'm not
gonna leave on March eighteenth
and just shut my phone off the
problems of New Mexicans will
being evicted people that are
searching for for different
types of services like those are
the types of of the issues that
I will still have to go back
legislature we do this because
we we don't turn the to the we
don't turn our phones off we we
want to be able to serve our
communities and I think that by
having
to be about how do we make it so
that this opportunity is not
just for those who can serve but
those who should be serving
have that that opportunity.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I I agree
wholeheartedly and again I'm
gonna go back to the
constituents that I serve who
but because I work full time I
you know I I find it.
To be a real struggle to to make
the time I'm so grateful that we
really grateful for their office
but our constituents need need
more they need help navigating
bill forward and all those
things are done and we're doing
that without a per diem you know
we're doing that on during the
week when we're not serving in
the interim and I think that
I wish I could give it and I
feel like I've given a lot and I
feel like my separate my family
sacrificing a lot I know my
checkbook is because I still
write checks eleven tells
about this issue I don't want to
bring up the trauma again but
I'm clearly doing it I'm sorry
of but we are not whining about
this we are we are trying to
professionalizing
And we're doing it you know some
of us many of us are doing it
while suffering financial loss
and stress so.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana you Mr
speaker gentleman I will yield.
this concept.
The poll and where can I find.
The details of that poll kind
lady.
interviewed about I think the
number is eight hundred and
fifty three Republicans
Democrats and independents and
they asked them a number of
questions so it wasn't just this
of New Mexicans believe that we
already make seventy five
thousand and and then a follow
up question to that was
and then the follow up question
to that was
do you believe it should be with
like an independent commission
and an overwhelming number of
them said said yes.
do you agree with me that over
the last several years the
general public has lost trust in
government and specifically
politicians.
Mr speaker kind lady is
I think in general if if you
Listen to.
I have I have heard a lot over
the last several years that
people have generally lost
crossed in government and
debate doing this as a vehicle
to increase that trust kind
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
really sure if it will increase
we should receive a salary and
that's what we're proposing here
today.
Mr speaker Connolly I would
agree with that that it's
twenty sixteen.
I was in state government we had
a recession.
The legislature was then I
cut services.
what what are we going to do if
that happens again.
Will the state will the
of us in the core who worked on
this issue
we come through a lot for the
last year and a half it's
conversations that we've had in
about many times about about
that and I think this is
something that you all that
folks have been brought bringing
up today around why it's so
important to have enabling
commission is being established
to potentially have some of
those guardrails to decide
whether or not we get a salary
at that time or that we don't
get a raise
and so I think that's why it's
important to continue to have
those debates moving forward.
Mr speaker kindly need that that
would be
leadership at the time and
having to make decisions all of.
Maybe laying off employees or
putting them on on paid leave
affected real people.
And Mr speaker kind lady
mindsphere.
Is that with the rate legislator
we're forcing state agencies to
to make those painful decisions.
Will we have the political
courage to make those decisions
in this house.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
This legislation specifically it
just sets up the commission but
and set up that through that
enabling legislation we can set
up those guardrails.
Mr speaker kind lady did you say
we've had a version introduced
whether it's from like a task
force to what you're seeing
right now there's probably been
about five.
that you've done to this over
the years.
I'm Mr speaker gentleman it's
not necessarily making changes
feel very uncomfortable making
decisions like this but when but
for me that I mean this is this
is the issue that I ran on when
I was first elected I didn't
believe that we should be the
there's a direct correlation for
why we don't have the why where
the bottom of a lot of lists is
because we don't have all of the
legislature that is fully
focused on our good on our
every year is because not only
are we having to inform our our
constituents that we are the
only legislature that is on rate
Mr speaker kind lady
on the point of you know the low
the low education scores.
New Mexico has an ever growing.
don't I don't know Mr speaker
cutting lady that a rate
legislature would change that
since for pouring money.
Into these agencies that are
Mr speaker kind lady are you
aware that most elected
officials in the state do not
draw salary.
Mr speaker gentleman I don't
You weren't sure if.
Of legislators were the only
elected officials and didn't
draw salary most mayors do not
Well I would argue Mr speaker
kind lady or much closer to the
constituent.
They live in those towns every
lady is that giving an elected
official salary does not change
things nor does it put them.
More in touch with their
constituency.
but at this point.
Mr speaker kind lady one of the
things that I ran all on is that
I understood.
servants.
Mr speaker kind lady all in with
this.
I I I am very uncomfortable.
Casting a vote.
Possibility much more than my
constituents make
because I feel.
Like earlier earlier or debate
led to.
Hundreds and hundreds of
thousands of taxpayer dollars
getting paid to a state
very careful in this house.
Are doing this
resolution because in essence
we're making decisions that are
strengthening laws to support
our law enforcement were words.
Debating and voting today on the
the gentleman from Santa Fe
Santa Fe Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
to the debate and of course I've
heard debate on this bill before
in I just want to.
Time in say a couple things.
None of us are happy with where
New Mexico is right now.
We want better things for our
Is that one of our branches of
government.
The legislature.
Is not fully engaged.
We we come appeared Santa Fe.
In transient complicated
problems.
And we can solve them in sixty
days.
problems The New Mexico faces
Justin Justin water supply and
delivery and management and he
sent me this letter in the and
it's and I looked at it and my
commit to this job.
Because I have another job and I
need that job to pay my bills.
Mr speaker gentle lady if you
think this job is thirty days
you're doing it wrong.
We need to modernize our
terms but yeah we're Senators
into this term right this not
this term the session.
In the past the session.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Because we probably won't get
the message if we did
Republicans get through in
thirty days if we can get
through in sixty days.
So there's a huge interruption
and if we don't get across the
finish line.
We don't have a lot to show for.
It's really frustrating Mr
speaker journalist to lady.
investment in New Mexico.
And Mr speaker generally you
might know I I've been active on
Twitter
in the past I've been very open
That will it's worth a try
because we need to do better.
Yeah I agree we need to do
better and I agree that this
this will help.
Of course this legislation.
It's not just paying ourselves.
And if the answer is yes I think
that's that would be great news
that we can move forward with
that.
And if the answer is no.
To Mr speaker generally I I
think this bill.
I think this bill is critically
important.
We need to do better.
this bill few times I thank you
for your persistence I'm hopeful
we can get across the finish
line this time and ask the
citizens whether this is
something they want to.
gentle lady I will yield thank
you I have some questions before
I can make some decisions on
this bill that maybe can help me
with so I want to make sure that
everybody home understands we
dollars every ten days times
three that ends up being five
thousand three hundred forty
dollars each one of us gets in
our bank every month.
Than what the average median
income is in New Mexico
currently.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
sure exactly about the numbers
but just so folks are clear
Santa Fe was six thousand
dollars just to be here and I
still care about call.
So that leads to another
question Mr speaker gentle lady
look as reimbursement you know
tactfully is but still gonna be
reimbursed if I got paid versus
per diem so are you saying that
when we pass the when this goes
forward what also going to get.
salary prohibition and to create
the commission the mileage and
the party and more still there
the commission will make that
decision.
Okay that's a whole other can of
them know we're going to get per
diem that we're getting right
now plus our top of that Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady the only
thing that's going to be on the
ballot is the repeal of the
people don't get paid when we do
we get five thousand three
hundred forty dollars in the
bank every month thank you how
we need to pay these people that
are getting paid so I have a big
I mean that absolutely should be
on the ballot but to continue on
so I have another question so.
If we're making five thousand
It's one thousand one hundred
dollars is that amount going to
be on the ballot and they're
gonna know that we also get per
diem to as well Mr speaker
gentle lady.
our constituents so can you tell
me if we're getting about one
thousand one hundred dollars and
ten years on para at five
to be making a ten years on
Karia when we get to that point.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
have those numbers again the
commission decides what the
constituents that this is a
thing looking for salary coming
to a press release on this too
so that they know it we're
talking salary we talk a per
diem we're talking pair of all
I knew what that was I had to
gas I don't know what the
numbers would be on that but
it's going to be substantially
just found this out and you get
elected here did you know you
get pair from the job and here
that you get you can get Karia
from both did you know that Mr
make sure is that going to be on
the bill as well as a people can
understand home that if my
representative.
salary per diem and another pair
down the line of the going to
know that on the ballot as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady no.
pair and per diem and a salary
all those things need to be
known because otherwise because
I know I'm guilty this to
sometimes you're going in there
something on the ballot and you
to happen the legal women voters
of publishes a voter guide
before every election in for
councilman is actually do a very
good job of giving all the
would be a tremendously long
ballot for every border who
shows up at a ballot box to the
state of New Mexico has access
to the border guard thank you Mr
speaker yes somewhere that and
that our constituents know what
exactly is going to happen and I
just have a couple more
questions for you Mr speaker
gentle lady so right now law
enforcement officers.
be a friendly amendment that we
put in there that we can't
double dip as well we can't get
voted out a quick come back to
show that we're not better than
law enforcement.
I I I I would really appreciate
it if we hone in back on the
issue I don't think anyone in
this chamber is trying to show
up law enforcement at all and I
School of law enforcement I
think a lot of us do Mr speaker
all of us.
Okay Mister speaker you went.
you work for a public body and
you get fifty thousand dollars a
year.
Then you would come here in this
position and you would also get
a salary do you think that is
fix that and enabling
legislation if the the majority
of the body does not make
payments to make those changes
okay Mister such as of now we
And I like to move house for
member number two.
Number one thank you.
And ask for a roll call vote to
I will Mr speaker is two five
nine six zero point one.
The amendment is being passed
out.
David the minutes and then you
everybody have it.
Given the thumbs up from the
gentleman from Chavis and
steady.
The lady please explain the
amendment.
legislators an employee of a
political subdivision of the
state.
Gentlelady from Dona Ana is is a
friendly amendment Mr speaker
gentlelady it is on friendly.
Gentlelady yields absolutely Mr
speaker so I'm clear about what
this ammendment does it
basically states if you're an
employee of a political
subdivisions such as a school
Salary by Mr speaker gentle it
is correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady you're
talking about the legislative
salary or are you talking about
the salary that you have at
So let me again ask if I
understood Mr speaker and gentle
lady that
employees of school districts in
this state are allowed to serve
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
debate on about the
constitutionality but yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady maybe you
need to research that because
Mexico legislature in the
constitution.
that is exactly what will that
what we're talking about then is
that there wouldn't be any kind
of a limitation from them
participating or they're not
salary as a member of the New
Mexico legislature Mr speaker
John that's correct.
Your speaker gentle lady what
about the rest of the
I'm I would be curious about
other things that are tied to
salaries
what about.
Retirement the current P. E. R.
a retirement.
fact that if they get income at
one it would not be fair to them
to have double incomes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
scan it Mr speaker gentle lady
expand a little bit on what
Representative Representative
from McKinley was talking about
the gentle lady from McKinley
excuse me
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
So Mister speaker gentle lady so
don't we already cover.
public timely running for
office.
Speaker gentle lady the also
prohibits you from holding this
office right here if you are
Jabi when I took on this
position Mr speaker gentle lady.
the state of New Mexico Mr
simply Mr speaker delegates in
two different branches.
The lady just to clarify you
cannot work for the state of New
Speaker gentle lady it applies
to the counties it is it's a put
a political Philly it is my
understanding speaker gentle
and gentle lady the point of
this amendment is that it
doesn't seem like it's fair that
somebody should be able to make
fifty thousand dollars for
public body then come here and
we also make that same amount
There's further debate on the
amendment the gentleman from
Santa Fe and Santa Fe
Representative McQueen and there
has been a request from over
coats members you can remove
their coats.
Mr speaker gentle lady the.
A think we are lacking a little
bit of information I know it's
because I know it's clear that
legislature I don't know if he
was a paid position so so Mister
speaker gentle lady
My question to you is why are
you singling out of public
employees.
Which on.
Which is tax dollars and this is
also the same so it was in the
same genomes what I would say Mr
well they serve in the
legislature.
Mr speaker generally think it's
it's I think it's likely a I I
would be astonished if they're
not people who serving here in
the legislature the continued to
just a question I I would be
astonished if there would not to
people in here that were drawing
salaries.
From a business the private this
is where there's there's or
someone else's
only the per diem is to cover
the expenses it's not it's not
in lieu of the salary it's cover
expenses so Mister speaker
gently I guess I go back to my
initial question.
It can include local law
enforcement.
It could include local first
responders.
It could include.
Clerks the.
loss issues with this bill and
these people would be receiving
to state tax and as I've also
learned to Paris.
it takes a while the best
another questions about that
before
and I I would just note I think
we kill off the amendment but
quarter of seniority.
And I'm not the ten yet.
So Mister speaker generally I
think what we're trying to do is
make it easier for people to
thank you speakers gentlelady
yields absolutely thank you Mr
speaker.
So gentle lady.
To a single person.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
something that.
We we've heard here today that
we don't really want to even put
about a hundred thousand dollars
for a legislators.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I don't believe.
That could be sixty seventy
thousand eighty thousand hundred
thousand dollars.
And then also draw a salary.
For serving in the legislature.
Have time or less potentially as
a legislator that was that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker dominion mail that
exactly that's the two state
checks it's taxed it's it it I
don't think that it's a fair
problem right now.
Speaker gentle lady with this
take away per diem for travel.
Mr speaker and gentleman no
absolutely not.
away with per diem for travel to
cover expenses if we have to
travel for meetings correct Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman at what I just
learned without they're going to
them that would substantially
not change if someone was in
that position if they feel like
it's.
Something serving in the
capacity we are now.
check every month and they could
still get the per diem here.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
know back home the reason I
cannot support the bill as it is
it's that's why currently people
who service citizen legislators
were not double dipping as a
matter of fact we're not getting
a salary what we are getting is.
we're leaving businesses behind
and other things however Mr
speaker and gentle lady that is
not the case if you currently
are.
A member of the legislature and
is for that instance what would
be doing is giving double salary
double budget budget we have as
legislature is not very much but
it would still be double
month.
So Mister speaker and and and
and gentle lady who I was I was
Contemplating getting an
amendment.
providing most of us are not
gonna leave our businesses if we
got a salary.
As we're hearing now
seems to be a a lot of angst
against
some speaker and gentle lady I
was going to introduce an
amendment that would have made
us where we would report are
hours and get paid hourly.
like.
And do it hourly and
maybe that would be more fair Mr
speaker angelic at least them
Your amendment which high I
really like basically says
taxpayers cannot get hit twice.
I'd like to fix this now so I
don't have to worry with my
constituents and art are
contentious in New Mexico of
being hit twice somebody getting
that double salary and that's
just not fair.
the AT and Administration which
is one branch and then run for
office because the question is
state government and and do this
job however the speaker and and
gentle lady and that is not the
case if you work for county
government for city government
I believe Mr speaker gentle lady
if if you're the sole person
over a budget not a board or a
commission or a council if you
the sole person over a budget
questions I I was hoping that to
clear that up for everybody
that's where the hatch act comes
into play Mr speaker and gentle
lady this has nothing to do with
that all of that would remain in
Where's my commitment.
And is deserving of a full time.
taxpayer and and taxpayers
believe me have very few
protections thank you Mr speaker
gently as for the debate on the
amendment of the gentleman from
Chavis and you know that are
Is one that the body should take
note of and that is that the
legislature.
Has rules.
They have been very.
come serve in the body to.
Continue to drop inure to their
retirement.
And to to.
My issue is.
Is that we haven't done that
with everyone and I think that's
what you're drawing out.
Law enforcement hasn't had that
same opportunity there been
beneficial I I I'll support your
amendment
I think the body if we want to.
We should do that in a manner
that allows more people to serve
in the and and hi I think what
you're doing is going to broaden
earlier percent of Garrett thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from Bernalillo and.
Let's see the Torrance Torrance
that this is something that once
again needs to be addressed in
the enabling legislation it is a
discussion that has to take
there's all different of
bargaining agreements done
throughout the state City of
Albuquerque employees cannot
rate of whether it's you know a
full time position or not
there's so many varieties of job
well pointed out really be longs
in enabling legislation and at
the time that this a joint
resolution passes and go to the
then they believe legislation
might say
first of all I might you know
take a leave of teaching because
I'd have a salary secondly a
this resolution is premature
although it needs to be
addressed so thank you for
bringing it forth but I can't
support the amendment because
Representative board a goal.
Thank you Mr speaker
will the gentle lady from
Bernalillo and Torrance yield
absolutely.
Gentle lady from.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
congratulations and no I did not
thank you.
lobbyist by the way for a
constitutional amendment that we
did in the nineteen ninety eight
just information and I'm not
served within the pair crashed
in two thousand and nine did you
know gentle lady that there are
the legislative P. E. R. A..
Plan is very minimal in terms of
out how much we make after ten
years and it's one thousand four
hundred fourteen dollars a
month.
The gentle lady and Mr speaker
The the gentle lady is wanting
to prevent people from double
dipping although legend the
legislative plan the way that
on the pair.
Well you mentioned the pair
earlier gentle lady you
mentioned both in as a matter of
fact Mr speaker gently I did but
Mr speaker I'm sorry thank you
this is the point of the matter
I guess is gentle lady and Mr
speaker
raised in this is you were
raised in a to include both the
salary and the pair of.
And that's how I understood it.
raised a should be sent to
saying you can't take two is set
to move salaries Mr chair the
that let's let's thank you we
have to go to the chair thank
To the question what I'm using
double dipping in the to you
pair but what I'm saying is you
can't draw the two salaries so
that the taxpayers don't get hit
twice.
my understanding.
Mr speaker deland sorry for the
confusion I'm talking about and
I know not double dipping to use
to use for the word for para I'm
Mr speaker
the way that it was presented is
very confusing and I think that
it needs to be clarified that
double dipping is typically
and and Mr speaker and gentle
lady I don't know if you know.
Back with.
The legislature allowed double
many people came back to work
they paid into the retirement
system but they did not draw a
second pension they were just
going it was very confusing
thank you Mr speaker Preciado
your time thank you gentle lady.
Deleted Representative Chasey.
resolution eight one of yes it
would a table the amendment it
would have no and we are back on
the amendment there is a roll
call vote.
Close.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House or solution eight has
been tabled to lady from billion
Torrance you still have the
floor thank you Mr speaker the
last thing I want to say the
just wanted more transparency
and I wanted to constituents
understand that we do get money
and that they should know
there's going to be a salary and
tax payers would be hit twice I
think that super important for
them to now I'm not picking on
anybody I just this is the one
thing where people get to tax
payer checks and I don't think
not everybody gets that and I'd
like to see more information
about the parameters on this so
that people know actually what
they're voting for thank you Mr
speaker additionally there's
to the gentle lady thank you
thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker I did want to make a
couple of comments and they did
have a couple questions Mr
recently that I can tell you
over twenty years ago the same
issue had come up many times and
it comes up Mr speaker and
gentle lady because the issues
job in many ways and it and it's
always been that way Mr speaker
gentle lady but I I am of
that would actually be on the
ballot and Mr speaker gentle
lady so than FY twenty five the
commission would need to and put
previous versions of it we had
asked for a preliminary report
in in October I believe and then
and so right now in the sub it's
less prescriptive so that we'll
still have all of twenty twenty
suggest that we do with the
enabling legislation is that
they give us a report back early
enough in twenty five.
voters choose to approve this in
November of twenty for them for
about twenty five FY twenty five
the commission would meet put
July twenty six is when this
would actually go into effect
correct.
So then it looks like those
six you would receive about six
months of salary.
Is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
lady yes and so it wouldn't be
Mr speaker gentle lady yes okay
I appreciate the clarification
on this Mr speaker gentle lady
but again I don't like thank you
for working on this I I can tell
I merrily because the issues are
incredibly complicated we all do
a good job with our constituency
we all tried to meet those needs
but sometimes it's a little
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Dona Ana yield
Mister speaker I will yield to
the gentleman.
rate legislature and I I I agree
there's a lot of need for that
discussion.
Mr speaker I feel like there
hasn't been enough discussion
about the structure of what
we're suggesting and and I think
The commission when they set the
salaries that ability Tory upon
the legislature.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
commission chooses sixty
thousand a year can the
legislature override that
number.
Mr speaker and gentleman the the
when the commission gives a
the voter referendum the we had
initially discussed having that
option
if if voters felt like they
needed to go back on that but
reference
of a voter referendums only for
bills that have passed not for
constitutional amendments and so
we had to we had to remove that.
Mr speaker generated from Dona
Ana so line ten on page two says
from Dona and I would submit to
you what that means that is that
it is in fact aboard Tory upon
us as a legislative body is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
whatsoever over those dollars
that were appropriating does it
not.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Dona
Mr speaker and gentleman at this
point in this legislation
there's no mechanism to address
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Dona
think is a bad vo and they
disagree with me then they have
the remedy that in the next
election cycle they can choose
someone else to serve in the
seat is that correct.
between this commission I could
call on a commission I think
it's committee known as
exposition
between this commission is there
any accountability during this
Mr speaker gentle lady so gently
from Dona Ana if.
If that's an average citizen of
New Mexico was upset with the
particular salaried said they
there is no mechanism at this
point if if voters are are not
happy with the recommendation
given by
the commission there there is no
be very troubling and and that
really I think prevents me from
being all support this
legislation because I I do think
it's a conversation worth having
as to whether we should or
The process this way what we've
now done is we've cut the
citizens of New Mexico
completely out of the process
they have no remedy they have no
recourse now I don't anticipate
And we do we do then transfer
that authority to a body that is
not elected by the people is not
accountable by the people and we
are gonna have to appropriate
conflict of interest for us to
vote on our own salaries.
If you look at what we do as a
body I I firstly I would say
that we do that quite
frequently.
reason why we would cut the
people out.
Instead of just willing to
essentially have the moxie to
take the hard vote.
And if it's true that the people
New Mexico would support their
legislators who who vote to give
themselves a certain salary
increase that from time to time.
So I I'm troubled by the
out.
I think that needs to stop as a
body but then be on that now I
think we've removed the the
taxpayers of New Mexico and so.
you know our our energy prices
continue to rise crime seems to
be a perpetual problem and.
Yet here we are as legislators
talking about what we take up
this evening as well we're gonna
There is a lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
lady hi
I wanted to go back to some of
the issues that were raised
differences between
When New Mexico became a state
and established it's governance
you know what the gender and
ethnic make up was of our
legislature in nineteen twelve.
Mr speaker gentle lady actually
I don't have that information if
Mr speaker gentle lady if you'd
like to deposit our guests that
would work.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady how about the ethnic
and gender make up of the
legislature now.
representatives has become very
diversified in the last few
years there's a lot of women who
are Representative in our in our
chamber
I think we we can definitely get
there the more and more that we
talk about modernizing our
legislature.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
ethnic diversity diversity of
backgrounds and careers
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
happen to have
believe it was more than half.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady would be my
supposition as well
it seems to me that you know
society different expectations
Mr speaker gentle lady are one
of the things that actually came
lady I think you also referenced
a building a.
Let's say at mother to a for
like it
Trials
working parents.
lady and as as working parents
When we as legislators who are
fortunate to serve
Are we do we make up that
difference Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Are we pay that difference.
Mr speaker gentle lady we are
not.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I don't necessarily have it
specifically but from the
research that we've done
any out of pocket expenses
For an for us specifically here
in the legislature to cover any
of these expenses in Santa Fe
and of course any of the interim
rates which change depending on
the month.
And so during this session
specifically the per diem rate
for Santa Fe is a hundred
gentle lady yes so a per diem is
different from employee wages
according to my Google here it's
incurred while on the job.
this is different from
reimbursing the employee for
these.
Expenses.
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady two
hundred and ten this month.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
fantastic do we know what the
rate is but the place that ice
and staying at is
a hundred and five dollars a
night.
Food and other incidentals that
you'd be incurring by leaving
your your job leaving your
And I mean everybody else's
costs are different but I still
have I'm not working outside
here and then still paying rent
speaker and gentle lady speaking
of you know paying for things
back home just so you know my
husband likes to joke that
Mr speaker gentle lady I I sent
him a text message earlier.
Is very good quantify for me you
know exactly how negative that
really come up with a specific
figure because a lot of the
travel that that I do for
interim committees I use hotel
points or if I'm going to a
however Mr speaker and gentle
lady my husband does confirm
that I definitely have a
negative salary and my children
drawn negative salary I work
very hard and I take my
responsibilities as a legislator
very seriously and it's kind of
gentle lady probably work.
Forty hours a week or more doing
this job and I do a lot of
travel that takes me away from
Be a good legislator and
represent my constituents I need
to have some background
knowledge on issues Mr speaker
gentle lady I need to spend time
different folks have different
professions Mr speaker gentle
lady the other thing that I do.
Is I had a lot of community
Albuquerque police department to
have a meeting with all of the
other law enforcement introduce
at six o'clock on a Wednesday
So Mister speaker gentle lady
all of this goes to say that I
think.
That.
lady that to do this job well
requires an enormous investment
of time and it is time talking
in Mr speaker gentle lady
knowing nothing about energy but
on the Energy committee we make
some really important decisions
and Mr speaker gentle lady I
of what I'm taking a vote on.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
We have an enormous
responsibility.
But I also know that having a
more diverse.
Legislature where we have time
for bringing this bill forward.
The lady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker this matter having been
under consideration for three
hours I moved to close debate
Having close of a dozen lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker before I
make a motion I just want to
thank and acknowledge the eight
then other times it wasn't very
fun but overall I think we
learned a lot and I I just I say
all of that because we didn't
we're not taking this issue
would likely this is an issue
representative Christy noted
that as million Matthews Linda
Serrato added Dixon Debbie
Saniona Susan ended up Natalie
Figueroa including that part
prepare for this this
legislation including Senator
Gonzales who continues to be a
partner in in all of this the
issue is not an easy one I
space for this conversation
because our constituents deserve
the legislature that has the
time to prioritize them and our
communities I urge you all to
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House joint resolution eight
do now pass we are on final
passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Does not close.
resolution eight has duly passed
this house gentlelady from Dona
on are you ready and item number
thirty.
taking and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution related expendable.
Thank you Mr speaker will also
invite my expert witnesses to
join me on the house floor.
Mexico Supreme Court Shannon
Bacon and Monique alts of the
fines and fees justice center.
The house Judiciary Committee
substitute for H. B. two ninety
seven
and traffic cases this means
here in our state we will no
longer to attend attempt to pay
for court operations an
collection of debt coming from
long standing fees and then
coming from fines moving forward
these additional provisions
criminal legal system including
the public defender's the
district attorneys the
corrections department and more
so with that Mr speaker.
explanation of the bill you
might of thrown in another Bill
number in there but we are on
house bill one thirty nine thank
you Mr speaker yes I have also
it's a committee subs coming out
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker where the
gentle lady from Dona ana county
yield I'm.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I yield
to the gentleman from Travis
we we're discussing over on page
two.
lines sixteen through eighteen
Program or some other program
that they were already involved
in.
And so are concerned expressing
and so Mister speaker gentle
lady do you recall that
discussion.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
one of the important provisions
in this legislation is that we
reducing the debt that comes
historically from bees but
moving forward will come from
fines so I appreciate that we're
attempting to get that right and
make sure that we respect the
judicial discretion and
part of community service thank
you Mr speaker I do have an
amendment to try to clarify that
point and so this time I would
move house floor amendment
to five number point two two
five nine four one point one
thank you John and I believe
that a man is being passed out
let's give it a minute while
Mr speaker well we're waiting I
might add that the odds of me
I believe everybody's got the
amendment thumbs up from the
involves page two line
seventeen.
And we're going to strike or
after the word including insert
the words rules went in and then
will read including enrollment
and job training comma four
academic or vocational programs.
Amendment and it basically
allows a court to.
Allow community service if they
debate on the amendment.
Delivers on one thank you Mr to
the gentleman from Chavis within
just a few.
Mr speaker and gentleman I yield
to the gentleman from San Juan
credit for of oil service press
front run for credit for
community service to pay off a
finder's fee if you were going
to school already prior to the
offense and I think there were
issue Mr speaker and gentleman
that certainly the intent and I
believe the language makes it
clear that it's to be.
community service to enroll in
Is there for the debate on the
amendment is our objection to
adopting the amendment.
I see none you have an amended
bill.
Gentleman from Travis yield the
Issue of of fees and you might
want to make clear that the
fines that are incurred would
still be payable but the court
to have a successful amendment
fundamental first amendment.
I don't think it's my first but
it's been a long term.
Donna.
Please yes Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from the speaker
gentle lady.
Streamlined to bill please.
These funds for these records.
Torrez.
The legislative wing State
hourly.
No way each.
job description associated with
the prevailing wage.
Mr speaker and gentleman family
thank you for the question I
first want to clarify that when
talking about is the rate at
which someone maybe working down
their debt if they are either
incarcerated or doing community
previously fees were not the
judiciary did not have the
capacity to waive fees we are
not dropping the price of fines
or eliminating fines of those
were always designed to be
down that debt that moving
forward if they would be paid at
twice the state minimum wage in
current law they're receiving
credit at the federal minimum
benefit then we're using that
conversion at twice the rate
that does not apply at the same
in the same formula for someone
wage is a term defined by the
department of workforce
solutions for various job
descriptions so for example if
hour is that Mr speaker to in
later your intent Mr speaker and
gentleman no our intent is to
Mr speaker gentlemen as you
might see on page three the
prevailing
of hourly minimum wages existing
online three there is existing
language.
Mr chair.
For.
The person convicted of a crime
is obligated to pay.
Can be worked off now twice the
state minimum wage isn't
Gentlelady.
Was twice the state minimum wage
selected as the.
Right.
commission the commission is a
bipartisan body with
representation I believe of
fifteen state agencies including
defense attorneys public
recommendations about creating
the kind of criminal legal
system that we need here in New
Mexico so I've introduced that
bill previously I introduced a
principles three three years
now.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
imagine okay pull.
Thank you your call those funds
and face.
The table with making to the.
If you'll Harper.
is a fictional right so it's the
number at which someone's debt
is calculated based on how many
hours of community service they
engage in our perform I would
when they engaged in community
service they would be able to do
so it with the best of their
intentions hopefully over a
meaningful time period.
Process for which the phone fees
or court costs can be worked all
free if you will have a maximum
of fifteen days.
forward from all trafficking
criminal cases but with the
remaining debt that would come
with fines if someone did not
have the ability to pay they
would then be facing two options
again because if clarified at
twice the state minimum wage.
The other option is that this
person would be incarcerated
either because they were
convicted on felony charges in
twenty twenty four credit hours
per per hour served so if they
were incarcerated for twenty
four hours they would get twenty
four hours worth of credit at
drop down that debt and we
dropped it from the jail side
from sixty days to fifteen days
on the present side from thirty
days to fifteen days.
now counties who spent more than
a hundred dollars a day to
incarcerate someone are paying
to keep someone in jail purely
because they don't have the
capacity to pay down these fines
savings mechanism meaning that
people would be incarcerated for
a shorter period of time in
order in order to work down that
debt and overall reducing that
cost of incarceration for a
This is an important question
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman if someone if there is
by the elimination of fees and
these accommodations to work
down the data finds it would
actually give the offender a
more direct path to make sure
that those dollars were directly
restitution is not been
rectified the rate of twenty
four times the minimum wage for
every day of incarceration Mr
remember thank you Mr speaker
will the gentle lady yield yes
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Madam Mr speaker and gentle lady
but I see this is a user fee of
these are individuals that go to
court they've violated what
fees.
In that as it's been stated you
know there's no funding and this
fight for funding.
And Mr speaker gentle lady I I
think the the having the public
pay for the year and behavior of
others
gentle lady I don't know if you
want to comment but that was the
my statement and that's what I
said in committee.
Thank you Mr speaker and
Are going to need to be resource
and we will certainly be turning
to the appropriators in our body
to make sure that the
inconsistent and volatile
revenue source for much of these
programs over their history so.
While some come back to court
operations the ones that go into
land I have great trust in our
house appropriations committee
and the LESC committee and part
of this bill moving forward is
to bring more accountability to
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
There is further debate the
yield please thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Travis.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for the of the a couple of
questions I do have here.
costs.
But not to remove any fines but
there's some instances for the
fees and
possibly it especially if you
might be talking about the crime
victims reparation Fund.
Yes Sir yes ma'am that's what
I'm talking about Mr speaker and
Where the part of what the
perpetrator has done why aren't
where those fees being imposed
to help those victims Mr speaker
the stream that an offender pays
that does go directly to the
victim the crime victim
reparation Fund is a state
agency in which they are around
that go towards services needed
for them but it's not a direct
payment to the victims as the
restitution issue issue is.
Well the kind of blows my mind
How are they do of is there any
accounting practices are
auditing practices that the
courts currently use.
To keep track of how much
what's real is that today in the
current practices the courts
have become debt collectors so
they spend a lot of money
chasing down New Mexicans to try
they're paying a dollar and
seventeen cents for every dollar
they eventually bring an so
we've basically asked the courts
to collect a debt they then
not a lot of accountability or
oversight or clarity on what
actually the money gets spent
on.
shall remit all penalty
assessment receipts to the state
treasurer for credit to the
general fund but that I'm I can
Mr speaker and gentle lady
ultimately those
responsibilities would go back
to LESC in DFA if there were
potential audit of the returned
that there might be an audit
take place there that would.
Get some clarification where
these funds are going.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's possible but not
funds are going and if it does
take that coming from the state
treasurer's office I think it
would be greatly appreciated not
only by me but by other people
as well and I would like if it
speaker gentle lady in reading
your bill.
I am drawn to page fifteen of
your bill all give you time to
turn their.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I found that.
goes on down there through gifts
grants donation all of that
language but the point of we go
back up to the line I on page
Then you drop on down to line
twelve point talking about
certification by the New Mexico
finance authority for payments
principal interest all that
Mr speaker if this bill is
enacted that light is that
language going to stay in there
Mr because it sounds like it
would be an ongoing for ever and
what happened here previously in
a different legislature with the
different Chief Justice
when the decision was made to
of us across the state would be
paying a facilities fee when we
received a ticket for a traffic
well but because of the language
that the NMFA agreed to in the
contracts they signed we are
paid down but today all of us
and all of our constituents are
paying I think in my case ten
dollars for facilities be I'd
assumed for years as had many
that those would have been
that the date that that debt on
the metro court complexes paid
off this fee will no longer be
collected.
Because I am just what I've
stated I am really upset over
this Mr speaker and gentle lady
because I too am upset over the
explanation uses got about as
Towards the windows in our
courthouse downtown because each
one of those windows isn't isn't
listening it is going to take
you doing straight I am and I
hope everybody else feels the
same way I do this is
ridiculous.
Whenever those fees could be
what they're not in the all.
Have important issues in our
areas to and I'm upset about
that.
Mr get off that let me take a
decision made in a previous
administration they're actively
pursuing this and trying to
rectify the situation and I'll
just and Mr speaker and gentle
lady on that comment by saying
this is the same facility and
this statement because actively
trying to get this paid off how
many years ago has that been so
they're actively trying to get
it paid off by dragon their feet
And it is it has been discussed
already on page three of the
bill see I've got off that
subject now so I am coming down
even though I'm still upset over
To him a little bit upset we
have people out there actually
doing work.
But whenever there's a defendant
who is in confinement for.
And they're going to be
receiving credit at twenty four
they are helping to pay for the
for that person that is confined
well they eat.
And sleep.
times the rate of the state
minimum wage Mr speaker gentle
lady do you see a problem with
the.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do not
that potentially the court has
ordered to go to jail because
they did not pay that fine so
currently again are counties are
paying to incarcerate this
twenty four hours and that's
based on the idea of an eight
hour work day but the argument
behind this and why the
sentencing commission the
bipartisan sentencing commission
payment on their debt that means
that instead of only giving them
credit for eight hours of every
twenty four hours they're locked
up we're now giving them credit
towards that debt for every hour
doing the right thing as to
these people that are being
confined right now it is those
people that are out there more
often than not working that
upset thank you Mr speaker.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
the the first time I heard this
bill and that when you brought
up before that twenty four
hours.
Of our twenty four hours of
And that's because as I've been
dealing more more with our local
corrections facilities Mr
speaker.
the cost to incarcerate them.
They're not gonna be able to pay
the fine is the problem.
So I.
some degree on this issue
they're going to be.
One on one side of the aisle and
one on the other side of the
aisle on this on the
consideration of this Mr speaker
Our our regional jail facility
and Mr speaker gentle lady are
our facility everything in San
Juan county is is called
regional and the reason is is
particular the size of
Farmington which is of less than
forty five thousand people can
grow to over a hundred thousand
on a weekend because of all the
problems in the community the
good the bad the bad comes with
the good so the speaker and
gentle lady our our jail
reflects that.
The county this could be a a a
cost savings by.
Decreasing the population that
just will.
They didn't pay the fine we
On the for but for my.
for the the city that I
represent for one of one of the
cities that are representative.
The city has a speaker gentle
lady that the city doesn't hold
people in their jail for nearly
as long they're there for a
couple of days and then the
In HSC.
And the conversation was that
this is a volatile.
getting those fines in getting
those fees.
And I know we've had this
conversation if you could
explain to me again.
How will these.
Cities and counties not every
counties in the situation that
we're in.
probably most counties how would
they make up this revenue Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
stands to lose the most with the
elimination of fees it's
estimated that fees for their
various operations from judicial
education state court I. T.
the most revenue as we move this
policy change forward.
The only thing we are doing is
eliminating the state mandated
fees so we are not touching home
rule authority we are not
would be justified so again
those will be conversations they
have with each other as policy
makers and their constituents if
they felt like a fund or a
If they were to implement these.
Fines are fees that would be
local home rule.
What standards would they have
we are repealing the state
mandated fees handful of those
are currently collected at the
municipal level and they would
not have room to continue to
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so really quick I don't
understand this and you brought
something up that's brought up
another question if the state is
mandating these fees to the to
The majority of fees go to
different places including back
to the courts and other
programmatic efforts over over
the years many funds were
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady if.
If these municipalities or
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
today the examples I can give
you a fees currently collected
by the courts and return to the
municipalities go back to
statewide dollars to those same
purposes judicial education
court automation and IT need so
that our court systems can keep
talking to each other but in
So the speaker gentle lady the.
The funding that's going to be
pursued that would be general
fund dollars Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
But in the future when.
Where we will not continue to
have these budget surpluses that
we have currently.
disparities in counties are able
to implement those fines.
I guess I'm not too concerned
about that if they have a budget
shortfall but our courts would
be reliant upon.
To be a problem in the future Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
this bill does have a delayed
are needed it's been my belief
and my interest in sponsoring
this legislation that especially
as we talk about those that
we're discussing now including
court automation and I. T. needs
the cost of court operations
especially when they don't have
the ability to do so.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
guess the concern I have is I've
ruling that was unfavorable so
that is a concern if through
this the courts are going to
have to be asking for more
money.
If this funding is secured for
however long and and and let's
say we don't have a problem with
that the budget going forward
how will the dollars be
distributed.
Mr speaker and gentleman when it
comes back to a see that would
be court leadership in the
budget committee and they'd move
through their regular processes
for making decisions about
when I walked in here today I'm
gonna have to.
At it I I think I'm gonna have
to take a point out of my pocket
and flip it because I do see
majority of the people that are
incarcerated right now
it's because of some sort of non
compliance whether it's not
paying a finder's fee.
Told me they're very concerned
about the lost revenue I feel a
little better and maybe that
maybe this one question might
help me feel even more better if
Are able to implement a
potentially different provide
structure.
Can they direct the monies to
cover court expenses if they're
over here so again we're not
touching fines we're only
creating accommodations for
people facing debt that make
that come from those funds but
for fees yes Mr speaker and
operations.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I know it's been said
before I have friends who are
for this and friends who are
against it and I going to have
to vote with my friends thank
gentleman from San Juan
Representative drive.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from the NMAA yield
yes Mr speaker I'll yield to the
third time for it to a gentleman
our county manager
he said at first it looks like
there may be a trade off that's
going to be okay and and looking
at a little bit deeper he thinks
Mr speaker and gentleman
we can't be certain down to that
level because we don't have
clear data about where the
deprivations data yet and so.
That is is this an unfunded
mandate that were were given
them and then with that
Mr speaker and gentleman there
are not DOT implications in this
legislation and I would
certainly argue this is not an
unfunded mandate unfunded
eliminating statewide fees and
taking courts out of that
obligations to be debt
collectors.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
Mr speaker and gentleman you
expand on your question.
counties or the cities and
municipalities.
crime lab so again these are
currently fees that are leveled
but not collected so we'd hope
that they'd have the investment
from the appropriators in this
doing community service some of
them are going to jail so for us
it doesn't actually change much
of that budgetary question but
that that responsibility would
is an appropriation than.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you.
as amended do now pass we are
final passage of house bill one
thirty nine eight the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill thirty nine.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty two in the affirmative
eighteen in the negative.
House Bill the house of the
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House the one
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett.
Let the record reflect the
action is assumed that all
action necessary.
For placing House Bill five
fifty House Bill by our house
substitute for House Bill five
fifty final passage.
On final passage has been taken
and that is a subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
temporary provisions for the
distribution of money
appropriated by house bill two
from the general fund to DFA for
the new sorry the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative this is really
important and the City of
warrants that are felony
warrants regarding violent
crimes these are people that
should be detained and should
not be on the street so we just
Representative.
There is debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
set aside in house bill two for
Going after these warrants.
You Mr speaker and gentleman
up a warrant backlog reduction
committee
that is administratively
attached to the department of
DFA and.
would you like for me to go into
that in more detail.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think that that's reason asking
some questions here just so the
body has an idea of how those
dollars we spent we had this and
speaker and gentle lady.
This.
Specifically the speaker and
gentle lady the question of.
you gentlemen and yes we did
actually have a fantastic
discussion in house
appropriations and finance and
as you'll recall those
and gentleman I'll fill you in a
little bit on the committee that
will be making some of these
decisions and then we can walk
through other parts if you'd
is employed by a municipal
police department we want to
make sure that our local on
Forsman is representative for
and they will be appointed by
the municipal league I'll just
member who's employed by a
tribal law enforcement agency I
know that was very important to
a number of our members.
make sure that everyone is
included
Mr speaker and gentleman a
member from the administrative
office of the district
attorney's
Mr speaker gentleman one member
who is employed by the
administrative office of the
courts and finally Mr speaker
gentleman one member who is
deal that was struck some years
ago for the Albuquerque metro
court and there were concerns
that this was just a fund to
to pay overtime to take care of
the the backlog that we know
it's been very public that they
have but we want to make sure Mr
speaker and gentle lady well
obviously it does benefit us to
periodically the only one I
really have to.
Speaker and gently but that
going to the store and I'm
always a excited on my vehicle
still parked in the parking lot
of equity and making sure that
the concerns of all of the
groups that you just mentioned
are that said that it spread
somewhat around Mr speaker
gentle it is one of the
that we would be encouraging
felons to surrender themselves
without which would cut down on
get them and track them down and
those resources resources be
spent half of what Mr speaker
gentle lady specifically how
information on that right here.
Thank you Mr speaker and
metropolitan court warrants that
does talk about
safe surrender events and
specifically in October of
thousand warrants so that is
huge
so we do a certainly encourage
entities that are applying for
might be a good use of
taxpayer money to have a few
more cops at
at the malls and other
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative ring.
Mr speaker yes I will yield to
my colleague from Travis county
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
just two questions our first
question is.
based upon the number warrants
and just sending it to the
respective police agencies that
would actually be.
Going out and serving those
warrants.
not be reducing the backlog what
they will do is develop the
criteria for awarding the grants
and certainly taking into
consideration the number and
really am pleased with with
regard to this bill is how every
Question of the criminal legal
system is included in being
to also specified your
colleagues point about
disseminating the information
that this has to be disseminated
sort of use evidence based and
data driven information to make
future policy decisions.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
see the results so I will
support it but I just expressed
my my concern that this might be
Hi Mr speaker yes I will yield
to my colleague from Bernalillo
county.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have an amendment for your bill
We can read the two to five
number on the bottom.
Mr speaker is only two words.
give it a minute really gets
passed out.
You will be online shortly it is
online.
Sir but if the amendment.
Really you to explain the
amendment.
Mr speaker and members of the
read district and magistrate
courts Sen Portman that we
include magistrate court of in
this.
Is there objection to adopting
the amendment.
I see none you have an amended
bill.
Gentleman from Bernalillo back
to you.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you'll.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I will
yield to my colleague.
Can you explain to me
applicable statutory reporting.
Reporting requirements.
Mr speaker gentle lady can you.
Can you tell me what those are.
required reporting on in service
training
misconduct and
Crime rates.
in service training but most are
actually in compliance with
regard to their crime rates.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
In house bill two that recurring
or is that a one time
appropriation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen it is a one time non
recurring expense.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
So the only
limit on an amount is that only
up to seventy percent can go
toward law enforcement agencies
there's no maximum amount of
state for APD or Bernalillo
county sheriff's office there's
no maximum amount to the can go
to those agencies.
the reasons that the committee
is designed to the way it is to
really incorporate all of those
viewpoints when making the
determinations.
you Mr speaker does gentlelady
yields.
Mr speaker yes I will yield to
the gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay San Miguel and
around how the money would be
spread out across the state in
the various agencies it's along
the lines of which the last
questioning was.
Mr speaker gentleman give me
just one moment please.
you gentleman yes according to
our FIR
the AOC reported that there were
two.
Two hundred and six point nine
gentleman continuing on
preliminary data showed a total
of three thousand seven hundred
ninety six felony warrants tied
that in and of itself is enough
to get this guys will.
I support this bill and I thank
you for bringing it.
Absolutely Mr speaker I will
yield to the gentle lady from
Chavis Mr speaker thank you very
much Representative ask one of
the quiz Representative
Chatfield as one of the
Madam chair Mr speaker and
gentle lady on page six of your
bill under section L. line
seventeen says the committee
those warrants are still
outstanding or if there's been
another one added to maybe
another person.
that jurisdiction for the
applicant's jurisdiction the
severity of the crimes the age
of the outstanding warrants.
line eleven is is the number of
repeat offenders.
For him the outstanding warrants
were issued.
Mr speaker gentle lady and I'm
something to prevent these
crimes from happening over and
over and over again which adds
up to the repeat offenders.
with a deadly weapon robbery
kidnapping felony domestic
violence out of the burglary.
And the list goes on there.
And Mr speaker one of the things
that it does say.
What a grant T. may use the
grant for is to compensate
related to important backlog
reduction efforts.
Then backlog in trees Fund war
But that rose there rises
questioned what I'm fixing this
to ask you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
With that grant T. be able to
under point here
The grantee would be able to use
the money for.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
Let's say that there is a has
been a of and.
Arrest warrant issued for
somebody in that the police are
would be allowed to use any of
that money for in those efforts
right there too.
Apprehend.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady of that would not be
Find the repeat offenders
micelles like there might be
several of them especially
Bernalillo county that it might
One of the components.
Mr speaker gentle lady for this
program one of the over arching.
The stronger the case they can
develop and prepare for
into the more likely we are to
of this program as to Mr speaker
gentle lady.
The crime stoppers I guess I'm
confused if you're asking if it
For information relevant to the
arrest and conviction of and if
there is so many repeat
act it seems like this much
money might go a long ways into.
Finding this particular person
and really do in substance
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady.
I think that this might be
something that the committee
could consider if it's a when
something certainly that the
Committee could.
Way one way or the other.
conviction of this so I think it
taking it into consideration
might be an advantage Mr speaker
that's all I have gentle lady
thank you very much for your
responses you know for the
committee substitute for House
Bill five fifty as amended do
now pass where on final passage
of house appropriations and
finance committee for House Bill
Was.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill five fifty as amended has
duly passed this house.
Reminder please.
Turn your cell phones as
ready and item number.
Thirty four thank you Mr speaker
will you give me to that point.
The record reflect that election
server placing House Bill three
ensures that are expunged
records that haven't been
automatically applied for simple
charges can apply to all other
records thank you Mr speaker
without I stand for questions
The gentleman from San Juan.
been an easy debate today.
Except for number one.
So the speaker does the
gentlelady yields I do yield
question Mr speaker so this
insurers for that simple charges
that we've already expands which
is fourteen thousand records we
had to make sure that some of
language of of these older
charges that warrant is simply
put this ensures that the court
can go back through those
records in prioritize those
more complicated categories Mr
speaker gentleman.
Thank you Mr the gentle lady
apply for expungement is that
incorrect the speaker you Mr
speaker gentleman for anything
that's legal today it was always
automatic and it will continue
to be automatic.
expunging New Mexico records
correct if they have something
that is on their federal.
if if it's somewhere reported
record but yes this this
pertains to state records Mr
speaker gentleman thank you Mr.
The gentle lady to close I now
move that house bill three
negative.
House Bill three fourteen as far
as amended has duly passed this
house.
Mr speaker can you give me to
the point that the record
reflect that election is there
for placing House appropriation
of finance committee substitute
for House Bill five thirty three
of final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
to increase minimum chair of
till health insurance premium to
school districts charter schools
and other entities participating
in group health insurance plans
the gentleman from Travis
Etienne noted Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
I will yield to the gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman.
Yes this this bill proposes to
that'll pay eighty percent of
the insurance for.
School employees that that make
fifty thousand dollars or less
seven to sixty thousand dollars
or more Mr speaker and gentleman
if you would up I would like to
introduce my experts please.
aren't some of these employees
covered by bargaining units.
Mr speaker gentleman yes they
are.
So Mr speaker in the normal and
German Mr speaker gentleman the
rates already set in statute now
That budget.
Like this.
When they are covered by a
bargaining unit.
normal in the business world.
Mr speaker Dorman what this bill
does is it establishes the
baseline for that there is
flexibility in there for
collective bargaining with the
The Kerr of gentleman what is
the FIR on this bill.
Mr speaker German if you could
give me a moment please.
In about two million for higher
education.
So Mr speaker and gentleman this
is hardly an H. B. two.
it's about thirty two million
dollars here recurring.
Mr speaker German that is
correct.
Mr speaker German if you could
please elaborate on that please.
Are the benefit of the.
which employed of which
insurance plans fit best for
their for their needs.
Mr speaker German yes that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentleman isn't it
hasn't been normal and customary
as in terms prices have risen
But Mr speaker and gentleman
that's not what we're doing.
Occurred gentleman thank you.
Si no further debate the
gentleman close.
committee substitute for House
Bill five thirty three the vote
is now open.
What is one of forty four in the
affirmative sixteen in the
Mr speaker would you give me
that point that the record
reflect that election is a
search for placing House Bill
for eleven on final passage is
been taken it is now subject to
Short and sweet on this one all
the changes that are put in
front of you today first and
foremost have been recommended
by the sunset review committee.
funding resources for those.
Engaging in the profession and
improve the affordability for
entry at.
For New Mexico residents and
So if you thank you Mr speaker
thank you John from the
gentleman from the Mr speaker
gentleman from Lee it with
constituents and also in our
wants and sort of generation
opportunities to build we need
the quality engineers to do that
work I believe that house bill
four eleven helps us immensely
The amendment numbers two two
five eight four three point one
if we could pass that out.
It'll give us some gentleman.
and explain the amendment is
surpassing it out can you hold
on a sec it's present it's it's
pretty lengthy said like for the
members to be able to see it in
full before you explain and give
I'm kind of an old school kind
of guy so the reason why this
looks like it's a long change is
because I like to see my
best thing to do because it does
make a couple of changes for me
to explain that.
And then to give you guys
something time to think about it
It gives this is a industry
related discussion.
Something that's always happened
in the state The New Mexico but
Those engineers have been able
to work without a professional
Sil- within the properties of
that business.
And they've been able to work
with the.
What we chose to do this year
was actually put into the
language.
That those companies the senior
that are tied together within
the boundaries of their property
or within the limits of the
easements below it that's all
this amendment does it does it
in section six and it doesn't
half before we talk about it
again that's the intent of the
amendment and I put it in
context very specifically so you
sounds good will roll this for
the next couple days and the
call back up
later time.
Thank you explanation.
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business in
objection it is so ordered.
Members thanks for productive
night thank you for healthy
thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announce that Mr
hunter Armstrong at age eight is
your level I gymnastic New
Monday morning committee
meetings.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker here has
gentleman from every wasn't
about is on one thank you to
speak a tax revenue committee
will meet Monday morning eight
thirty in room three seventeen.
will have a performance so.
This price thank you members
taking note.
In announcements members before
Tension I number is two two five
eight five two point three again
House Bill five forty seven two
to five number two two five
And place it in the house
taxation and revenue committee
see no objection it is so
ordered.
House Bill five twenty five two
two five number two two five
Remove it from the house rules
in order of business committee
and referred to the house
agriculture as a guest and water
resources committee see no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I move that over the
business messages junction
disorders.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate as
passed Senate Education
Senate bill three ten as amended
in Senate bill four fifty as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted.
Rating on Senate chief clerk Mr
chair.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation in addition it is so
Senate bill two introduced by
senators of on this act relating
to judicial salaries providing
that justices of the state's
from court receive an annual
You are but I'm just reading
other as it is.
Been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house appropriations and
finance committee.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
occupations requiring data
collection and analysis to
determine the efficacy of the
suspension program making
appropriation some of health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
eleven as amended.
amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house government
connections and indifference
Committee.
allowing for registered nurses
contracted by hospice agencies
to make death pronouncement
Senate bill one sixty eight as
amended introduced by Senator
is ordered not printed in front
of the house Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill two oh two as
amended introduced by senator
Munoz and act making
senator Munoz Senate Bill tool
to as amended amended twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
the Human Services department to
establish a new child support
schedule by rural aligning
requirements of the Human
Services Department must follow
when establishing the new child
support schedule updating
requests disincentive to twenty
three to five committees.
No see no objections to twenty
three as amended amended twice
by title is ordered not printed
severance tax bonding providing
for the minimum distribution
from the severance tax bonding
fund to the severance tax
permanent fund every year for
ten years Senate bill three
seventy eight as amended
revenue committee revenue
committee thanks has provisions
of finance committee.
checks requiring confidentiality
Senate bill three eighty three
as amended introduced by Senator
Stewart and Representative
Sari√±ana.
insured introduced by senator
Sanchez and Pirtle and act
relating to outdoor recreation
creating youth programs to be
administered by the department
of game and fish providing the
senator Sanchez and pirtle
Senator three ninety two of
equipment was by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the House Energy Environment
and natural resources committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
We go to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
Thank you for a great day good
working committee today.
We will take tomorrow off.
lady from Bernalillo.
This is the crime of the host
stand in recess until eleven AM
Monday morning March the
