Good morning members let's rise
for today's implications.
To see of a.
Representative.
Read.
please buyer heads um dear lord
please bless all the legislators
a guess here that have shown up
to support and and advise us on
these most important matters
please remember that we are all
just trying to do what's best
for constituents of for the
state of New Mexico and please
watch over us over the staff
sixty days thank you a man.
Thank you gentlelady to pledge
allegiance Representative
Pettigrew what.
I pledge allegiance.
And for the New Mexico pledge
Representative Harry Garcia.
Able.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislations intervention is
so ordered.
Click to read.
House memorial fourteen
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil a memorial
declaring declaring January
thirtieth twenty twenty three
the U. N. M. daily and the house
of representatives in
recognition of the university of
New Mexicos contributions to
education research and public
service on behalf of the
residents of New Mexico House
memorial fourteen introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil.
House memorial fourteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business see no objection it is
so ordered good morning members.
Happy Monday.
Are there nonsense the gentleman
from a total.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the body I rise
today to recognize the work like
seen perseverance of a great man
concerns in this chamber Senator
since two thousand thirteen and
that members the honorable
gentleman from the fifty seven
thousand strict in Santa Fe
County and the past Republican
minority with indigenous family
treated me and all of our
members here with such respect
and the good guidance and
guidance kindness and and
camaraderie and he was truly a
team player and a servant leader
Mr speaker and Mister speaker
the tenants in Santa Fe County
in his exemplary legacy of
service fighting against bullies
and showing nothing but respect
for his fellow man has not gone
unnoticed by myself and so many
of my esteemed colleagues here
in this body.
We regarding with the utmost
admiration and appreciation for
all his work.
Although I have only served in
this body for a short time so
far Mr speaker I look forward to
years of service alongside my
friend from Santa Fe County.
Both share one major attribute
in common we both the fighters
for the causes we believe in Mr
speaker.
Whether we agree or disagree on
certain political issues we both
had our share of bullies and
overcoming evil to produce
something good.
For the great people of this
beautiful state which will love
and cherish Mr speaker.
Unfortunately sometimes those
bullies when battles but in the
long run good always prevails
and wins Mister speaker the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
has not only serve this body in
this entire institution with
distinction it has been a
blessing to the great state of
New Mexico for his honorable
service to the people who are
fortunate to have him
representing them.
Mr speaker I want to thank him
for his kindness toward me and
so many others and I want to
reaffirm my steadfast support
for him in this body of the
house of representatives.
Mr speaker I would like all of
us at the June from Santa Fe
counties calling second one
round of applause for all the
great contributions so far to
our state and all he will
continue to do in whatever
capacity.
In this value chamber so this is
the people thousand I'd like to
just give a one round of
applause thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen the June one
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial fourteen be removed for
the speakers table in the made
the next order of business see
no objection it is so ordered.
That all actions necessary for
placing House memorial fourteen
on final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentlelady to explain the
memorial thank you Mr speaker so
to date January thirtieth twenty
twenty third three is being
declared UNM day the house of
representatives in recognition
of the University of New Mexico
supports contributions to
education research and public
service on behalf of the
residents of New Mexico there
are some people here with us Mr
speaker that I'd like to
recognize at this time the first
being president of the
university Garnett S. Stokes
present so services the twenty
third president of the
university of New Mexico is the
first woman to hold the post in
the university's history doctor
Stokes is that the highly
successful one university
initiative at UNM the into
strategic alignment all of you
and Ms education research
community service and health
care functions spanning all
campuses including those in
Albuquerque Gallup Los Alamos
Towson Valencia County in twenty
nineteen doctor Stokes launched
UNM's grand challenges
initiative to develop
transformative solutions to the
problems of global national and
regional significance whose
impact serves to benefit the
education health and well being
of all New Mexicans doctor
Stokes holds a PhD in industrial
and organizational psychology we
are very happy to hear I've
heard here today.
The next person I like to
recognize Mr speaker is
Douglas's Adonis doctors Adonis
is executive vice president of
the UNM health sciences and CEO
of UNM Health doctors don't just
join the University of New
Mexico in December of twenty
twenty one thing has deep
experience in fields such as
public health mental health and
addiction psychiatry to serve
the people of the land of
enchantment doctors don't as
previously served top health
sciences I programs across the
country including at the
university of California San
Diego UCLA university of
Massachusetts Yale and Rutgers
University as UNM's top health
leader doctors Adonis retains
oversight over UNM School of
medicine college of pharmacy
college population health
college of nursing and UNM
comprehensive cancer center
health sciences research
programs and UNM hospital
doctors Adonis is also leading
UNM Health strategy focused on
caring for medically underserved
populations in New Mexico
including diverse communities of
rural tribal immigrant on house
Armed Services veteran
constituents doctors Adonis is a
doctor of medicine also holds a
master's degree in public health
and we are so happy to have him
here today.
I'm at this time Mr speaker they
to yield to my colleague
Senator Baca who is going to
introduce one other person on
the rostrum.
The gentleman from but as a
result Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker it is a
great day in the land of
enchantment I have the honor and
the privilege of introducing any
new agency vice president
director athletics mission is a
is there a good reason Mexico's
thirteenth Affleck director
dating back to nineteen eleven.
The successes as an athletic
director leading the university
to a national championship
across country in two thousand
seventeen.
thirty four NC twenty men of the
princes and fifteen mountain
west titles over the past five
years.
One point of time Mr newness of
time as a senior leader at UNM
one of students have
outperformed other mountain west
schools in academic achievement.
Including a thousand thirty one
mountain west all academic
selections and seven hundred
twenty eight mountain west
scholar athletes in twenty
twenty to one Mr Nunes became
just the third person in history
the money was to be honored for
the commissioner's award so
Mister speaker I think you and I
welcome you Mr news I yield back
to the lady the gentle lady from
Bernalillo digit.
Thank you Mr speaker finally I
would like to yield to you Mr
speaker I believe there's a
couple of introductions you
intend to make yourself thank
you Julie.
We've got a number of guests
here in the chamber as well
joining us from the university
of New Mexico I want to start
with Amy Corcoran University
architect welcome Amy.
The university planner Rosie
Dudley.
The somehow very assistant vice
president of campus
environments.
Welcome to the house and I
believe we are top twenty five.
You know basketball.
The first time in a long time.
Is there for the debate on the
memorial.
On the memorial.
For the debate in the memorial.
For.
The generated from earlier
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker.
And will the gentlelady yields
there you are thank you and the
gentleman yield thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo thank you
very much I want to just stand
in support of this memorial and
acknowledge.
President Stokes and all of the
important guests on the rostrum
and as a member of the United
academic faculty you and the
grad worker union and a current
student at the university and
having been a graduate of the
school of architecture of
community regional planning as
well as the graduate of the
public administration school I
want to say thank you to the
university for having given me
the course and program of
studies that I've been pursuing
far too long now I hope to go to
a feed soon presidents don't so
you can confirm that doctoral
degree on me at sometime soon so
I just wanted to stand in
support and say thank you and
also to asked the university to
remain open.
To remain attentive.
And to remain committed.
To the students.
At all levels are graduate
students are important are
teaching a student assistance
are critically important without
this workforce there would be no
institution as well as without
students.
There would be no institution I
feel compelled.
To make that statement because
it has been a long road for the
graduate students it's been a
long road for the faculty in
order to be able to impress that
institutionalizing change for
the betterment of our
institution overall and for
students is of utmost importance
to all of us here in the
legislature because it is our
premium institution and we'd
like to have a model for the
rest of the nation so thank you
Mr speaker and thank you very
much on the gentle lady and
gentlemen for introducing this
memorial and thank you for
listening to me today thank you.
Thank you ladies.
Any other debate on the
amendment.
On the memorial thank you.
On the memorial three million
or.
Jennifer was on the letter so
Harper thank you Mr speaker does
the lady from Bernalillo you'll.
Mr speaker I yield to my good
friend from Santa Fe County
thank you Mr I just want to say
how much I am.
I just love the University of
New Mexico I I which New Mexico
tech for my undergrad but I feel
I did my PhD work at the
university New Mexico in
chemical engineering and what a
great school of it is and and
while working at Sandia labs and
doing my PhD who work at the
same time I just think the
university for being so flexible
and accommodating and really
helping and we did some cutting
edge research and got some great
publications and really top tier
premier journals of the work
that is done there is is amazing
there's a lot a lot of great
work that is being done there I
never made it to a the you know
New Mexico state's high
apologize from Maggie friends
but that we do have really just
some jewels when it comes to
education in the state of New
Mexico I want to thank you and
all the faculty everyone for the
great work that that is done at
UNM thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen.
On the memorial the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
but.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to acknowledge all of these
wonderful
Lobo's for for if and
Absolutely president garden at
Stokes and I also want to
introduce my guests today who is
with the school of public
administration I happen to be
the president of the school of
public administration at UNM and
up I want to introduce today
lady just to just just to make
sure I'll make it short it's
it's it's a that is the the
person is in the chamber and yes
she's sitting right here please
proceed yes this is doctor
poderia de lancer Jones Senator
right and she is the executive
director of the school of public
administration and the school of
public administration is the
premier school in New Mexico for
preparing graduate and
undergraduate students with the
knowledge and skills for ethical
and effective leadership in
public and tribal governments
and health care and nonprofit
sectors so I'm very delighted to
have her with me today and it
seems highly appropriate that
she joining these the list of
people that are sitting with you
today Mister chair and thank you
so much for this opportunity
thank welcome to the house.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker I too am a graduate
of UNM in the physical therapy
program back when it was still
under the department of medicine
so I told him up stairs I
graduated from the department of
medicine but I'm not a doctor so
and and one thing we really need
to bring attention to is project
echo that has become an
international jewel that New
Mexico and you and can claim Dr
Rohr is amazing there they've
gotten into education now we're
working with them on so many
things and everyone's a Lobo
willful false.
Additionally the gentleman the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative the locals thank
you Mr speaker is a proud around
in Prague letterman welcome you
and M. Gallegos.
Education was transformative in
my life and I know it is for
every student to graduate from
higher ed.
While I love UNM I support all
of higher ed institutions
because I know how important
they are to our communities and
to all of the wonderful students
in this state thank you Mr
chairman welcome again thank you
gentlemen is are for the debate
on the memorial.
We'll take pictures Prague of
and informed because you know a
probable human and class of two
thousand four followed by the
universal two thousand ten.
great place in to echo the
sentiments of the gentleman from
Bernalillo in fact education has
been transformational for my
family as well for generations
to come I was the first to to
attend the university and
graduate from and very proud to
be a level although in the
basketball game it sounds like
we're not going to be caring the
lobola Jersey it's and the for
the house levels for the Senate.
We'll a we'll take what we can
but I do want to welcome all of
you to your house of
representatives and I want to
thank you gently from bring for
bringing this memorial forward.
I see no debate the gentle lady
to close on house memorial
fourteen.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that we are now move that house
memorial fourteen do now pass
and Julie would you like to ask
unanimous consent that house of
the record show that the role
has been called in all members
present voted in the
affirmative.
Speaker yes I would thank you
very well as remission show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
no objection it is so ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial fourteen the vote is
now open.
What is a close level of seven
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house memorial fourteen
has duly passed this house.
Thanks again for joining us
folks.
Further announcements the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker I just one
quick announce announcement
tomorrow is aerospace stay here
at the roundhouse all members
are invited to a reception
tonight from five to seven PM at
the end of the at Loretto and a
legislative breakfast tomorrow
morning at eight AM in room
three twenty one.
And throughout the day tomorrow
there will be events and
exhibits in the rotunda thank
you Mr speaker thank you
generated members signaled the
gentleman from.
Looking at that Representative
Vincent.
Thank you Mr speaker it's my
honor today I have the I have a
shadow with me Logan gray and
he's with team back and can use
wanting to inspire to be a
politician and he loves this
process and I would also like to
recognize his mother in the in
the audience there in the
gallery Jennifer grey and.
And also I've got some other
guests from Otero county
gentlemen if if I believe I've
got you list right here and I'd
like to recognize them in the
gallery.
And I think I can read and
writing so let's see how this
works out welcome Laurie black.
Vicki Barker to brandy Murphy.
Amy to listen.
All from Otero county and I
believe from the Otero county
commission welcome to the house.
Thank you Mr speaker and you
know as a freshman I'm getting
my legs under me now but
You always get a little homesick
I never knew I was going to get
home sick and and I've been here
now for three weeks and we still
got quite a bit of time to go
but every time our constituents
come down they make it feel a
little bit better hands I
appreciate everybody on the
floor for making me feel welcome
as well and I've made lots of
friends so far so thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen and
welcome Logan and there's about
a hundred and twelve politicians
in this building so you have
plenty of people to talk about
about your future plans.
The committee from going on a
representative that you goes
thank you Mr speaker at today I
have some guests that I'd like
to introduce most cities and
counties have a day but Los
crucis of we are committed these
people have been here since
early or mid part of last week
and said and they're still here
so I'm very proud to introduce
in today I've got Diana
creating.
The last cases days Santa Fe
chair thank you for being here.
Michael law.
Chair elect greater Los crucis
chambers.
Chad gets.
Director greater Las Cruces
chamber board.
Yes it updated city Los crucis
counselor.
Taylor Isaacs.
Director of development
development and investor
services greater Las Cruces
chamber.
Taylor Isaacs.
Director investor they just they
have
to be more creative less crucis
chamber president.
And Beth Hoffman regional
director for big brothers big
sisters of mountain region.
Thank you all for being here and
I hope you enjoyed Santa Fe
thank you Gillian welcome to the
house to a re guests.
Transposition Lynn from.
Federally you'll Cibola McKinley
support roles on one end but in
Santa Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
those chamber I'd like to say
thank you to all the charges are
due of arms I mean these people.
Staff you know the the work
everyday that would card every
day and you know there's not a
lot of recognition put to these
people and for me to them thank
you for all you do for us and
now if you would be willing to
the ball from who'd be shaded
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen thank you all for your
service.
Representative Garcia and I
believe you also have some
special guests in the gallery
students from those learners
high school welcome to the house
fees rise we recognized.
Representative Kevin Lara Cadena
also have some guests in the
gallery students from health.
Occupations of America Carol you
one to not even the Paley forbid
local in Haiti Aldrich welcome
to the house.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker.
On your yes this morning you
have a handout in its title one
voted to sing.
The stories with caring.
And we are inviting all
legislative workers this
legislative week to visit the
institute of American Indian
arts museum of contemporary
native arts at one hundred
eighty cathedral place just
present your budget at the
mission desk and it's open all
week except Tuesdays so just of.
The week of indigenous things
will come Friday just remember
that on Friday thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
The gentleman from.
The representative of Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker we.
A number of folks on the rostrum
this morning I would like to
introduce a couple of those plus
my shadow and then you'll need
to Representative Pettigrew for
some more introductions first on
the list would be as soon as the
executive director of our career
technical education facility in
Hawke's.
Nine hundred enrollees and so
for.
Great store tribal lands will be
a very successful program.
Next on the rostrum would be
changed but it is the Hobbs
public schools superintendent.
To be sure it is one of the
Citrix students earlier hi this
is a junior all time and she is.
Mechatronics.
Senator facility which is
understandable is romantics
hydraulics and electronics
reporting.
Robotic applications
interested in a future career in
mechanical engineering and with
that I'd like to turn further
introductions over to
Representative Pettigrew thank
you gentlemen the other
gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker and good
morning.
As as we're all aware our career
and technical education center
and Hobbs's just the the
beautiful facility and
inside that centre we teach
energy manufacturing
transportation culinary and
hospitality information
technology and construction
architecture.
With respect to that.
Mr chair I'd like to introduce
to other people that are highly
they are engaged in this market
to see tax center the first of
the two would be Juan Carlos
Medina.
Instrument.
Is one of our mechatronics
instructors it also happens to
be the schools state schools USA
chapter development coordinator.
I am sitting to his right is
this Kristin Hughes.
That means our community liaison
and does an excellent job with
getting the information out to
our community and making and.
Ensuring that our community is
stays completely involved in our
center facility.
With that Mr speaker I'd like to
introduce the shadow that I I
was blessed with today mystery
from Hernandez.
This for Hernandez is a senior
this year will be graduating his
focus at that same taxes on the
architecture side when you start
going to school he likes bill
and stuff for the fans he is
active in state skills USA is
born and raised Lea County in
and Hobbs American just blessed
to have him with us today.
I will confess that he's looking
for a degree in architecture and
wanting to go to your amendment
and as an Aggie I'm trying to
converting.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Welcome to the house to both of
your shadows.
For the for the news agency the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon thank you
Mr speaker I would like to
introduce this morning might in
turn from for the entire week it
Nick this are just from UNM.
I'm sorry no other I don't know
I said it
you know a no was a sophomore at
UNM studying political science
thank you.
One to house.
Gentleman from current about the
with a little bit Roosevelt and
send me again Representative
Zamora.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise
today to welcome the people that
are here from Roosevelt and
curry county.
today is are gathering for for
the Clovis and and for the
Roosevelt Kerry county people
they're here to to support us.
there I don't know.
The minutes there in the gallery
I can recommend for you if if
you will thank you Mr speaker if
you folks please stand up so we
can recognize you and welcome to
the New Mexico state house
representative thank you for
making the long trip here.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and any other
announcements the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Romero
thank you Mr speaker I wanted to
introduce my intern for the week
this is has to send one of those
Sanchez he graduated from Rio
Rancho high school kids
currently the issue and and
steering committee and rules
vice chair he's a junior
studying political science and a
volunteer at the center of the
while you that he did it to us
if we could all welcome this is
to the house of representatives
of an intern for the week.
Welcome to this facility from
Bernalillo Representative
Matthews thank you Mr speaker I
would like to introduce my
intern for the week he's a
graduate of love Cueva and he is
a freshman sophomore sorry at
UNM study political science with
the hope of going into public
service and perhaps becoming the
next governor of the state in a
few years not the next many
later later later and his name
is dating Chavis and I'm very
pleased to have been here
welcome to the house.
Any other instance.
Members we have some guests in
the gallery guest of
Representative Gail Armstrong
said.
If you're in the gallery please
residue recognize we've got the
attention a BPA chapter we've
got the advisor Jennifer
humbolt.
We have the vice president
president release.
We have the secretary Jordan.
The
state historian Molly.
The cater.
And the treasurer and economy
welcome to the house of
representatives.
These are guests of Jamie then
since thank you generally the.
Any other announcements folks on
the social calendar we've got
you NM day all day here at the
capitol I thought every day was
UNM day.
Today's official you day we also
have as we heard earlier the
greater Las Cruces chamber of
commerce uh breakfast that's
passed now we do have a dinner
tonight from as as told to us by
the delay from Santa Fe the
aerospace Association reception
at five o'clock there is a UNM
alumni association legislative
reception that level on that six
o'clock in the Clovis economic
development.
Legislative appreciative
appreciation dinner at hotel
Santa Fe at six forty five also
by way of a reminder members
your financial disclosure forms
are due tomorrow January thirty
first you have to do with them
see fists that is the.
Reporting website that you all
did your campaign reporting
through it must be in by
tomorrow the thirty first please
reach out to your respective
leadership offices if you need
any support getting that in.
Any other features
announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Mr speaker I also have an intern
from the UNM political science
department with me will be here
this week he is Edwards Valiante
he has been in the Air Force for
ten years he grew up in the west
part of the United states
California Oregon Nevada.
While in the Air Force advert
earned his associates degree in
criminal justice and served as a
law enforcement officer in the
Air Force and he has been
deployed to Turkey and Africa he
and his wife who served in the
Air Force for fourteen years
have a six month old son.
And they his wife is from New
Hampshire so they never would
have met except for the Air
Force and
Edwards Valiante has a double
major in political science and
philosophy with a concentration
in law is going to be with me
all week so I'm going to put in
to work and we hope we welcome
him.
Welcome to the house and thank
you for your service.
Folks I am reminded years
steamed madam clerk that
tomorrow Wednesday and Thursday
is picture day Representative
Lara.
Don't forget today
Representative block picture day
tomorrow Wednesday and Thursday
and you can only take a photo
once so you can take it on
Tuesday and then come back
Thursday for a second bite at
the apple picture day tomorrow
Wednesday and Thursday in the
house lounge the gentleman from
the Indiana thank you Mr speaker
just wanna answer house
appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting at one
thirty today in room three oh
seven thank you gentlemen member
signal the gentle lady from Los
Alamos Rio Arriba Sandoval in
some favors of Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker
unfortunately I do not represent
a real read anymore I know I
guess my little name placard
thing needs to be corrected but
I miss them and I look forward
to supporting efforts that will
advance their causes Mr speaker
your house Judiciary Committee
will be meeting at one thirty
today we have a pretty full
agenda so let's all everybody
try to be on time it's room
three OO nine thank you Mr
speaker naked gentlelady the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you Mr speaker house
transportation and public works
capital improvements committee
will be meeting tomorrow morning
agenda says nine we actually
moved up to eight thirty we have
some organizational stuff that
we have to get through so we can
start hearing bills about planes
trains and automobiles so thank
you all and see you in room
three oh five eight thirty
tomorrow Jim Lee are those
automobiles electric.
Mr speaker some if not all and
maybe eventually all we'll see
what happens very well thank you
gentlelady the generated from
every bus and also defend
thousand percent of it at a.
Thank you Mr speaker here
agriculture seconds and water
resources committee will be
meeting tomorrow at nine o'clock
thank you thank you gentlelady
the gentleman from Santa Fe
Santa Fe Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
we will not hear house bill
ninety one natural resources
trustee changes Indians please
we hope the hill here house bill
one ninety seven the ever
controversial increase free
fishing days bill.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Controversy is always good
gentleman the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker I
am so excited to make this
announcement the help committee
will be moving our location from
the tiniest room in the building
to room three oh seven on a
trial basis starting on
Wednesday so if you have built
in front of the committee but if
you have built in front of us
were not in our normal place so
this is a big deal thank you.
Thank you Julie members signaled
the generated from tiles are
presented with this thank you Mr
speaker that is a very small
rooms I'm glad you're moving
your house a rural development
and land grants and cultural
affairs committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at nine
AM and we will be hearing HB
forty five in H. B. one sixty
will not be hearing HB thirty
three.
Thank you delayed the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
representatives at Landel thank
you Mr speaker your house
commerce and economic
development committee will meet
this afternoon at one thirty and
will and room three seventeen
and we'll be hearing HB sixty
nine H. B. eight HB seventy
seven twenty eighteen one twenty
six and one twenty seven we will
be skipping one fifteen at this
moment thank you thank you
deleted members take note.
The gentle lady from the not
Dona Ana Representative Rubio.
You Mr speaker the house
consumer and public affairs
committee will be meeting
tomorrow at one thirty and we
have several pieces of
legislation so
Don't be late.
Thank you lady the delay from
Santa Fe were several metal
thank you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting at one thirty in room
three oh nine the first bill on
the list HB ninety seven will be
rolled the rest will be heard
thank you Mr thank you Julie
member signal.
And the other for now Smith and
so ride.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey for a
motion.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
report seeing no objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred house bill seventy
three has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that a do pass an
answer for to the consumer
public affairs committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are adoption of federal
committee reporter for house
bill seventy three all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Opposed say nay the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to whom is
been referred house bill ninety
three has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that a do pass
and this referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair of adoption we
are an adoption of a favorable
committee report for house bill
ninety three of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose may the eyes have a
committee report opted Mr
speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill one of four
has had it under consideration
point seems recommendation that
I do pass and that's referred to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair move
adoption we are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house bill one oh for all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose name.
The I. sub committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee tune is been
referred house bill one thirty
six has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
this referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair.
Revert to pass.
I Dodson I'm sorry.
This call will there
we are on induction of a federal
committee report for house bill
one thirty six all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those opposed me.
The report opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
tomb is been referred house bill
one thirty has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it to pass
in this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
the speaker move adoption of the
committee report.
We are adoption of federal could
report for house bill one thirty
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Those opposed the I saw the
committee report opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
tumors been referred house bill
one forty has had it under
consideration point seems
recommendation that it to pass
and this referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we are adoption of a federal
committee report for house bill
one forty all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Post may the eyes have a
committee report adopted Mr
speaker Education Committee too
is been referred house bill one
forty seven has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and this refer to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair speaker
move adoption of the committee
report we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house bill one forty seven all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose day the eyes have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to is been referred house bill
twenty five has had it under
consideration point same as
recommendation that it did not
pass that house labor veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for house bill twenty
five to pass an answer for to
the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted as
Silicon chair this report we are
an adoption of a nonfederal
could report on house bill
twenty five but a favorable
committee report on house labor
veterans military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill twenty five all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Those names the eyes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker labor veterans
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill one
zero I have had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it to pass
immense referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Eliseo Lee Alcon chair
thank you for we are optional
Federal Committee port for House
Bill one oh five all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
All the supposed name the I.
seven committee report opted.
Mr speaker labor veterans
military affairs committee to is
been referred house bill one
zero six has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation that it to
pass and insert for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted of Silicon chair
Mister speaker for Stewart and
optional Federal Committee port
for House Bill one oh six all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Post name the eyes of a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill fifty four has had it
under consideration point same
as recommendation that do pass
as amended and it's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted dean
Wonda Johnson chairwoman Mr
speaker not so see this now.
The option.
The lady were on adoption of
federal committee report on
house bill fifty four of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee to
miss been referred house bill
one zero three has had it under
consideration person was
recommendation that it do pass
immense referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson
chairman Mr speaker move
adoption we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
house bill one zero three all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose today the I. seven
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
twenty one has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
adoption of a favorable
committee report for house bill
twenty one all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Post may be I just have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
one thirty nine has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation added to pass
this refer to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr speaker move adoption
we're adoption of a federal
committee report on house bill
one thirty nine all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Oppose me.
The I just have a committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
from is been referred house bill
one seventy five has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that it to
pass in this referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
an adoption of a fable Committee
report for house bill one
seventy five all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose may the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill forty four
has had it under consideration
reports state with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair.
Mr speaker I move that option.
Optional from committee put on
house bill forty four of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose name the I just have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill sixty two
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it to pass and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair Mr
speaker move adoption we aren't
adoption of a federal committee
report for house bill sixty two
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose maybe the I. seven
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill ninety has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it to pass and it's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
adoption referral committee
report for house bill ninety all
those in favor signify by state
line.
Propose name the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
economic development committee
to is been referred house bill
one fourteen has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are
adoption of the federal
community port for House Bill
one one for all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
A post made the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to has been before referred
house bill one seventy four has
had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
do pass and this referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair move
adoption where an adoption
referral committee report for
house bill one seventy four of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Apple's name the S. have a
committee report opted Mr
speaker Energy Environment and
natural resources committee to
is been referred house bill one
eighty four has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that do pass and
it's referred to the government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair.
Move adoption or in adoption of
a federal committee for for
house bill one eighty four of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose may be as seven
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill seventy nine
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation that
I do pass sentence refers to
commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair.
Reduction we're on adoption of
federal committee report for
house bill seventy nine all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Those bills may be just have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee was been
referred house bill ninety four
has had it under consideration
point single recommendation that
it to pass and it's referred to
the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair of adoption we
are not optional Federal
containerboard for House Bill
ninety for all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Posibles name the eyes of a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill one twenty
three has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair reduction
reduction of federal counterpart
for House Bill one twenty three
of those in favor signify by
saying aye.
The school's name the eyes have
a committee point opted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
referred house bill one twenty
four has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption we are on
adoption of fable Committee
programs bill one twenty four of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
All those goals may.
Yes have a committee report
opted.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
We go to that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered other announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker that order of
business introduction of
legislation in objection it is
so ordered click to read.
House bill one ninety one
introduced by Representative
Dixon Senator Hemphill and
Representative guy a ghosts for
the legislative finance
committee and act relating to
public finance increasing the
amount that is annually
transferred to the early
childhood education and care
program fund house bill one
ninety one introduced by
Representative Dixon Senator
Hemphill Representative guy you
goes house bill one ninety one
of amended twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee thence the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to twenty seven
introduced by Representative
Herndon and act relating to law
enforcement adding to the law
enforcement retention fund an
annual retention disbursement
for every year of service after
twenty years allowing law
enforcement officers serving one
year of credit for health care
premiums for every year of
service after retirement
eligibility allowing on for law
enforcement officers to return
to work for affiliated public
employers under certain
conditions allowing law
enforcement officers to earn up
to one hundred percent of the
retirement benefit pursuant to
the public employees retirement
act house bill two twenty seven
introduced by Representative
Herndon.
House Bill to twenty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee.
Thence the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House Bill to twenty eight
introduced by Representative
Serrato small and we're tents
and act relating to local
government connecting the
improvements special assessment
act authorizing counties to
impose administer and disperse
the special assessments to
encourage the development of
certain property improvements
House Bill to twenty eight
introduced by Representative
Serrato small and or tests.
House Bill to twenty eight have
been resistant read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house commerce
economic development committee
since the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill two twenty nine
introduced by Representative
Lujan and act relating to
insurance excluding certain
adjusters from bonding
provisions House Bill to twenty
nine introduced by
Representative Lujan House Bill
to twenty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house commerce and economic
development committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill two thirty one
introduced by Representative
read an act relating to children
requiring the children youth and
families department to obtain
identification cards for
children under the supervision
house bill two thirty one
introduced by Representative
read the house bill two thirty
one having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee events
the house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill two thirty two
introduced by Representative
serin Jana and Senator Ivey Soto
and act relating to public
records amending the inspection
of public records act to accept
from disclosure information that
could be used to come compromise
critical infrastructure for
information technology systems
providing definitions declaring
an emergency hospital to thirty
two introduced by Representative
serin Jana and Senator Ivey Soto
house bill two thirty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer and public
affairs committee then it's the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill two thirty three
introduced by Representative
Matthews and act relating to
executive organization for your
organizing the regulation and
licensing department providing
for compliance inspectors for
the alcoholic beverage control
division and cannabis control
division including the boards
and commissions division and the
information technology division
in the list of divisions of the
department house bill two thirty
three introduced by
Representative Matthews house
bill two thirty three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
thence the house Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill two thirty four
introduced by Representative
Matthews and act relating to
crime amending the elements of
robbery creating the crime of
organized retail crime adding
organized retail crime to the
definition of racketeering
imposing penalties house bill
two thirty four introduced by
Representative Matthews.
House bill two thirty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house commerce and
economic development committee
vents the house Judiciary
Committee.
House bill two thirty five
introduced by Representative
Chasey and how to meal an act
relating to children expanding
the rights of the child to
appear the child abuse and
neglect hearings lowering the
age for mandatory appointment of
an attorney house bill two
thirty five introduced by
representatives Chasey and how
to meal house with two thirty
five having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee then so
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill two thirty six
introduced by Representative job
Chavez and act relating to
health care requiring the
department of health to
promulgate and enforce minimum
nursing staff to patient ratios
in license hospitals creating
the staffing advisory committee
requiring license hospitals to
develop and implement policies
and procedures providing
administrative penalties
declaring an emergency hospital
to thirty six introduced by
Representative Chavez house bill
two thirty six seven been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee events the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to thirty seven
introduced by Representative
Scott Townsend and divert an act
relating to taxation repealing
the film production tax credit
act providing for the exhaustion
of eligible credits after the
repeal date hospital to thirty
seven introduced by
representatives Scott Townsend
and Nyberg house bill two thirty
seven have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee thence the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House bill two thirty eight
introduced by Representative
Garrett Senator Hickey and
Representative go to a and act
relating to crime making it
unlawful to discharge a firearm
in a densely populated area
providing an exception providing
a penalty hospital to thirty
eight introduced by
Representative Garrett Senator
Hickey and Representative
corolla F. House Bill to thirty
eight have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house consumer
public affairs committee then
the house Judiciary Committee.
House bill two thirty nine
introduced by Representative
Alcon and act relating to
animals prohibiting an animal
shelter from euthanizing for
causing for soliciting youth in
Asia of animals in shelters or
temporarily houses creating a
website to search for missing
pets creating an initiative to
help counties secure funding for
low or no cost spay and neuter
programs making appropriation
house bill two thirty nine
introduced by Representative
Alcon.
I was with the third and two
thirty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections in
India first Canadian bins out
appropriations and finance
committee.
House memorial thirteen
introduced by representatives of
corn and Lujan a memorial
requesting the department
transportation to convene a task
force to study the ownership and
maintenance responsibilities of
the Indian service route one
twenty facilitate dialogue with
key stakeholders and recommend a
plan to address travel concerns
on the road House memorial
thirteen introduced by
Representative Ezzell con and
Lujan House memorial thirteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee.
House memorial fifteen
introduced by Representative
Jones and cut us a memorial
declaring January thirty first
twenty twenty three Deming Luna
county silver spike stay in the
house of representatives House
memorial fifteen introduced by
Representative Jones and tell us
as more of fifteen have been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed in place on the
speakers table.
House memorial sixteen.
Introduced by Representative
Lujan a memorial declaring
January thirty first twenty
twenty three New Mexico
aerospace stay in the house of
representatives House memorial
sixteen introduced by
Representative Lujan.
House memorial sixteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed ice is or not
printed.
Do not printed please.
Complacent speakers table.
The.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
That order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business see no objections so
ordered.
Any final announcements members.
Right I've got a few
announcements to make your.
In.
Discussion with.
Leadership as well as my major
minority leadership as well as
committee chairs.
We are going to add a.
The committee to for bills and
I've shared these with leader
plan already as well as with our
major.
House bill thirty nine we're
going to add a referral to the
house appropriations and finance
committee so there for house
bill thirty nine is referred to
house Education Committee then
house commerce and economic
development committee then House
Appropriations Committee.
House bill one of.
We're gonna add a referral to
house appropriations and finance
committee so house bill one of
two is referred to the house
Education Committee then it's
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
Vance house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one twenty seven
we're gonna add a referral to
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Therefore house bill one twenty
seven is referred to the house
commerce and economic
development committee then it's
the house Education Committee
vents the house appropriations
and finance committee.
Lastly house bill one thirty.
We're gonna add a referral to
house appropriations and finance
committee therefore house bill
in the house bill one thirty is
referred to the house Education
Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee events the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Any final announcements.
Mr speaker I move the house to
the response recess until eleven
tomorrow morning thank you
generated for to that motion
thank you members for a
productive day.
Have a great rest of your day
enjoying afternoon committees
and any and all of the
receptions that are going to
take place this evening I see no
objections the house and Senate
recess until eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning.
