Four.
I.
People that
Good afternoon.
Thank you for reading this
morning I am the LC I am the co
chair of the subcommittee.
As we all know this is a.
They were very action
the proposals for budget and
what would have happened is that
the vice chair will leave a
motion to about which option is
a favorable at the time.
Just because.
This means that.
Before the full committee.
That.
So that will be introduced to
analysts of the school.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again my name is
Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst with the legislative
finance committee will be
starting with order and forty
this afternoon that's agency
four one seven so under tab for
of your binders we're also
joined this afternoon by the
Vigil from the department of
finance and administration to
make some comments on the
executive recommendation and our
border Authority director of Mr
Gramm.
So I will go ahead and go over
the recommendation of the LFC
and the Executive
recommendations are identical
there's no difference so it
should be pretty easy one of
both recommendations reduce the
use of fund balance by sixteen
point six thousand and supplant
that revenue with general fund
revenue and analysts reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets I can go
ahead and pass the hill for any
further comments on the
executive.
Mr chair members of the council
the end of the hill I do not
have any comments to add to
this.
Mr chairman I had an eight
director had to make some
remarks if that's alright.
The Mr chair members of the
committee.
Thank you for sorry about that
my my little lump in my throat.
Well about as.
The.
You know we're coming from
southern New Mexico's along
warmer down there.
Thank you for the opportunity to
assist in this important
committee
You know we're we're very happy
to be here again it's it's a lot
colder than southern New Mexico
so we're we're still trying to
get used to hear that the
climate.
built as Amanda mentioned we are
requesting a flat budget.
We were we're trying to make it
easy for you.
So is as they mention both the
LESC and the governor's
recommendation is flat.
we are also requesting fifty
thousand for a legislatively
mandated mandated.
New Mexico too well one New
Mexico so not a commissions
this is the twenty year
anniversary of those commission
so we're very excited to get
that the get that moving.
David my forgiving if anything
else North.
just as far as a brief update I
wanted to mention that we're
making propped the.
We're making progress in all our
projects all of our projects are
moving forward very nicely.
Thanks for your support and we
have invested over.
Or we're looking to invest over
one hundred million dollars in
the border region.
I mean you can say that you know
pretty easily but that's a
substantial amount for the
border region.
We're leading all of the major
projects on the border one of
the projects that I've often
talked about here.
Is the border highway connector
this is a game changer project
for Senator that is a booming
summed up that as a region.
we're finishing the phase a of
that of that project right now.
and all state even though we're
barely starting with the
feasibility of this project we
already have eighty million
dollars lined up up to eighty
million dollars line of for this
product so you know it's barely
starting but it it's good it's
going to be a substantial
investment.
We're leading the expansion and
modernization of the some of the
support of entry.
our agency just is working with
US TSA.
We're starting the feasibility
of that project this is long
overdue this that this project
is long overdue.
were also leading a another
major project down there the
water towers and that that is a.
We were just allocated another
two million dollars for that
project so we're very excited to
get the project done.
Again these are all critical
projects all game changer
projects that are going to have
a huge impact as far as
recruiting businesses and
creating jobs out there.
The Luna County how we're also
investing in another major
project down there we we're
we're really honestly we're only
working on major projects in in
the border region.
Thanks for your support we have
about twenty million dollars for
this project and working with
Luna County manager Chris price.
we secured purchase agreements
on on may and purchase
agreements with the major
landowner.
Honestly this this was the main
hold up for us I mean we've been
we've been working with this
landowner to try to get these
agreements done so we can go out
there and build we have as a
payments now that was the major
hurdle so we're we're going to
be investing about twenty
million dollars in Luna County.
But it's not even just the
investment honestly this berm of
flood protection project will
protect the region from
recurring flooding and allow for
that expected economic
development to grow in that
region.
You know Luna County manager
Chris price he always tells us
you know Luna County has the
potential to be the next and
that that is a we agree.
And this project is going to
allow them to make that happen.
Well as far as some key general
updates to some of those support
of entry set a new record on
commercial traffic just to give
you you know put in perspective
so three years ago when I
started working at the border
Authority we were averaging
three hundred fifty trucks a day
to that point.
Now it's six hundred and fifty
so almost double the amount of
traffic going to there we're
also hitting a new record in
exports to Mexico out in New
Mexico are expected to hit about
three billion dollars so we're
continuing to see that growth
would continue see the momentum
and the border Authority is
leading a lot of those
investments are going to need to
even further investment further
growth on the border.
The agency itself we're also
increasing our of our revenue.
in the last three and a half
years since I've been there
we've increased revenue by
seventy four percent I mean
that's a substantial increase
we're also have to projects that
are funded that are going to
allow us to have even further
growth in revenue and why is an
important.
That's important because when we
have revenue we can invest that
revenue along the border so when
the agency doesn't we weren't
making a lot of money four years
ago you could reinvest I mean we
were barely covering the bills
for the agency now as we
continue to grow that revenue
you know my thought is and the
goal of the agency should always
be to reinvest that funding on
on the on the border region.
With that's all say that we are
committed to to getting these
projects done I I I gave you a
presentation that outlined all
of our projects I do want to go
in in detail and all of them
because we have several but feel
free to go over that
presentation you again we're
committed to getting this
project done all of our projects
are funded they're all advancing
to there is no project right now
that is completely stalled.
And we're can we have a small
team but we're very committed to
the border region and and we
just with that I'll just say
thank you for your continued
support and partnership in
getting getting these projects
done.
The most for any questions Mr
chair.
Mr.
Members.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
always totally inspiring two
quick questions
The new port of entry has Mexico
in the United States reach an
agreement yet of where that new
port of entry will be Mr chair
members of the committee I'm
assuming you're referring to the
potential port of entry for
someone park is that the one
you're free to yes or they were
looking I think in California
and at us so so for us the the
main project that we're leaving
as far as a port of entry is
really expanding and modernizing
the something to support of
entry that you know it to your
question requires that
collaboration with Mexico we've
been working a lot with Mexico
we were on Mexico City twice
last year with the cabinet
secretary Lisa keys and our
partners and MDOT along with our
partners and you will trying to
get Mexico to also make those
enhancements on the Mexican side
why is that important.
As we progress on the US side
with our port expansion and
modernization it's not going to
have much of an impact unless
Mexico also gets theirs done so
in those visits to Mexico City
we did receive a commitment from
the Mexican government that they
were going to prioritize our
expansion of the second will
port of entry the even listed it
as the presidential the priority
project for Mexico we also have
the for in secretary the foreign
minister I'm sorry inside could
unable talking about that
project so unfortunately they
haven't actually committed that
funding as far as I know.
but we continue to push that
because it's important that we
move those projects on both
sides so that that's the project
that we're looking at as far as
New Mexico and and as far as
consensus with Mexico we do have
a lot of consensus
Representative okay thank you
I'll I'll say whether question
for another time thank you Mr
chairman Representative next
week Senator yeah Mr Chairman so
you have all these great things
happening the house security at
the border of what were you up
there do you have in the fifties
to cover what you need to keep
its care Mr chair members of the
committee so we don't we don't
directly work a lot a lot with
security I will say you know we
interact a lot with our federal
partners including border
patrol.
so mentioned that that region as
far as and that that is a is
seeing the highest number of of
illegal migrants trying to get
across the border so we we've
heard a lot about people turning
themselves in trying to seek
asylum that's not what's
happening in this and that that
is a region so in that area
they're primarily trying to get
away so we've been working with
border patrol especially trying
to address concerns with someone
park and so that that is of the
industrial base that that's been
our role as far as the security
side trying to make sure that
border patrol is engaged that
they're listening to the
concerns with the concerns of
the community which they are and
and trying to resolve those
concerns that that's been really
our role as far as an thank you
Mr chairman would inspect do you
have enough people to do all the
inspections unique that's a lot
of trucks coming yes
Representative.
Mr chair I apologize my throat
is is really acting up.
so on that side we are working
with with the custom side
because of who what what needs
to happen as far as getting more
customs agents it is the numbers
go up as the numbers go up as
