Representative members we have a
quorum.
Thousand order.
Please rise for today's
location.
By the gentle lady from.
McKinley is and one.
Representative Johnson.
Create a heavenly father maker
of all things hear me.
Hear my voice as I lived my
heart and give you praise and
thanksgiving.
For blessing each and other
everyone of us here today.
I come humbly before you the
spring time.
To call upon you to bless our
body of servants our veterans
our staff our families and the
places we call home throughout
the state.
We call upon you that you
guidance all in all that we do
to define the inheritance for
our future generations to come.
Let us be mindful that we must
labor for the sake of our
children and for our elders who
blessed us and gifted us our
values of love respect and
compassion plus each and
everyone knows what each and
everyone of us so that we can
always walk in beauty all these
good things we ask in your name
amen.
The pledge of allegiance lady
from McKinley Representative
Lundstrom.
For the New Mexico pledge the
gentleman from someone
resembling.
I salute the flag the state of
New Mexico Z. a symbol of
perfect friendship among United
cultures.
Good morning members.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business see no objection it is
so ordered.
Good morning members.
Good to see all of you
committees are busy getting
under way I'd like to welcome
you today and all our special
guests in the gallery here on
the rostrum to today's floor
session just a quick run of show
we're gonna do announcements now
we're gonna do some introduction
of legislation a few committee
reports and then we should be on
our way
for lunch and committee work
with that
other announcements on the
floor.
The gentle lady from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom thank
you Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house memorial six
period move from the speakers
table and be made the next order
of business no objection it is
so ordered.
Thank you Mr speaker today
members is Gallup McKinley day
at the legislature we have
hosted this Dave I think for the
last two decades and certainly
we are very very pleased to be
here you will see that on your
desk you'll have our our core
necklaces and a very beautiful
in the our community has
distributed to all the members
so Mister speaker I'd like to
ask is to ask the clerk to read
the memorial please.
The New Mexico house of
representatives the state of New
Mexico House memorial six
introduced by representative
Patricia A. Lundstrom
Representative Wonda Johnson
Representative Harry Garcia and
representative of the seal the
of Cologne.
Reclaiming January twenty six
two thousand twenty three Gallup
McKinley county day.
Whereas the city of Gallup in
McKinley county.
Are the northwestern gateway to
New Mexico and whereas the city
of Gallup and McKinley County
reflect the rich cultural
recreational and economical
diversity of New Mexico and
we're as McKinley County has the
greatest number of native
American residents of any New
Mexico County.
Is home to the members of the
Navajo Nation and the publicity
and as a site of one of the
largest annual gatherings of
native Americans the intertribal
Indian ceremonial and.
Whereas last year Gallup posted
the one hundred and you one
hundred annual intertribal
Indian ceremonial ands.
We're as McKinley County
incorporates the continental
divide.
Which separates the watersheds
of the Pacific and Atlantic
oceans fans.
Whereas the city of Gallup has a
historic downtown and is
recognized as will the New
Mexico mainstreet and arts and
cultural district and whereas in
two thousand eleven the
legislature declared the city of
Gallup to be the adventure
capital of New Mexico.
And we're as McKinley County
those the world renowned
adventure venues and trails
including the Zuni mountain
trail system the jewel of the
southwest and whereas the city
of Gallup is recognized as the
most patriotic small town in
America and is home to a state
national veterans cemetery and
whereas the city of Gallup is a
center of commerce and since the
nineteen century has been
recognized by the B. and S. F.
railway as a heritage community
for its importance along the
transcontinental road rail line.
And we're as McKinley County is
home to Gallup energy logistics
park one of only a handful of B.
and S. F. certified sites for
economic development located in
and Internal Revenue Service
designated opportunities
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico said
January twenty six two thousand
twenty three.
The designated Gallup McKinley
county day in the house of
representatives to honor and
showcase in many facets of the
city of Gallup and McKinley
County.
Signed and sealed at the capitol
in the City of Santa Fe.
This
there debate on the moral.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lady
I'd be happy to yield
Mr speaker in lady I just I
really want to thank you for the
beautiful railroad engine this
morning and I just want to say
that
Having grown up in Arizona and
my grandfather was an attorney
and the Santa Fe railroad was
one of his clients so he and my
grandmother travel by train from
Phoenix to Chicago all the time
and I have been along the
railroad track I haven't written
the trading but I want to some
day to do Gallup and Winslow and
and stay there at the former
Beautiful beautiful resort where
Howard uses to land his plane in
Winslow Arizona anyway thank you
it's a wonderful thing to have
this reminder of the railroad
and its history and its
connection to our history thank
you so much Mr speaker and lady
I always appreciate the
wonderful gifts from the
community here you're from.
Thank you leave there's further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
support us online and balance
you have Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady because you'll.
Yield.
The gentle lady thanks for
bringing this up for the full to
the mall you know Gallup poll is
really the gateway to the south
west coming from Arizona to New
Mexico you know they're blessed
with the sure of millennials out
there every year and I was a
hundred for your anniversary and
all you folks need to go out
there and and visit this place
to have red rock state park up
there no nation borders on the
border by Gallup the board the
Navajo Nation and it's a real
side to go see they have a lot
of people Mr speaker who are to
grant alter flooding in jewelry
a lot of my stuff up in up there
and David for bringing it up
again in this house in honor
being here is the longest
serving with you
Madam
and Mr speaker was thank you
very much.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Cibola in
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker with
generating a concealed I will
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I am very
happy to welcome the people from
Gallup McKinley to our chambers
actually there's those are not
our chambers to their chambers
I've known that they had a hard
time getting here every time I
drive in Gallup to Milan where I
live that thanks committee
anywhere from thirty to forty
five minutes to get to that
construction that's been going
on forever and I hope that
somewhere somebody's state
highway department is listening
because that construction has to
come to and then seven days
and getting them all to be
sitting there for thirty forty
minutes every time I go to
Gallup and to come back home but
other than that we should be
good after big complaint okay.
I did a I just consider Gallup
McKinley basically like next
door neighbors there part of me
or I am part of them have been
well to learn to that community
Senator is awesome to represent
my part the symbol of a the
committee and the Gallup area
thank you again soon thank you
Mr speaker.
Thank you gentleman there is for
the debate the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker does the kind gentle
lady yield high yield thank you
kind gentle lady I would also
like to thank.
Representative Lundstrom and my
colleagues for introducing this
house memorial it's always a
privilege and an honor to
represent McKinley and San Juan
counties I am proud of my
community and my constituents
and I would like to welcome all
to the roundhouse who travels
from McKinley County thank you
Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from McKinley County
L. I will yield.
Gentle lady I wish to
congratulate and thank you for
bringing this memorial for
although I Representative
stricken San Juan McKinley
County has always been my home I
grew up in McKinley county and
in our culture my umbilical cord
is buried somewhere in McKinley
county some of that is always
going to be home so I thank you
for this and high insurance.
Of Gallup called Indian capital
of the world and I went to
school for all of my years and
after I graduated.
San Juan County and then from
there I am good in the world
round health so thank you for
this memorial gentle lady thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen is are for the debate.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative thought Thompson
at thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield I yield I too
am a product of Gallup McKinley
I went to property high school
there Gallup was town Gallup was
sixty miles away the closest
movie theater swimming pool or
restaurant so it was where you
went on dates if you did such
things and it's a great place I
have a sister there it's it's a
wonderful place and thank thank
you for the always lovely peons
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Julie there's further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Robert
W. thank you Mr speaker will the
kind lady.
Easy health I will yield.
Thank you kind lady I just
wanted to thank you for bringing
forward as always this memorial
and this recognition and I also
want to thank you for the gifts
with every year it's a surprise
and they're beautiful and I
really appreciate it but I also
wanted to stand and acknowledge
everyone hear from McKinley in
Gallup county because many of
you may or may not know that
Representative Lundstrom and I
worked many years moons ago
together I was a Cibola economic
development director and she was
working all as always as a
fellow colleague and community
and economic development and so
on little did we know our little
did I know that I was going to
come forward Mr speaker and be
elected and be able to serve of
with Representative Lundstrom so
those of you from Gallup in
McKinley there's a lot of work
to be done still in
Bringing viable and strong and
valuable economic development
and I just wanted to state that
I will do and continue to work
with of representatives from
those counties to continue to
prioritize that area because I
know first hand how much need
there is in that area and all
work as I always have diligently
thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady thanks Julie there's
further debate the gentleman
from but is here Representative
Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from canyon county
please yield I will yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for the posted come down from
Gallup McKinley actually had my
first experience in visited this
part of the LFC the interim
committees and the hospitality
the welcoming that you guys gave
all of us as legislators was
greatly appreciated
I was so impressed by the beauty
the art.
All of the the stuff is being
done on the main street so.
I want to thank you I want to
welcome you and that although
that was my first visit there
will not be my last visit to
Gallup McKinley thank you Mr
speaker they can gentle lady.
Thank you gentleman there's
further debate the gentleman
from Katrin grant any though go
Representative Terrazas thank
you Mr speaker with a gently
please yield I will yield.
The process for the gifts very
thankful for the guess Mr
speaker gentle lady and welcome
please welcome to to the
roundhouse all of you from
Gallup McKinley county my wife
and I have enjoyed your your
town on our way up to more of
Utah that you're a little stop
on the way up and so it's a
beautiful place to stop the as
my my my friend here next door
Representative Baca said
everyone's always very very nice
and respectful and kind and I I
just love that little town on
the way we up to what do talk so
welcome thank you Mr speaker.
Digital there's further debate
the gentleman from.
Chavis Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley yield
I will yield.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I to stand to thank you and the
fine folks from McKinley County
who year after year have given
us a piece of of McKinley County
and and we wear with pride and I
wanted to share with you that
the there's one piece of the
believe it was above several
years ago and for some reason my
wife is not let me have that
back so we appreciate the the
gifts that you bring it here and
please know that we really want
to express our thanks and
appreciation to the folks and
linking to McKinley County who
make that available to us thank
you.
Thank you John and is there for
the debate.
The generator from Bernalillo
Representative print in thank
you Mr speaker with the gentle
lady he'll I'd be happy to yield
thank you gentle lady I want to
rise today to not only thank you
for the gift that you bought but
also to recognize the indigenous
women's resource council from
Gallup and the work that I was
able to do with them and your
wonderful wonderful city so
thank you for bringing this to
the attention of all of the
members of our of our
legislature here and most
importantly I just also think
you and support your indigenous
women's resource council in
Gallup.
Thank you gently there for the
bait on the memorial.
The gentle lady from violence
Representative made a lot of
oil.
Thank you Mr Spiegel we're the
gentle lady yield I will yield I
just wanted to stand up and
welcome those from Gallup in
McKinley county I as a child I
grew up going to my parents sold
at the flea market in Gallup so
I spent a childhood
experiencing the wonderful
culture I am also my great
grandma was full blooded Navajo
so it I always.
Absolutely loved it and not to
mention the rest of my family of
was in the Nibert counting and
and Cibola county so so I just
wanted to welcome you guys I
cherish your culture and I
cherish all of you thank you
thank you Mr speaker thank you
ladies are for the debate.
The gentleman from Chavis and in
a bit of Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker on the
gentle lady LA I will yield.
Tonight I just want to stand up
in in concert with my friend
from Travis county to echo that
I'll probably never see that
little train again because my
wife already has another look
pale and she has the necklace on
as well and I will love I would
get to look look at it as it
goes by.
but I'll always chairs the
ability to look at is go back to
great tradition from McKinley
County to do this we all look
forward to and it's something
that we cherish thank you.
Thank you Germans are for the
debate on the memorial.
Gentlelady have kept all of my
pants all these years I keep him
away from my wife and my kids
there in a drawer they don't
know where they're at and
hopefully they're not watching
as webcast so they don't know
my.
My my secret here
As of now gentle lady I want to
thank you as well and all of the
good people from Gallup in
McKinley county who have made
the long trip here to Santa Fe
the city Gallup is one of my
favorite cities as as I raise my
family one of the things that we
do is we drive out west to
California and by golly we've
got to go right through Gallup
and that's a community that I
think is on on on the up and up
it's it's transforming itself
through the good work of folks
like you a gentle lady and your
colleagues in that community and
I can't wait to see what's next
for Gallup McKinley I can't wait
to go in the interim until the
good things that are happening
seeing an old friend there is
further debate on the memorial.
Casey no further debate on the
memorial the gentle lady to
close thank you very much and I
want to thank everyone for the
wonderful comments it's
certainly been our our pleasure
over the last couple decades to
come forth and share a little
piece of Gallup McKinley county
with the body and this year as
as you've noticed it is a a
train we're very very proud of
the city's relationship with the
BNSF railway and because we're
heritage community with that Mr
speaker I now move that house
memorial six do now pass and I
ask unanimous consent of the
house of the record show that
the role has been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative.
The gentleman is in motion show
all members of the house present
and voting in the affirmative
seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial six the vote is now
open.
Close my lotus in the
affirmative seventy in the
affirmative answer in the
negative house memorial six has
duly passed the house.
Lady from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom thank
you Mr speaker and we also have
to provide to people on the
rostrum that we'd like to
recognize of bills
Representative Johnson and I
know I'll be able to
Representative Johnson to go
first.
The lady from McKinley is and
one Representative Johnson thank
you Mr speaker Mr speaker and
colleagues of the house I have
the privilege of presenting Mr
Vance Alonzo as one of the
recipients of McKinley County
days outstanding honorees I
would like to thank Mr Lonzo for
his service in our community he
is a respected member of our
community and I appreciate all
of his work.
And Mr long so I want to thank
you he can hat to not on the and
not in congratulations on your
on your work we appreciate you
you're always combine and I know
that you work hard because I see
you every day in our community
working so with that said Mr
speaker may we have the clerk to
read Mr Alonso's certificate.
Click to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes Vince Alonzo.
Gallup McKinley county day
honoree.
Whereas Vince Alonzo a
formidable presence and Gallup
and McKinley County has been
employed in Gallup for over
forty years and we're as Mr
Alonso worked his way up serving
in many city of Gallup positions
including red rock park manager
and fox run golf course
superintendent to his current
position as executive director
of the city of Gallup parks and
recreation department recreation
department spans whereas Mr
Alonso has received more kudos
than any other Gallup employee
or manager for his unsung work
ethic and leadership and.
Where as Mr Alonzo arises events
long before they begin to make
sure the event spaces are set up
and stays long after an event is
concluded to make sure the
spaces are cleaned and prepared
for the next event.
And we're as Mr Alonso picks up
trash whenever and wherever he
sees it and makes sure that
Gallup is clean and inviting and
we're as Mr Alonso has promoted
the City of Gallup and McKinley
County through his dedication
and work spirit has service and
managing the areas parks and
trails recreation centers of
sports and recreational programs
and mentoring the next
generation of stewards who
gallops New Mexico youth
conservation corps program and
we're as the quality of Mr along
those work ethic and leadership
are assets that Gallup uses to
promote tourism quality of life
and economic development.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to Vince
Alonzo a Gallup McKinley county
day honoree and an unsung public
servant of Gallup for his pride
in his job and extending his
heart to his community signed
and sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe.
Relations Mr Lawson thank you.
Julie from McKinley
Representative Lundstrom thank
you Mr speaker we have one other
honoree to complete our
recognition this after this
morning for Gallup McKinley day
and if I may I'm going to go
ahead and read this particularly
because this is one of my best
friends in the community of the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico recognizes
Billy more Gallup McKinley
county day honoree for us public
services always been an integral
part of Billy Morris life they
were just Mr Moore's been
advocating for McKinley County
and the city of Gallup for more
than twenty years for us Mr
Moore served for twelve years as
the McKinley County commissioner
representing district one and
whereas Mr Moore has served for
twenty years on the council of
governments board is been the
chair of the board since twenty
a town that was Mister Moore
also served a term as a
commissioner of the state
transportation commission and
we're also in all of his
government positions Mr market
McKinley County in Gallup at the
forefront of his efforts and has
been a staunch advocate of
funding for area roads and
bridges Westminister more has
participated in Gallup McKinley
county day several times
throughout his last twenty years
and is a very active partner and
supporter of this event now
there be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to
billing more a Gallup McKinley
county honoree for his
leadership in advocating for
Gallup in McKinley county signed
this day of your Martinez
speaker of the house Lisa Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk and myself
so if we could Mr speaker could
we please recognize Mister bill
and more congratulations and
thank you Mr Bailey more welcome
to the house of representatives.
Thank you both for your selfless
and tireless work on behalf of
your community is an honor to
have you here amongst us.
Are there further announcements
the gentleman from Chavis.
Within this.
A lot of neighborhoods within
in.
Thank you Mr speaker one of the
jewels of the city of Rossell is
a long standing state
institution New Mexico military
institute.
When you come into Rossell it's
one of the things that everybody
sees it's a unique for the
southwestern it's architectural
style and it's a beautiful
campus and today we are graced
with the attendance of a the
number of cadets from from that
institute and the three other
staff members and so Mister
speaker I believe there in the
gallery I would appreciate if
you would maybe recognize them I
am following which I believe we
ought to give a hearty welcome
to the cadets and staff from New
Mexico military institute thank
you gentlemen will today it's
please stand up.
To be recognized.
Such a fine institution and
truly a treasure here in New
Mexico thank you for joining us
today and taking the long drive
up to Santa Fe.
Further further announcements
the gentle lady from billion a
Representative Ferrary thank you
Mr speaker I would just like to
let everyone know that today is
also a special day for New
Mexico Food and farm stay in the
house of representatives in
celebration of community food
and farm initiatives towards
ending hunger and strengthening
the statewide food system.
And we celebrate the efforts of
individuals communities
organisations and agencies in
creating and thriving local food
farming and ranching economy
while emphasizing that everyone
in New Mexico should have a have
access to fresh local healthy
and nutritious food end hi I
would like to introduce a few of
our guests
we have and they're from a
Farmington area and we they got
to meet a newly elected
representative Duncan and I'd
like to introduce Priscilla
Marie Garcia Franzoni field
please stand.
And she is owner and operated
operator of denture of farm corn
New Mexico and Marie Johnson.
You please stand there she she
left I'm sorry she's with the
governor net right now we have
Natasha Gonzalez.
Is that right okay and she is K.
through twelve by Ellie or
assistant director of operations
Farmington municipal schools
and
see Darby.
Simmons she's from Farmington
municipal schools also welcome
and she is
with K. twelve by a Lee or
training and accountability
manager so thank you for letting
me introduce them they have been
visiting of the rotunda there
was a special celebration and
three other of the younger went
to the governor's office right
now so I also want to let you
know that Getty bags that you
see food farms day has apple
butter and also bunny do uses
half grown apples New Mexico
grown apples in half a pound of
New Mexico carrots go into each
one of the stars so
I also would like to thank our
hunger provided hunger caucus
for supporting the different
issues and a funding for
The of the of the reducing of
food insecurity in our state and
also there's a packet that you
will see that you can go through
that has all of the different
initiatives that we would like
to see supported as we've been
able to build from ten million
to twenty million and we hope to
get through another fifty
million this legislative session
to help reduce hunger in our
state and we've been doing a
good job with all these programs
thank you very much Mr speaker.
Thank you lady.
The gentle lady from.
Very much on the wells in the
fan tells Representative thank
you Mr speaker I rise this
morning to recognize the
independent insurance agents of
New Mexico and you have on your
desk a little goody bag and also
an invitation to night to
reception from five to seven at
the tell you already did end of
the call jadi cafe if you
haven't been there check it out
and I have we have visitors in
the gallery I'd like them to
stand so that I can recognize
them we have please all stand
it's Patty but don't independent
insurance agents of New Mexico.
Hi I'm gonna do the the gallery
in trials for you is a list I
can do it here from the rock
thank you so much okay everybody
is invited to the party tonight
have fun.
Party thank you deleted.
what we we've been in this let's
go to the gentleman from
Representative Scott.
Number of
candidates TIRS all rostrum this
morning.
Going to introduce a couple
of traffic over gentleman from
Lee County.
Representative political to
finish up those introductions
first I'd like to introduce to
the bottom CENIC.
Well as director of our.
Relatively new.
Senator facility which is career
technical education.
The I believe if.
With seven hundred students in
rural facility.
One nine hundred students
enrolled in that facility next
on the list as the flamboyant.
Of channel New Mexico.
Mr speaker members.
Next on the list isn't almost as
flamboyant.
Chair Mister one kilogram.
With that Mr speaker.
Over to the gentleman from other
gentleman from for further
introduction the original
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield.
Announcements we doesn't have to
yield all right I will tell you
you know I am going to.
Follow the rules of the thank
you can't thank you very much
Mr speaker and.
Colleagues we also have.
Jennifer Grasham which is the
president and CEO of Lee County
EDC.
Mr Jean Strickland are
superintendent of the whole
school system.
Finally Mr speaker and thank
colleagues
this Karen feeling the
presidency of your Rinko and
board member of the economic
development corporation.
very blood was pleased to have
them here with us today Mr
speaker and I hope everybody
takes an opportunity to to meet
with our
board board of directors today
so with that Mr speaker I yield
that.
Welcome to the house of
representatives I'm gonna make a
quick announcement a mechanism
folks in the gallery.
we have Patty Pat in independent
insurance agents of New Mexico
when a Hobbs Rachel Sheffield J.
Bowles Joseph many coaching.
Kendra's exact Arius David set
live hundred gram welcome to the
house of representatives.
Also in the gallery we have the
honorable mayor of the city of
Hobbs New Mexico mayor Sam Cobb.
Also joining us in the gallery
we have.
Right and county commissioner
want to Garcia from pine hill
Rama in the gallery welcome
county commissioner.
In from the cell valuable
Kentucky we've got the pole
middle school patriots in the
house welcome patriots.
Illegals Mr lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker I want to announce
that today is autism day in in
the capital and I am wearing the
T. shirt that.
That I designed for the very
first autism date in two
thousand seven and it says on it
somebody I love has autism and
I'm betting that most of you in
here that applies to your your
grand kids your neighbor your
whatever.
When my son was diagnosed in
nineteen ninety four the
incidents was one in one
thousand six hundred and sixty
six today it is one in forty
four.
So it's it's expanded and
It's it's a real issue and I
will just say that autism is a
lifelong condition that presents
challenges to education
employment housing and community
development and much of what
gets done around autism is done
by volunteers and I I can swear
to that for the thousands of
hours I put in around autism we
know early intervention is the
is the best thing we catch them
early and and do the best that
we can with them as opposed to
waiting until they're in school
so I'm very thrilled about that
all the stuff that's happening
in early childhood education and
elevate the spectrum left us a
lovely
lanyard and some some delicious
treats so please everyone Mr
speaker there are some guests in
the in the on the all up there.
Welcome guest thank you for
joining us here in the house of
representatives Mr speaker I
think you have a list of names.
The lady.
The lady we do not but if you
get a tool to us we can read
them out thank you Mr speaker
thank you please give everyone
hear for autism welcome.
The gentle lady from the you
know Representative Ferrary
thank you Mr speaker I
inadvertently thirteenth Lee did
not read the memo or have you Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
that house memorial one be
removed from the speakers table
and be made the next order of
business I see no objection it
is so ordered
Mr speaker we do get you to that
point absolutely gentle lady let
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial one.
A final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to explain the
memorial thank you Mr speaker as
I said before New Mexico Food
farm at a farm state is
celebrating community food and
farm initiatives toward ending
hunger and strengthening the
statewide food system.
And with the chief clerk please
read the memorial.
Click to read.
Mr speaker I can go ahead and do
it if it's easier.
To read.
House memorial one entities by
Representative Ferrary.
A memorial declaring January
twenty six two thousand twenty
three New Mexico Food and farm
stay in the house of
representatives in celebration
of community food and farm
initiatives toward ending hunger
and strengthening the statewide
food system.
Whereas New Mexico Food farm
state Salah celebrates the
efforts of individuals
communities organisations and
agencies and creating a thriving
local food farming and ranching
economy fund the sizing that
everyone in New Mexico should
have access to fresh local
healthy and nutritious food and
whereas New Mexico Food farm
state celebrates the following
two thousand twenty three award
recipients a the good food for
New Mexico award celebrating New
Mart Mexico farmers markets
Clovis and Portales farmers
markets Margie Palmer.
Be the sewing change award for
organizations engaged in
creating sustainable food
systems First Nations
development institute Richard
elm hill lead program officer.
See the heart of the land award
for outstanding leadership and
farming or ranching.
Today's food baby foods L. L. C.
merry and Zach been.
Do the growing the future award
for new or young farmers and
ranchers deterrent farms
Priscilla Marie Garcia Franzoni.
The the living land award for
outstanding leadership and land
stewardship for unity resources
Farm Juliana and to hinder Siano
and.
At the New Mexico grown.
Golden Chile award honoring all
schools senior centers and early
child care centers that purchase
New Mexico grown and raised
drugs from the farmers and
ranchers.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico said
January twenty six two thousand
twenty three be declared in New
Mexico Food and farm state the
house of representatives in
celebration of community food
and farm initiatives toward
ending hunger and strengthening
the statewide food system and
the it further resolved that a
copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the governing
board chair of the New Mexico
food and agriculture policy
council.
Is there debate on the memorial.
I
see no debate the gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house memorial one do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the house of the record show
that the role is being called in
all members present voted in the
affirmative is in motion to show
all members of the house present
and voting in the affirmative
seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial one the vote is now
open.
Level of seven in the
affirmative.
In the negative.
House memorial one because we
passed this house thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you generally
folks I'd like to direct your
attention to of the gallery for
guest from elevate the spectrum
we have to remain in the main
Robert Bundy Joel Davis.
It may go.
Sir Senator Baca.
Y. LA Kayla flowers all from
elevated the spectrum welcome to
the house of representatives.
This.
Thank you Sir thank you for
joining us internal Spence.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker house Education
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty so we'll start at
eight thirty sharp house
education room three oh nine
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
First financial disclosure forms
or do electronically to the
secretary of state's office by
Tuesday January thirty first all
state representatives must
complete the form for twenty
twenty three the form needs to
be submitted online using the
staff is website.
Again financial disclosure forms
to electronically to the
secretary of state's office by
Tuesday January thirty first
those of you who may not be
familiar with the process please
reach out to the respective
leadership offices or to the
speaker's office for support but
I don't want anyone getting
deemed for not submitting that
form
again generate thirty first
financial disclosure form
deadline.
The first.
Gentleman from Simona.
In the.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker your labor
veterans military affairs
committee will.
At one thirty this afternoon one
thirty this afternoon thank you
Sir members signaled the deleted
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker your House
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at one
thirty today
subcommittees have their
assignments and locations thank
you thank you lady the gentle
lady from Los Alamos.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting tomorrow at one thirty
we have I bills on the agenda so
be there in the square thank you
Mr.
Although it is the house
Judiciary Committee so high he
gets very technical the gentle
lady from McKinley is on one
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee will be meeting
tomorrow January twenty seventh
at eight thirty AM room three oh
five thank you thank you gentle
lady the generated from
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker
house health and Human Services
will meet tomorrow morning at
eight thirty thank you for
sticking bills the gentleman
from.
Any of us on the ball is in one
Representative Lente.
You Mr speaker good morning good
morning members tomorrow there
you're taxed revenue committee
will be meeting at eight thirty
see you all then.
Thank you gentlemen.
The gentle lady the gentle lady
from billion a Representative
Ferrary thank you Mr speaker I
know I've been standing a lot
this morning sorry.
The house consumer and public
affairs committee will be
meeting at one thirty today room
three seventeen and
accidentally house bill seventy
four was dropped after being on
the schedule it is on the
schedule will be heard we will
be hearing it as one of our last
of five bills thank you Mr
speaker members take note.
Other announcements the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move regarded that
order of Business reports of
committees reports of the
committee see no objection it is
so ordered.
Mr speaker.
Your labor veterans and military
affairs committee to miss been
referred house bill twenty three
has had it under consideration
point same with recommendation
that a do pass and it's referred
to the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted resale
Lee Alcon chair.
The speaker move to adopt the
report we are adoption of a
federal Committee por for House
Bill.
Twenty twenty three all those in
favor signify by saying aye hi
all the supposedly the eyes have
a committee reported opted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
tune has been referred house
bill twenty eight has had it
under consideration and reports
same with recommendation that do
pass as amended in this referred
to the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair.
The state government to adopt
over for we are adoption of
federal community for for house
bill twenty eight all those in
favor signify by saying aye high
suppose state.
Highs have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to is been referred house bill.
Forty six has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that I do pass as
amended.
And then just referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted a sale Lee Alcon
chair.
The third for.
We are on the we're on adoption
referral committee report for
house bill forty six all those
in favor signify by saying aye
high suppose name.
I have a committee report is
adopted.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee was been referred
house bill thirty nine has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendations that I
do pass and this referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we are an adoption of federal
Committee ports for House Bill
thirty nine all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose needs.
Yes we reported up to Mr speaker
Education Committee was been
referred house bill forty three
has had it under consideration
point seems recommendation that
I do pass and that's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair the speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we are on adoption will
favorable committee report for
house bill forty three all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
A post may.
The eyes have it committee
report is adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
was been referred house bill one
twenty five has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that IT pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we are adoption of a favorable
committee report for house bill
one to five all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Opposing.
Yes I have a committee reported
on.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill forty has
had it under consideration
forcing the recommendation that
it did pass and it's referred to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully salute submitted
Representative Thomson chair.
Move adoption we are in a
favorable committee of rounded
option all the federal Committee
port for House Bill forty all
those in favor say I was a nine.
Those opposing me.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too was been
referred house bill forty two
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that it to pass and it's
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are adoption of a
favorable committee report.
Forty four house bill forty two
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
All those posts name.
I just have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill forty eight
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation that
it to pass and it's referred to
the commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Housel forty eight all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
This post may.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill twenty four has had
it under consideration and
report same without
recommendation and insert for
the transportation public works
and capital improvements
committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair.
Respectfully submitted
Representative D. Wonda Johnson
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are on adoption.
The report without a
recommendation for house bill
twenty four all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Those bills may.
The eyes have it reported opted.
Mr speaker government elections
and in an Affairs Committee
tunes for House Bill twenty six
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it to pass and this
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are on
adoption of a favorable
committee report for house bill
twenty six all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those opposing a.
The record.
Yes of the committee reported up
to.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill
thirty five has had it under
consideration point things
recommendation that it to pass
and then three for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption.
We are adoption referral
committee report for house bill
thirty five all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
The supposed may the eyes have
it could be reported opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill eighty has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that it to
pass and this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption we are
on adoption of a favorable
committee report for house bill
eighty all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All the supposed may.
I just have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill one thirteen has had
it under consideration point
things recommendation added to
pass and insert for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption we are
in adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
one one three all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Although supposed may.
The eyes have it committee
reported up to.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I got we we go to
that order this is introduction
of legislation seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
House Bill two oh three
introduced by Representative
Allen Martinez an act relating
to civil rights amending the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act
reinstating the defense of
qualified immunity repealing
section forty one dash for a
dash for and and just a in
nineteen seventy eight being
laws two thousand twenty one
chapter one nineteen section for
house bill two of three entities
by Representative Allen
Martinez.
House Bill tool three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer Public
Affairs Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two is two oh four
introduced by representative
Armstrong Madrid how to meal an
act relating to state symbols
declaring a state mineral.
House Bill to for entities for
representatives Armstrong Madrid
and how to meal House Bill tool
for having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house rural
development.
Land grants and cultural affairs
committee this house government
election an Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill to I introduce my
representatives Armstrong
Chatfield how to meal Madrid and
Ezzell an act relating to food
and acting the meat inspection
act authorizing the New Mexico
livestock board to conduct meat
inspections to ensure the safety
and quality of meat for human
consumption creating the office
of the meat and poultry
inspection director providing
for inspection stamps and
establishment numbers providing
penalties providing exemptions
for ritual slaughter.
House Bill to I introduce my
representatives Armstrong
Chatfield how to meal Madrid and
Ezzell House Bill tool I have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house agricultural state gas
and water resources committee
then it's the house Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill two oh six entities
by Representative Sanchez an act
relating to telecommunications
amending the rural
telecommunications act of New
Mexico providing for the use of
the state rural universal
service fund for consumer
broadband only loops providing
definitions house bill two oh
six entities by Representative
Sanchez.
House Bill tools six having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house rural development land
grants to cultural Affairs
Committee vans House commerce
and economic development
committee.
House Bill two oh seven
introduced by representatives of
has and Andrea Romero and
senators Hamblen and worth an
act relating to human rights
extending the scope of the Human
Rights Act to apply to certain
actions of the state and its
political subdivisions and
public contractors expanding the
list of protected classes to
include gender making technical
corrections House Bill two oh
seven entities by Representative
Ortez and Andrea Romero and
senators Hamblen and work.
House Bill tools seven have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee fence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill two oh eight
introduced by representatives
Terrazas Serrato and Jones an
act relating to taxation
creating the rail infrastructure
income tax credit and the rail
infrastructure corporate income
tax credit House Bill two oh
eight introduced by
representatives Terrazas Serrato
and Jones.
House Bill to avoid having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee finance the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House Bill two oh nine
introduced by representatives or
TE's Armstrong and Hernandez an
act relating to student loans
amending the health professional
loan repayment act to update the
requirements for receiving loan
repayment House Bill two oh nine
introduced by Representative
Ortez Armstrong and Hernandez.
House will to nine have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
it's the house health and Human
Services Committee.
House Bill to ten.
Introduced by Representative
Lundstrom Roybal Caballero
Chandler and Senator Gonzales
an act relating to public
employee pensions providing a
temporary additional non
compounding payment to certain
retired members under the public
employees retirement act.
House Bill to ten entities by
Representative Lundstrom Roybal
Caballero Chandler and Senator
Gonzales.
House Bill to ten having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee since
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill to eleven introduced
by representatives block and
Johnson an act relating to
children requiring the children
youth and families department to
recruit support and retain
Indian foster families providing
reporting requirements providing
technical cleanup.
House Bill to eleven introduced
by representatives block and
Johnson.
Yes.
House Bill to eleven.
Been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee then the
house government election in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill to twelve introduced
by Representative Garrett
Senator Hickey Representative
Rehm and Charlotte little.
An act relating to crime and has
and the penalty for trafficking
a controlled substance will
carrying a firearm House Bill to
twelve introduced by
Representative Garrett Senator
Hickey representatives Reem and
little.
House Bill to twelve having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer Public Affairs
Committee then it's the house
Judiciary Committee.
House memorial nine introduced
by Representative Terrazas and
Senator Hemphill a memorial for
Klay proclaiming February first
two thousand twenty three the
forty seventh annual Grant
County day and house of
representatives House memorial
nine introduced by
representative of that ISS and
Senator Hemphill.
House memorial nine amendment
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
speakers table.
House memorial ten.
Introduced by representatives
read.
Reem Sanchez and Townsend in a
Morial recognizing the victims
of violent crime and their
families and honoring their loss
and suffering.
House memorial ten introduced by
representatives read.
Redeem lord Sanchez and
Townsend.
House memorial ten of been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee.
House memorial Levin entities
for representative Thompson a
memorial declaring January
twenty six two thousand twenty
three autism day and house of
representatives House memorial
eleven introduced by
representative Thompson.
House memorial eleven have been
retired by title is ordered not
printed and placed on the
speakers table.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business to no
objection it is so ordered are
there any further announcements
for miscellaneous business.
I know the gentleman from grant
has miscellaneous business he
wants to talk to us about.
Another.
Management's announcements of
lower before we break for the
day.
Members thank you for a
productive day I hope you get to
enjoy some lunch before
committees get to work I do have
an announcement tomorrow we will
reconvene at eleven.
For some more introduction and
some more committee reports and
then some afternoon committee
meetings as well we will not be
on the floor this weekend so
plan accordingly we will not be
on the floor this weekend.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move the house
stand in recess until eleven AM
tomorrow.
Thank you Julie thank you
members see no objections the
