But those without a recorded
response.
Representative Alcon.
Here Representative Alcon is
here Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Here Representative Gail
Armstrong is here Representative
but at us.
President Representative about
us is present.
Yes.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is
here.
Representative black.
Representative looga.
Representative Brown.
Representative Cadena.
Here Representative Cadena is
here.
Representative Castellano
because of the.
Representative Castellano is
present in Representative Cook.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is here
Representative Eli.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa is here.
Representative Harry Garcia
Senator.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Garrett.
Representative Garrett is here
Representative Harper.
Harper Representative Harper is
excused.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lewis.
There are Representative Lewis
is here Representative Lujan.
Of the.
Representative Lujan is present.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here.
Representative Roger Montoya.
This is the Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Nibert.
I'm here Representative Nibert
is here Representative Ortez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
is here.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Serrato.
Here Representative Serrato is
here Representative Strickler.
Representative Terrazas.
Here Representative Terrazas is
here Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend is here.
Representative Zamora.
Okay rococo's close we have a
quorum.
Members please rise for or
today's invocation offered to us
by.
Representative Baca.
Father.
We come before you we give you
thanks we thank you father for
the state we thank you for the
many blessings in our life we
thank you for your son Jesus who
died for our sins.
Further we know that all good
things come to you.
What we just have to be here
with us to be present lowered
that you have got to work give
us the strength and the courage
and wisdom to do you will.
This model and follow example of
servant leadership toward
understanding that we have a
responsibility lord so as to to
guide us and give us strength.
I pray for all of those here
that if you gather to pray for
their safe.
Their safety their health and
well being.
I processing for blessing for
those in our family and our
friends or loved ones that we
left behind.
The by the to keep them safe in
our absence and we realize that
there's a the greatest sacrifice
and ours.
And by the father I pray for all
of humanity.
During this last couple of years
in this dark hours in this I
pray for those who have been
affected by COVID I pray for
those that are sick appraisal of
those that have suffered in a
press budget for those that
we've lost.
I forgot I pray that everyone
find the hope in the peace in
the comfort and that can only be
found in your love and mercy we
also sings in Jesus name.
Thank you.
Would the Jeffersonian a
Representative Lara please leave
us in the pledge of allegiance.
And with the gentleman from
Chavis lean Roosevelt
Representative Anderson please
listen saluting New Mexico's
flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Good morning barely Mr speaker
good morning members I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous.
No objections so ordered.
Good morning everyone.
We'll do some messages and bill
introduction today of the
revenue committee reports.
and then we will be wrapped up
after that until Monday are
there any nonsense.
Any miscellaneous business.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
the speaker before I go to the
next order of business and so I
don't mind the body that we have
a fabulous food vendor down here
in our lounge local food truck
called what the truck and we've
been eating there all week
amazing great prices please try
them out you'll level speaker I
move that we go to the next
order of business messages.
no objections so ordered.
to read.
House executive message number
eleven dear speaker Egolf and
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. to
the New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
initiatives of house bill eighty
four a bill expanding the
purposes for which a crime
reduction graph maybe maybe
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor this is
really entered.
House executive message number
twelve your speaker Egolf and
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature's second
session submission of house bill
eighty three a bill amending the
eligibility requirements for the
for for the position of state
engineer respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
Mrs ruby entered.
House executive message number
thirteen years figure Egolf
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill ninety
five.
A bill enacting the easy
enrollment act established
establishing the easy enrollment
program requiring requiring
revision of the state income tax
forms to allow taxpayers to
consent to provision.
Of certain information
pertaining to enrollment in
certain health coverage programs
allowing the Human Services
Department to enroll consenting
taxpayers in Medicaid allowing
the New Mexico health insurance
exchange to enroll consenting
taxpayers in qualified health
plans under certain
circumstances and providing an
exception to confidentiality for
certain tax return information
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Message will be entered.
House executive message number
fourteen dear speaker Egolf
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number point two two
one four three seven a bill
enacting the diversity act
creating the chief diversity
officer within the state
personnel office creating
diversity and inclusion liaisons
with state agencies creating the
workforce and diversity council
providing certain duties
requiring agencies to develop
and implement policies to
address institutional racism
requiring annual annual reports
and making an appropriation
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor this is
really entered.
House executive message number
fifteen there's bigger Egolf and
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill creating
the crime of threatening or
attempting to assault kidnapping
or murder a judge creating the
crime of malicious sharing of
personal information of a judge
or their immediate family and
imposing penalties respectfully
yours Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor.
This is really entered message
from the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the health of
the duly enrolled in gross copy
of house bill one as amended
with emergency clause have been
read in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate and open
session and returned same here
with respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk distributor.
The speaker move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections order click to read.
House bill one hundred I
introduce Representative Rehm
black Anderson Senator love
Sedillo Lopez and Representative
Hochman Vigil for the
investments and pension
oversight committee and act
relating to public employee
retirement allowing public
employees to return to work for
Philly aided Pueblo employers
under certain conditions five
hundred I introduce
representatives Rehm black
Anderson Senator Sedillo Lopez
and Representative Hochman
Vigil.
House bill one of five having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
House Bill hundred six
introduced Representative bream
Anderson black.
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Representative Hochman Vigil for
the investments and pension
oversight committee act relating
to public employee retirement
allowing public employees
returned to work for affiliated
public employers under certain
conditions House Bill hundred
and six introduced
representatives cream Anderson
black Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes one six having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House Bill hundred seven
introduced Representative small
Sweetser and Lundstrom and act
making it the general
appropriations and authorizing
expenditures by state agencies
required by law House Bill
hundred seven entries
Representative small Sweetser
and Lundstrom.
House bill one or seven having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Differently appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill hundred eighty
introduced Representative Zamora
and Townsend for the water and
natural resources committee and
act making appropriation to the
board of regents of New Mexico
State University for the support
expansion of a network of
weather stations throughout the
state yes a hundred eighty
introduced Representative Zamora
and Townsend.
Just going to wait having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution.
Reporter printed and referred to
the agriculture Sikhism water
resources committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House Bill hundred nine
introduced by Representative
Serrato and Dixon and act making
appropriation to the higher
education department for central
New Mexico community college to
develop and operate intensive
short term who can't training
programs for unemployed or
underemployed workers house bill
a hundred nine entries
Representative Serrato in Dixon.
House bill one oh nine having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Education Committee.
Since appropriations and
finance.
House Bill hundred and ten
introduce very present of
Anderson an act relating to
pension solvency addressing the
actual actuarial solvency of the
G. judicial retirement fund and
the magistrate retirement fund
allowing for the appropriation
of money into the judicial
retirement fund and the
magistrate retirement fund
changing composition of public
employees retirement board
changing the certain elections
requirements requiring notice of
an emergency meeting making
appropriations house bill
hundred ten introduced
Representative Anderson.
Yeah.
Fourteen.
One ten having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
then see Judiciary.
One hundred eleven introduced
Representative Miguel Garcia and
act making appropriation to the
aging and long term services
department for the City of
Albuquerque department of senior
affairs to provide tree cutting
services for low income seniors
within house district fourteen
and the larger atrisk go
community in the south south
House Bill hundred eleven
entries Representative Miguel
Garcia.
House bill one eleven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed.
And referred to the health and
Human Services Committee thence
appropriations and finance.
One hundred twelve introduced
Representative Miguel Garcia and
act making appropriation to the
local government division of the
department of finance
administration to fund the
improvement and renovation of
the facility for the expansion
of integrated substance use
disorder programs and clinics
declaring an emergency hospital
hundred twelve introduced
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill one twelve having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
House bill one hundred thirteen
introduce for Representative
Miguel Garcia and act making
appropriation to the aging and
long term services department
for services of the Bernalillo
county south valley multipurpose
senior center house bill hundred
thirteen introduced by
Representative Miguel Garcia one
thirteen having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuit to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
One hundred fourteen introduced
for a presented Matthews and act
making appropriation of the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration for Bernalillo
county to develop criminal
justice data sharing efforts
house bill one hundred fourteen
introduced by Representative
Matthews one fourteen having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill one hundred and
fifteen introduced by
Representative Lujan an act
relating to public schools
creating a science technology
engineering and mathematics
pilot project conducted by the
education department to model
support programs for students
and teachers in science
technology engineering and
mathematics and kindergarten
through fourth grade reading and
mathematics requiring the
collection and analysis of
teacher student and programs
data to determine the efficiency
of the pilot program creating a
fund making appropriation house
bill one fifteen introduced by
Representative Lujan for one
fifteen having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution.
Order printed and referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House joint resolution ten
introduced by Representative
Rubio and Representative
Martinez a joint resolution
proposing to amend the
constitution of New Mexico by
creating a public officer salary
commission to establish and
limit the salaries of elected
state officers and other public
officers as provided by law
repealing the constitutional
provision providing for
legislative per diem and mileage
and the prohibition of
legislative compensation
amending and repealing
constitutional provisions for
the establishment of certain
executive and judicial salaries
by law house joint resolution
ten introduced by
representatives Rubio and
Martinez.
Mr resolution ten having been
read twice by title is
authorized by article nineteen
of the state constitution order
printed and referred to the
consumer and public affairs
committee that's government
elections and Indian Affairs.
House joint memorial one
introduced by Representative
Zamora and redeem for the water
and natural resources committee
and Joint Memorial urging New
Mexico's congressional
delegation to take into
consideration the impact of
drought when setting federal
federal agriculture policy has
Joint Memorial one introduced by
Representative Zamora and reams.
Mr Morial one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
agriculture sec use and water
resources committee.
House memorial twenty introduced
by representatives Andrea Romero
Representative Rubio I'm Mario
requesting the New Mexico
Legislative Council in
conjunction with the public
regulation commission to conduct
and oversee a study to determine
the public right Karia
environmental and economic
benefits and costs and the
technical feasibility of a state
level public utility model for
New Mexico House memorial twenty
introduce for representatives
Romero and Rubio.
House memorial twenty having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the labor veterans and military
affairs committee then to
Judiciary.
House memorial twenty one
introduced by representatives
Garrett Baca and Lara.
A memorial requesting the
legislative education study
committee in collaboration with
the higher education department
the public education department
and the office of educational
accountability the department of
finance and administration to
develop a comprehensive plan to
enhance recruitment preparation
licensing induction mentoring
professional development and
evaluation of school leaders in
New Mexico House memorial twenty
one introduced Representative
Garrett Baca and Lara.
Rural twenty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee.
Also moral twenty two introduced
by Representative were about
coming at a memorial requesting
the Human Services department
and the workforce solutions
Department to convene a task
force to study the impact of and
make recommendations for the
implementation of a New Mexico
basic income for low income New
Mexicans and report its findings
to the legislature House
memorial twenty to introduce for
representative for about coming
out of.
House memorial twenty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee.
House memorial twenty three
introduce for Representative
Chandler a memorial
congratulating el Rancho de las.
School and school and go entry
notes on its.
Fiftieth anniversary and
proclaiming January twenty fifth
twenty twenty two el Rancho de
colder in just stay in the house
of representatives has more of
twenty three introduced by
Representative Chandler.
Sure twenty three having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
House bill nine introduced by
Representative funded Senator
Ivy Soto Senator Sedillo Lopez
and Representative Sarinana an
act relating to crime creating
the crime of unlawful access to
a firearm by minor imposing
penalties house bill nine
introduced Representative
permanent Senator Ivey Soto
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Representative Sarinana.
We
bill nine having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the rules
committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Junction sorter.
Sorry Representative Pettigrew
today's your lucky day.
House bill fifty five.
South of fifty five the request
Representative Pettigrew.
And a consultation with the
Representative Garrett.
that bill will be removed from
the copper the referral to the
commerce committee will be
replaced with a referral to the
committee on transportation
public works and capital
improvements.
Thank you Mr speaker.
we have house bill eighty three.
it is in the rules committee
Representative Andrea Romero.
it is now germane pursuant to
house executive message twelve I
order it removed from the rules
committee and referred to the
agriculture acequia said water
resources committee fence Energy
Environment and natural
resources house bill eighty
three pursuit has executive
message twelve is germane.
Is to be removed from rules
order of business committee
referred to agriculture is a key
is in water resources committee
thence Energy Environment and
natural resources.
House bill eighty four.
Representative Ely.
is germane pursuant to house
executive message eleven.
Since I would remove the rules
committee and referred to the
consumer and public affairs
committee events Judiciary
house bill eighty four
Representative Ely is germane
pursuit has executive message
eleven order it removed the
rules committee printed and
referred to the consumer Public
Affairs Committee thence
judiciary.
House bill ninety five
representative Thompson.
Is germane pursuant to house
executive message thirteen.
Order it removed rules committee
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee.
That's taxation and revenue.
House with ninety five pursuant
to house executive message
thirteen is germane it is to be
removed from the rules committee
printed and referred to Health
Human Services then to taxation
and revenue.
House bill ninety nine
Representative lane.
House bill ninety nine
Representative lane is germane
pursuit has executive message
fifteen.
Order moving rules committee
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
Committee that's Judiciary
that's appropriations and
finance house bill ninety nine
Representative lane is germane
pursuant to us executive message
fifteen border movement rules
committee.
Printed referred to in some
public affairs committee this
judiciary than support creations
and finance.
Also say for members.
bills that create entities is
been my practice for the last
five years to refer all those
bills
to the appropriations and
finance committee and our
practice has been.
to wait for the FIR to be
written and then consider
withdrawing those bills from the
Appropriations Committee or
having that referral dropped so
I don't want members worried
about triple referrals issues
been our practice that we can
get a thorough FIR done on those
bills in any budgetary impact
that would potentially arise
from the creation of new
penalties so I've done that all
of them I did want you to and if
you're paying attention but I
earlier just one make sure that
was clear on that.
We're gonna have a few minutes
for a the last bills of the day
to get members and they'll go
back to intro the gentleman from
Lee Representative Scott.
Speaker I have a question that I
believe would qualify as
miscellaneous business.
Let's let's find out.
Bill analyses or being posted to
share file but not to the
legislative website is there a
good reason for that.
I believe.
So that me that so I guess is a
question for the legislative
finance committee that does the
FIR is.
I think it is been a practice to
take those agency analyses and
put them into the F. I. R..
I don't know.
Senator none of that is within
my function so I I don't know
the answer your question.
Mr speaker in the interest of
transparency would be
appropriate I think for those in
that age and CMLL sees.
Go to the public website.
Kind of that please thank you Mr
speaker I think that certainly
hope they're all public
documents that would be subject
to a for a there's there is no
shaped requirement.
With it for a so I just was a
could be requested or if you
could.
You could send a.
Again I.
You're you're talking about a at
a level of the technical
operations that I am unfamiliar
with so I I don't know.
To do it I mean I could ask some
sure but I mean I think it is
just as easy for you to.
I mean I don't know who manages
the share file.
It's probably easier for you to
just the person that you're
dealing with on it I don't know
of of making a query.
is there any other Nelson the
gentleman from Santa.
Bernalillo.
Right now Bernalillo Rio Arriba.
Chairman Lente Mr speaker so
close from Rio Arriba Sandoval
in San Juan thank you for
recognizing me I want to take a
quick moment for the body good
morning to recognize and
publically celebrate an
individual from my district
house district sixty five of the
Pueblo of San Felipe a who was
recently
recognize and will be taking the
reins at the Smithsonian's
national museum of the American
Indian in Washington DC this
Cynthia Chavis Lamar who has
been recognized will be taking
the reins on the national level
so congratulations to her what a
large accomplishment and and of
great great recognition thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman
regulations as great news
gentlelady from.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker this is literally
a trash COVID
so the thank I didn't know for
the longest time that behind our
trash in our bottom right George
is paper recycling so you can
put your papers behind the trash
part and they get recycled thank
you Mr speaker.
Members say no.
The general if you represent a
small thank you Mr speaker the
following the the democratic
caucus on the floor there will
be your house appropriations and
finance committee will be
meeting today this because time
is one thirty thank you Mr
speaker.
Never say no Jennifer Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker
Yesterday my wife and I in Lee
County received some very sad
news.
Our state employees she's.
Going into the hospital on
Tuesday morning and and she
passed away Thursday no no
complications doctors have no
clue what happened.
The issues are first New Mexico
black police chief and she
she she her and her family are
just amazing people and passes
everybody take take time and in
your own way and just pray for
their families thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman that
members are we please rise for a
moment of silence.
Thank you.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house Judiciary Committee will
meet at one thirty today or
immediately after the democratic
caucus should be one thirty.
Members say no the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
Maestas thank you Mr speaker
regarding the commerce committee
the goldenrod is incorrect
apologies there will be no
commerce meeting today the first
commerce meeting will be Monday
at one thirty funding one thirty
no commerce meeting today thank
you.
Ever say no the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee will meet
Saturday at eleven and please of
the eleven we talk about media
line there is a conflict with
another committees will be
meeting at eleven the assumed
thank you Mr speaker.
Members take note.
Are there other assets
gentlelady from Los Alamos thank
you Mr speaker just another
reminder house taxation revenue
will be meeting Monday at nine
A. M. the is assumed thank you.
More say no the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
celebrate and recognize today a
fine young man born twenty one
years ago today who is chosen to
interrupt his college education
to serve his community and his
country in the National Guard I
am immensely proud of him and
all of our young people who
choose to serve in this way.
And I ask my colleagues here to
join me in wishing them well and
we sing Happy Birthday to my
nephew Jacob Bradley rigs
Ramage.
Thank you very.
The.
Okay we're gonna do we're gonna
go back to introduction
legislation to the last of the
bills.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
introduction of legislation
projections ordered to read.
House bill one sixteen introduce
for Representative my SS speaker
egolf Representative Martinez
and Representative Davis an act
relating to the legislature
directing the Legislative
Council Service today velop an
ongoing statutory revision
program creating the position of
reserve visor of statutes within
the Legislative Council Service
providing duties including the
revisor of statutes as a member
of the New Mexico compilation
commission providing reporting
requirements has the one sixteen
introduced Representative Masser
speaker egolf Representative
Martinez and again this one
sixteen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the rules in
order of business committee.
One seventeen introduced by
Representative Sweetser
Armstrong Anderson and act
making appropriation for the New
Mexico historic women maker
marker initiative posso one
seventeen introduced
Representative Sweetser arm Gail
Armstrong and Anderson.
One seventeen having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the.
Rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee
thence appropriations and
finance.
House bill one eighteen
introduced by representative
Lente an act relating to early
childhood authorizing the early
childhood education and care
department to enter into joint
powers agreement with tribal
governments making appropriation
house bill one eighteen
introduce for representative
Lente that's one eighteen having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill one nineteen
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero and act relating
to school districts adjusting
amounts to be used in
calculating state distributions
to school districts that impose
a public school capital
improvements tax ended Turner
schools within those school
districts creating an additional
distribution to those school
districts and charter schools
repealing outdated section of
law has bill one nineteen
introduce for Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
One nineteen having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the Education
Committee since appropriations
and finance.
Also one twenty introduced by
representatives Garrett Figueroa
Chandler Sweetser and at at us.
An act relating to broadband
amending the roll
telecommunications act New
Mexico and the connect law New
Mexico act remove contingent
wording from the definition of
statewide broadband plan
amending the connected New
Mexico act in the broadband
access and expansion act to
align with the timing of
required various annual reports
to be October one of each year
adding and removing definitions
from the connect New Mexico act
to align with the definitions in
the broadband access and
expansion act amending the
connect New Mexico act to
provide for the adoption of
preliminary policy establishing
a competitive grant program from
the connect connect New Mexico
fund for one year prior to the
adoption of the policy I rules
also one twenty introduce
representatives Garrett Figueroa
Chandler Sweetser and at a.
One twenty having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules in order of business
committee.
House bill one twenty one
introduced by representatives
Herrerra Kasi on homes or tennis
Andrea Romero and Lente.
And act making appropriation to
carry out the purposes of this
acequia and Community ditch Fund
Act house bill twenty one one
twenty one introduced by
Representative Herrerra
Castellano or ties Andrea Romero
and Lente.
One twenty one having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the agriculture sec
is in water resources committee
thence appropriations and
finance.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you miss that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business objections so ordered
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker
health and Human Services will
be meeting B. as in home at
eight thirty and we have a full
agenda thank you Mr speaker.
Perspective.
Members of the we'll go back to
has to one sixteen.
As your title doesn't noted that
there's a substantial
appropriation in the bill passed
the one sixteen is germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
one sixteen ordered removed from
rules order of business
committee and referred to the
Judiciary Committee then Senator
creations and finance.
Further further announcements
the gentle lady from McKinley in
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker we will
have a democratic caucus meeting
immediately after this floor
session in room three zero seven
thank you.
Members to know anyone wanting
lunch from what the truck's not
to tentatively sure if you want
to make it in time for the
caucus.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker your house Education
Committee will meet Monday
morning at eight o'clock B. as
soon I have a brief
organizational orientation
meeting and then we'll jump into
the three bills listed in the
golden rod from all the members
should check their file share
the wonderful staff and has
Education Committee have been
posting everything in there that
you will need and will continue
to do so thank you Mr.
Amber signal.
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative but at us.
Thank you Mr speaker you are
enrolling in grossing Committee
is not going to have to thank
you.
It's disappointing that members
take no the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker also I'd
love to endorse what the track
as our new a
new cafeteria hosted their
Excellency had a Victoria and
chase so they're great people
and spending money there and
leave it in Santa Fe thank you
but also one more
quick announcement the rules
committee will be meeting at two
thirty today it's an
organizational meeting to
discuss the process for how we
will evaluate bills for whether
or not they are germane thank
you Mr speaker.
Or say no the gentleman from Rio
Arriba Sandoval in San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker looking for
the next week next week Tuesday
your house agriculture cities
and water resources committee
will be meeting visit home eight
thirty in the morning we'll have
a presentation orientation and
then a presentation from Mister
Mike Hammond who is the
governor's new water Authority
in her office so thank very much
Mr speaker members say no other
further announcements.
Gentlelady from Valencia.
Degenerated wanted you know the
today's national squirrel
appreciation day.
Mr speaker I didn't know that.
Mr speaker what do you call a
net that is worth a lot of money
hello gentlelady what I cash to.
Mexicans to today.
Please.
Mr speaker which type of not
goes to address space.
generally what kind astro met.
Okay we and that we did the
second one.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Sorry general if you
Representative small thank you
Mr speaker and the thanks to the
gentle lady from Chavis for the
reminder I do want to announce
Mr speaker that
there are a the house
appropriations and finance
committee there will be meeting
tomorrow also in subcommittees
thank you Mr speaker.
You are also take this
opportunity to receive I show
hands.
in the chamber in the gallery is
involved in agriculture.
The expectancy every hand up I
just one hand Representative
Dow.
Okay here we go.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until eleven
thirty AM Monday morning members
of the thank you for good
morning and afternoon the bill
introduction thank you those
gallery for being with us today
please be sure to watch our
committees this afternoon and
tomorrow.
Enjoy your weekend ever stay
safe get your booster shot if
you haven't and we'll be back
here live in thirty AM Monday
morning.
The house is in recess.
