Are rolling house bill six so we
will not be hearing house bill
six J.
and next we're going to go in
the order of Senate bill six and
then we're gonna go back to the
house built our house joint
resolution nine House memorial
thirty five and then we'll get
to house bill one ninety one so
that'll be our schedule this
morning and I think if we get
out early then Representative
Rehm wants to take us to the
front.
I'm getting.
Okay great so
Senator Ivey Soto and secretary
of state and you will raise your
hand we can promote you to
panelists.
Great welcome Senator Ivey Soto
and miss breast cancer we are
ready when you are Senate bill
six thank you very much madam
chair and co sponsor and also
recognize the presence of
another co sponsor the bill
Representative Nibert.
on this piece of legislation so
Senate bill and then carry for
us this is present for the
secretary of state's office and
the secretary of state will be
joining us in a few minutes as
well.
the Senate bill six is the
election security and
administration bill and this
bill does a number of things
that important for the security
administration of our elections
which include among other things
all for those people who want to
vote in person this bill
establishes that all in person
voting locations on election day
will be voter comedian centers
making it more convenient for
people to vote in person
throughout the county.
For those people who would like
to vote by mail this bill
changes the identification
requirement for the return
ballot from and identification
apartment of name registration
address and your birthday with
each of us which each of us can
pull and the voter file for
anybody in our district and
instead it goes to what we used
in the general election and a
special congressional election
which is the last four digits of
the voter's social security
number thus creating a passcode
that other people presumably do
not have or at least it's
restricted as to who has that
information.
This bill also provides of a
curing procedure so that if when
the county clerk's office
receives a mail ballot.
There is some information that
is missing the county clerk's
office can front load of
reaching out to the voter so the
voter can share their mail
ballots.
In order to do this process than
the county clerk has to be more
nimble in terms of being able to
verify the presence of a
signature and that there are
four digits and that those four
digits matched the last four
digits of our social security
number.
So that so that then what we do
is when the absolute for
election board meets.
There is a verification process.
I'm sorry there's a confirmation
process of the verification by
the county clerk of that
information that is conducted
before the absentee voter
election board.
And that process requires.
In that two percent.
A number equal to two percent of
the number of ballots that were
mailed out.
To voters.
B. be confirmed by the absent
voter election board.
If all of those and and it's the
absence or election board will
randomly select those envelopes.
If that if that checks out then
we presume that the rest of the
ballots were properly verified
by the County clerk although
every ballot is always subject
to an individual.
Challenge to interpose by a
challenger or a member of the
option R. or member of the
election board should there be
information that anybody has
regarding a specific ballot.
In order to make sure that
process takes place correctly.
No ballots may be separated from
the between the outer envelope
and the inner envelope until
that verification process has
been made complete.
This bill in addition.
with regard to special
districts.
This bill brings in the biggest
valley occasion Conservancy
district using language that we
have worked on together and
collaborative Lee it also brings
in the arch Hurley Conservancy
district and quite County to the
local level when I say brings
them and brings them into the
local election.
and and are Charlie is often
quite County and we're we have
worked with them in terms of
those changes to be made.
This bill does not include the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district.
and this bill does not include
any sense and PED's tax
increment development districts
or property proven districts
those in a separate bill.
with that madam chair I'll be
happy to yield first to
Representative Nibert if he has
anything he would like to add
and then the mistrust guess if
there's anything that you would
like to at and then of course to
madam chair and then at that
point we will be ready for
questions.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator I just like at a
couple things number one.
This bill.
Was worked on for quite a while
I know that the Senator work
with.
Alex larkspur for many months
and.
R. I could tell you that in
December I believe it was when I
was notified but Mike Kelly
Clark director there was another
election bill I contacted the
Senator
he graciously bat with the not
only myself but there are are
some other of my colleagues on
the Republican side of the aisle
in the early January are we
spent a day with the senator
going through
the bill and.
Have some back and forth on on
some of the items and I really
appreciate I know it's hard to
get our arms around these
election bills but I appreciate
the.
Time that you spent with us and
frankly as a result of that time
that was spent and some are some
of the our.
Concerns that we raised and and
he was so amenable to addressing
those issues
both Representative Eli and
myself as well as Senator
Diamond are joined
Representative Georgene Louis
and at our chair and senator
Ivey Soto in sponsoring the
legislation so it so it was
very.
You.
I think generally grants what
we're we see one of the senators
bill because it's a lot of
reading and hard to digest but I
appreciate the the extra time
particularly on this legislation
more to be able to go through it
and review it and so
That was was done and I
appreciate that up for thank you
senator and our records are this
press is is here to answer all
the tough questions but.
Mistrust is.
Madam chair members of the
committee and thank you thank
you very much for allowing me
the opportunity to speak before
you this morning and the
secretary of state very very
much supports this bill we
believe that this is
very helpful to the continued
efficient.
Administration of elections all
all all we see New Mexico as a
leader in our in our efficiency
and thoughtfulness towards
election administration and and
this bill continues to resemble
resemble that fact it's just a a
bragging right I've taken around
the nation when I've had the
opportunity to try and speak
with other election officials
and this bill flat falls right
in line with that efficiencies
security and finding that
balance for or you know allow
allowing many different
opportunities for for voters to
vote and and still maintaining
efficient efficiencies and
securities I ate I agree
wholeheartedly with
Representative my roots comments
the Sanchez worked extremely
hard and in ensuring the support
of our office the support of the
county clerk affiliate who did
vote to support this bill.
And also an effort on making the
bill a bipartisan bill which is
hard these days and and
elections so all all of those
efforts are very very much
appreciated by the secretary of
state and I'm happy to be here
and I'm happy to answer any
questions that means making come
out today thank you.
Just the very last thing I'd
like to to to say with regard to
this bill since I and I now need
his vote is Representative Eli
and I we're panelists yesterday
together in a UNM classroom
Representative Ely take back
everything I said in that class
that's right Senator will just
I'll be asking the rules of the
and I'm sure you'll.
Thank you.
Thank you I just might my brief
comments are just you know data
everything that's been said the
senator has worked I've seen him
work a lot on this bill and in
cooperation with the
collaboration rather with the
secretary of state being very
available to needs and so I want
to thank your office as well but
I do know that Senators those
are pretty line.
And you know that comes with the
territory I guess but I will go
ahead and go to the public if
you are like to raise your
virtual hand in the poll will go
ahead and open that up you want
to raise your hand in support of
Senate bill six or an opposition
of Senate bill six.
Are we getting pulled out of
school.
We'll bring that up shortly.
Okay it's now open.
And we'll keep it open for about
fifteen seconds.
This is Senate bill six not
house bill six this is Senate
bill six yeah so.
Disregard the old house bill six
at the top but we do have do
support Senate bill six and the
question mark below.
So great was going to close that
we have twenty one excuse me
twenty as part and for an
opposition and let's go ahead
and hear from the opposition if
you would like to speak in
opposition of Senate bill six
raise your hand.
Lindsey Buckman.
You are now and made it.
I'm I'm madam chair and members
of the committee and I intended
to speak at support and okay
we'll go back to you okay thank
you John block you are now in
muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John black united New Mexico
and I live in Alamogordo and I
support many parts of this bill
I want to make sure that the
sponsors know that I think that
the election security is the
most vital thing and our state
right now to make sure that we
have secure elections and that's
why I appreciate them for
putting security measures such
as limiting the party change for
election judges and such things
like that but the one concern I
have is with the social security
numbers being used on the
ballots because it will actually
buy our election poll
challengers from being able to
observe the counting and the
tabulation of these ballots due
to security reasons which will
give even less transparency to
our our system so it that's the
one issue that I have with this
bill but otherwise I appreciate
the Sanchez the co the
bipartisan co sponsors of the
bill for putting this forward
and I hope that we can work out
some of these changes to make
sure that we have a good bill
goes the floor and gets passed
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you now we will go to
members of the public that would
like to speak in support of
Senate bill six please raise
your hand.
The document you're needed.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Lindsay Bachman I am chief
deputy clerk here in the napa
county so greetings from the
southern part of the state this
morning I appreciate the time to
speak in support of this bill
that clerks from different
offices from across the state
worked in collaboration with
Senator Ivy Soto on I'm coming
up with a bill that that
advances us even further as a
state that does election
administration well I ask for
your vote in support of this
bill symbol sex.
Thank you.
Rainy Bill then you are now.
And made it I'm sorry ma'am
messed up the pronunciation.
Find their chairman members of
the committee thank you very
much I might Representative in
the league of women voters we
have very carefully vetted
this bill and gone through it
despite its length Senator and
yes I'm I think extremely
thoughtful method of improving
the security and the efficiency
of the elections and I'll give
us one of the best set ups in
the country from that regard as
far as we can tell so we urge
your support thank you very
much.
Thank you CJ garrison you are
now and muted.
Sorry give us one second I'm
having.
Good CJ.
Good morning my name is DJ
garrison I'm the Harding County
clerk.
As it was stated before by Kerry
D.
Ellie it has voted and yes in
support of this bill and and you
want to thank the sponsors for
working so hard on this.
And
And if you would.
Please vote in favor of this
bill we would appreciate it.
The clerks have worked with
Daniel over this.
We appreciate it very much thank
you.
Thank you Barbara.
You are now needed.
Barbara you just need to and
then on your end.
Okay.
Right and I have voted I have
that served as a poll worker for
about fifteen years probably
more than that but that's what I
can remember.
And I know the long nights that
we had going to the tabulation
well then and to count and
recount what needed to be done
and to have good supervision I
always appreciated the amount of
training that we got and so I'm
pretty familiar with the with
the routines and the moment
things that the first gentleman
mentioned as he was describing
it really will be so much more
secure than we have had more
more anchored I would say then
we had possibility of long ago
now if there is more attention
given and I think it's a really
good bill and I urge you do
pass.
Thank you Linda Stover you are
now and it.
Good morning everyone chairman
Senator out we work very hard
with Senator Ivey Soto on this
L. and those of us Bernalillo
county are also urging you to
vote yes on this bill and we
appreciate your time.
Have a good day.
Thank you Nicole you are now and
you to.
The call you'll have to and more
on your end.
Are you there can you hear me we
can hear you okay thank you for
your time I appreciate it I
actually my hand was raised late
this is for opposition this SB
six go head.
Is that okay okay thank you okay
so as of as of personal voter
myself going into the polls I
voluntarily show my driver's
license and I'm a little
concerned because I get brushed
off every time by the poll
workers of when I show my ID
some are willing to take may do
but some always tell me I don't
need it that's a little
concerning to me I would like
that you know people who do vote
to show their ID but you know I
I'm just voicing my opinion here
but also that that this bill if
you take into consideration what
changed definition of citizen of
which potentially would open up
the door to more member brought
in New Mexico with non citizen
voters so thank you for your
time.
Thank you Gary person you are
muted.
Yes I do
I am in opposition of this bill
and what what.
Die in that committee thank you.
And that concludes the public
comment portion of the committee
members.
Representative Eli thank you
madam chair and senator and
The first is I am I do have a
number of questions and I wasn't
kidding I am going to be asking
that this bill be rolled over
until the next committee but I
want to ask some questions first
because it is a two hundred
forty six page bill and we have
a raised in the house that we do
Senator Ivy Soto cleanups and
I'd like not to do that this
time so I think it's worthwhile
to spend some time going to this
bill I got through R. sixty
seven pay R. seventy six pages
of it the two hundred forty six
page bill and I'm not opposed to
it I just need to I've got a
number of questions and I think
we're just getting started so
let me start with section two
here's what it says it says and
election related organization
shall register with the
secretary of state at least
seventy days before regularly
scheduled statewide election or
forty two days before special
election or election to fill a
vacancy in the United States
rounds representatives to what
happens if they don't what
happens if there's sixty nine
days out does that mean they
don't get to conduct any
activities they're not required
to register the statute is
silent on that so what we do.
Senator.
Charlie madam chair
representative Ely so related
organization I saw there is
coming from the AG's office they
seem to miss apprehend what what
Alexa related organization is
because it has nothing to do
with federal organizations
versus state organizations that
nature it also has nothing to do
with campaign finance.
Election related organizations
organization that can appoint
watchers to be present in a
polling place.
And so the the
This was brought at the request
of the secretary of state's
office because we had
Organizations are springing up
out of nowhere at the last
second when.
Well we're we're just trying to
to get folks to be able to be
stationed into polling places
and so the idea was that we want
to have election related
organizations that are real
organizations that actually
exist and if they actually exist
then absolutely right this will
be a legal voters coming because
true the vote
the the voter integrity project
of these kinds of organizations
where where as long as we know
who they are and advance their
act absolutely free to have
people go and be present in the
polling places to watch the
process but I will yield to this
process for further answer if
necessary.
And madam chair and the Senator
covered it a perfectly thank you
and madam chair Senator I
appreciate that but I guess my
question was answered what I'm
asking is is let's say one of
the selection related
organizations registers sixty
nine days out what happens what
happens is that they're that
they're not able to a point
watchers to be a polling place
so madam chair Senators that
mean that the county clerks are
going to have access to like a
list of election related
organizations and that
these people are going to
somehow identify themselves amid
how is this as a practical
matter going to work yeah and
and does it mean that is
somebody
register the I mean if they're
within that seventy day window
do they still registered as a
waiter what happens I'm just
curious because the new material
this is all new material the
statutes just action on that of
the bill is just absent on all
of those issues so that's why
I'm trying to find out certainly
madam chair and representative
Ely so the so.
Hey what would happen is it
would be on the plane any any
any Water Street appalling place
the following places a
sacrosanct plates.
One places Representative place
where where only authorized
people are allowed to be there
under current law.
Even if an election related
organization let's say you and I
decide to to to just a few days
before the election to
To invented noted a session so
that we can get our people
embedded in a public place.
The fact of the matter is is
that they they still need to are
we still need to tell the
secretary of state's office
under existing law at least five
days in advance who those people
are going to be.
The secretary state them sends a
list of those people to the
county clerk's office and the
county clerk's office then sends
a list of those people out to
all the polling place so in fact
yes there is a list there
already is a list.
Right so let me show you madam
chair and senator if I'm
understanding I just want to get
that pragmatic kind of what's
gonna happen so if they're sixty
nine days out as opposed to
seventy then the secretary of
state if somebody showed up at a
polling place instead I'm with
you know Bob's organization the
county clerk within check with
the secretary of state to see a
Bob's organization did it
seventy days out and if they
didn't they wouldn't allow them
or is it the secretary state
sends a list of names pre
approved when they've done it
five days in advance of whatever
election we're talking about so
that they they allow those
people to be within the polling
place I'm I'm just it's it's.
It's the latter okay the latter
right so already already have
somebody shows up at a polling
place and says I'm a watcher
with Bob's organization.
Already that that information
has to first in order for that
person to be a polling place
that information Bob's
organization has to send that
information to the county clerk
are to secretary of state's
office five days in advance.
And the and the secretary of
state has to let the kind of
card now the kind of car passed
left all of the of polling
officials now so that if if I
walk in and I say I'm
organization than
then there's clarity that I'm
they've got me on a list of
people who are proved to be an
apple.
What I mean so so here's my
confusion as I read the bill it
says an election related
organization shall register with
the surgery stateLee seventy
days before so I okay fine.
But it's not clear what that
means so in other words what
you're saying is if they
register sixteen days before
they can do that I guess
although the statute is totally
are I keep saying statute the
bill is completely silent on
that issue they can I'm assuming
that the organization can
register with the secretary of
state even you know five days
before the election but they
would not be allowed to have
their people at the polling
place and if that's what you're
saying why isn't that in this
material.
Because you have to you have to
read the entire election code.
And then you will know that so
the definition of election
related organization is one dash
one that's three point three.
Excuse me.
The the process for election
related organization to be able
to have to appoint people is
item one dash to dash twenty
seven I understand would be nice
if we had it all in one place.
But the that's that's not the
election go that we were handed
some years ago and I'm just to
make it as comprehensive as
possible.
and so with the so one tested
just twenty seven.
We specify that election later
organization made a statewide
special election of what
watchers in a county for the
organization if there is issue
provides a written notice to
secretary stateLee seven day I'm
sorry seven days not five days
you got me I was wrong
seven days prior to serving as a
watcher during early voting
the last date election date for
the balance of qualification.
Right for mail ballots a
statewide elections special
elections specifies the names of
the qualified appointees so
basically if they missed a five
day deadline they don't get the
person the people under this
bill they missed the seventy day
deadline they don't get the
people that's that's what
happens and the other thing is
that under this bill in addition
watchers and challengers need to
take training and so and so it
does facilitate them having
people working through election
related organizations to take
training if they're going to be
and apologists.
What madam chair and senator it
just strikes me that the section
that you just read that should
also be amended to say that the
election related organization
has to be qualified under one
dash one dash three point four
and what if they're not then
they don't get you're talking
about a different window you're
talking about the seven day
window which I gad
but we're really talking about
whether this election related
organization is qualified or not
and I gotta tell you this bill
does not make that clear it just
says they shall register but it
doesn't have in the bill
anything that would say okay so
what happens if they don't and
the section that you
Representative it doesn't say
that and so I just think you're
wonderful and on and on Senator
hang on you're just gonna have
to be careful as we're kind of
you know it taking one section
out this is what's what what
worries me sometimes is I'm
thinking okay so you've got this
one section that you're changing
and you're referring to another
section but not in this bill
you're not and in the section
that you just read it doesn't
refer back to this qualification
on l'action related organization
and I just think you're gonna
have to be careful about that
because I think it does get
confusing that's I mean that
that is going to what's going
the that is going to continue to
worry me as we go through this
bill that makes sense it it does
I guess I will just mention one
other thing and that is
The default is.
You're not in the polling place
unless your business there.
So unless you have permission to
be an appalling plates.
The default as you can't be in
the poem.
So and by the way up madam chair
the secretary of state is in the
waiting room I think if she out
up she's joined us in the room
she's in our so.
Yeah so I appreciate that I I
I I understand what you're
saying that you want to make
sure that the people that are in
the polling place are qualified
to be there trained they're
they're they're qualified by the
statute what I'm saying to you
is is the statute that you just
read me does not reference
election related organization in
terms of who's qualified news
not it says in this bill which
appears to be new material to me
that they have to register or at
least seventy days before but
it's not clear what the
consequences are if they doubt
and I just think that's a
concern I would have if I was
looking at this bill I think you
want to make it now these are
complicated areas I get it but I
think you want to make it as
clear as possible that if
they're not registered at least
seventy days before they can
still register but they will not
be able to have qualified people
at the polls and that I'm not
hearing that that's either in
the statute that you read and
I'm not seeing it this bill and
I will just and I will just
bills that had election related
organizations since two thousand
eleven they have always had to
register with the secretary of
state's office.
The lack of registering meaning
an exclusion has never been a
surprise to anybody during that
time.
Again and I don't mean to beat a
dead horse this puts a deadline
on this says at least seventy
days before and I'm saying okay
so what happens of the erect
they come in the state word
sixty eight days what happens is
we look at the statute and we
can figure out I just I know
what the problem would be with
just making it clear that's all
I'm suggesting thank you all
right let's go to David section
fourteen this was actually
something was raised by one of
the attendees and I see it
repeatedly
Bill I want to know why it's
okay for challengers watchers
observers all to see the last
four digits of social security
numbers you are both lawyers I
can tell you most judges one
let's see any of social security
numbers so why is there suddenly
this need that everybody's going
to get to see a social security
number.
So madam chair and
representative Ely if you look
at the language that is use our
lab to the presence of social
security numbers.
And I okay Madam chair Senator
I'm not clear what that means is
let me Representative answer
looking at the number I think
that it seems that does seem
like a little bit senator with
all due respect that does seem
like a little bit of a Dodge I
mean if I say here's my so
security might so the law would
require them to hold off for
like two seconds and then put it
away yeah absolutely a chair
representative Ely that's that's
exactly that is exactly true as
a matter of fact is that is that
you've got we have to protect
the substrate numbers are not
allowed they're not allowed to.
and and in fact with with in
this bill and in that section we
actually make it very clear in
that same alright this is not be
allowed to view voters full date
of birth or any portion of our
sister number provided the
Chandra washrooms are may be
allowed to see the presence of a
signature or social number we
what we do is then is that when
and this gets a little bit
frankly to a John block was
talking about.
In his comments and and that is
that when you have
election board that is working
with this privileged information
and you have a challenger that's
present the challenger has a job
to do it and part of that job is
making sure the challenger those
that there are the last four
digits are present.
Now they don't get to make a
recommendation of what those
last four digits are they if
they don't get to do an audio
they don't get to do a video or
a photograph of that.
But if the if the election board
is saying hold on a second we're
gonna check these numbers
Sanchez okay I have these
numbers these numbers match.
It's fair game for the for the
challenger Water preserver to at
least know that there were some
four digits that they're
comparing with something but
we're not going to allow
challenges watchers observers to
create their own database of
people's last four digits that
will not be after.
Secretary of state on that issue
okay I would hear from
secretaries to.
Adam chair at Representative Ely
that's cracked and you know
again this is this is a process
that we're developing just to
make sure that there is some
sort of check and see an
external check on the accuracy
of the qualifications which is
been a concern that's been
raised and and the idea is you
know this is.
This feels like a minimal amount
of transparency in order to
assure accuracy at and and no in
no way shape or form and and
back to anybody is caught making
notes recording taking video
keeping some sort of record of
these last words of social are
there going to be
sent away and they will not be
able to come back as challengers
are watchers for that I believe
this bill requires at least two
general election cycles in
between so I'm Mr chair and
representative the concern is
duly noted but I think we are
taking adequate precautions to
ensure the ongoing privacy of
that information and the
accuracy.
And tell me where that is so in
other words if somebody just has
a particularly good memories out
sites you know we see that in
Las Vegas report card counters
if they are particularly good
memory and and somebody kind of
figures out that's what they're
doing I mean what happens they
get booted from of all inflation
that somewhere in the statute or
the bill.
What it got.
By all means Senator.
Certainly so Madam chair and.
Representative Eli as a matter
of fact it is in the chair and
in in the bill if you look on
page eighteen of the bill.
Representative six at the top of
the bill are that page and these
are people who are not
the challengers watchers like
some servers training
qualifications what we have here
is that you're not allowed to be
a challenge watcher observer if
you've been removed from service
as a challenger watcher lectures
over County campuses over in the
current immediately preceding
election cycle by unanimous vote
that means it is a multi party
vote by the way of the presiding
judge election judges of
election board for violating the
prohibited or permitted
activities of challenges watches
lections servers kind of have a
chemist observers so we have the
ability with this with this bill
we have the ability to maintain
that order.
In addition to that we also have
in the election code and I and I
can find it that no person is
allowed to
To make
I notice.
Or or keep information regarding
peoples
protected preservation which is
in this case the month and date
of birth for any part of that
voters also sturdy number and
and I'll and I'll find out of
the section to freestanding
section and election.
Okay yeah because I'm not stay
in the section decided I'm
looking right at it I get that
you can remove people but I'm
not seeing something
specifically related to you know
if the Clarke county in a fact
and doing it with social
security numbers that you get to
them and maybe that's in the
yeah and and and I and I
recognize that while I'm.
dyslexic and and not able to
chart counts.
I do know there are some people
who have that that capability I
also know that when you're when
you're looking at over a hundred
different mailed ballots I'm
getting up to second view on
each of them Blau if somebody's
able to remember that number of
social security numbers a
result associate in overs
with the names as of as of as of
being handled like that that's
truly really very impressive now
I I mean I get I get that the
facetious miss of that but I
just want to remind both of you
to go through the chair please
I'm sorry chair chair Senator I
I get that I'm just I'm just
suggesting that if you had an
affair is actively wouldn't
necessarily be targeting a
thousand they might be targeting
just.
If you and that's what I'm
worried about so if you can find
it section I'd appreciated all
right let's go now to section
eighteen this is the same day
voter registration and again it
does look like this is all new
material so let me just ask you
I mean and I I'm glad Madam
chair of the secretary of state
is here
is our student ID is currently
permitted
of four people seeking to
register to vote.
Madam chair and Representative
Eli.
Student ID's are currently
permitted for people who are of
seeking to same day register and
I will note that in Senate bill
eight this section is also laid
out and it also in Senate bill
eight it allows the use of
New Mexico twelve educational
institution ID's and the and so
and and the compilation between
the two bills is such that if
both bills were to pass the
educational ID's would survive.
Okay so I'm madam chair and
senator and secretary state if
I'm looking at this bill however
the one that we are being asked
to pass through and get to the
next committee and then get to
the floor if this bill were to
become law and Senate bill eight
we're not to become law student
ID's would no longer be
permitted correct that would
that would be taking this out I
just reading that wrong madam
chair and representative Ely you
are correct.
So how come I mean this is new
material I thought this was to
be fixing problems not creating
new are requirements this looks
like on this bill would take
student ID's which
currentlypermitted and now say
yeah I you can't use them so why
is that happening madam chair
Senator secretary of state Madam
chair representative Ely first
of all sometimes and you're
doing a bipartisan bill you have
to make certain decisions.
and and and I respect my
colleagues and I respect the the
I have I have no problems with
that with the concept of this
bill.
I'm I'm I'm I'm just simply
recognizing that that that
there are certain breaks that
are put on certain aspects of
the bill second of all this is
if you look at the top of that
section you'll see it's a repeal
and replace.
It's a repeal and replace the
same day registration provisions
because the voting system
certification committee did vote
earlier this year to go ahead
and extend same day registration
to election day and there was
quite a bit of clean up we had
to do in that section in order
to get there.
we also I will tell you madam
chair and representative Ely
that in our experience with same
day that we've had during early
voting we have not seen the use
of student identifications.
I'm madam chair and secretary of
state is there anything you want
to add before I follow up with
the question.
No okay Madam chair Senator on
here's the concern I've got is
that I mean I look at.
For example that section right
and
and this is why I I mean I know
there's a Russian everybody
wants to get this done but this
is represented to us as a
cleanup bill and whether it's
happening or not if I look at
section eighteen unless I drill
down into each page which I'm
trying to do and go through this
I am not gonna find stuff like
that so currently student ID's
allow you to register and this
quote cleanup bill are suddenly
takes out whether it's happening
or not it strikes me that that's
something that we should now is
it changing the law that's what
I'm worried about rather than
just simply cleaning things up I
mean I don't know what clean up
there is when we're talking
about do you could use a student
ID and now you can't what is it
we were trying to clean up when
we did that.
Madam chair and senator.
Madam chair and Representative
Eli so when we did the repeal
and replace of this section we
did a number of different things
first of all in this section we
remove the existing requirement
that during early voting there
be an extra staff person present
in the polling place second of
all we removed the option of
accounting clerk not to have
Senator registration in every
single early voting location.
Third this but based on the vote
of the voting system
certification committee.
the this bill also
is clear that of all election
day probability locations will
have the ability the capability
of doing same day registration.
For this particular section the
identification requirement to be
able to show an ID under
existing law and here's a change
we may and yes I stand by this
change under existing law I can
take my driver's New Mexico
driver's license with
Albuquerque address and walk
into a polling place in Hobbs
and same day register showing
the ID.
I'm not showing anything that
connects me to that address.
And and I can send a register
under this bill the way this is
written if I use my Albuquerque
ID to walk into a polling place
in Hobbs I then also need to
show a credit card statement
utility bill is right of other
other documents that are out
there that have the address my
name and the address where I'm
registering to vote at show some
listening to that address.
So so that listening was not
bear if used in New Mexico
driver's license it was if used
any other document under
existing law so yes there are a
variety of different things that
we did as changes to the
existing policy all of them in
close collaboration with the
county clerk's with the
secretary of state's office and
and and with the number
stakeholders and and and and
included with with my
co sponsors of both political
parties.
So madam chair and senator
Senate bill eight then you
referenced that would plug back
in the student ID's is that
we're talking about Madam chair
representative realized that is
exactly correct the it lays out
one dash four dash five point
seven exactly the way it is in
this bill except that it adds
New Mexico twelve education
institution as an idea the
committee is so help me
understand what happens to this
and I I think this has emergency
clause committee that is correct
does Senate bill eight have that
it does not and also I have is
what would happen is this would
this would go into effect first
and madam chair Representative
Eli and the Senate bill eight
would go into effect later and
then the provisions of Senate
bill eight.
with them to survive.
Madam chair senator so I was
gonna ask you so what what kind
of gap does that take in terms
of protection per student voters
madam chair and representative
Ely it's a six month gap.
Okay running from when to when
do you know.
Madam chair representative Ely
from the day that this bill is
signed assuming it makes it out
of this committee I'm still
until July one twenty twenty
two.
Okay so madam chair Senator were
or were talking about is an if
both bills were passed
student ID's would not be added
for the primary elections in
June but they would be permitted
to the general.
That correct Madam chair
representative Ely that is
correct I will also note madam
chair representative Ely if this
bill does not get the emergency
clause.
None of this bill but effect
until halfway through early
voting.
Which was very chaotic.
Yeah I I mean I just I madam
chair and senator I just I guess
I don't understand why if it's
not important to have
student ID's are not used why is
San Juan bill and not the other
Madam chair Senator why is it in
Senate bill eight and nine in
Senate bill six I'm not getting.
Madam chair representative Ely
that's how the bills have have
developed as they are coming
through the legislative process
that is a a provision that the
sponsor of Senate bill eight is
very comfortable with the
provisions we have it here is a
provision that I'm very
comfortable with and but they
were written also to align other
than that one issue.
Okay let's move on to section
twenty I'm looking at C. H.
thirty nine
so this says it the county clerk
rejection certification of
registration because required
information is not provided in
the state again because on and
then you add this language is
required to provide the full
social security number prior to
receiving a ballot and
intelligence provided may only
go by provisional ballots I mean
I just have this seem concerned
about why are we doing that why
are we making it now
more difficult for people to
register I thought the whole
point of this was not to make it
more difficult.
Madam chair representative Ely
so since the late nineteen
fifties New Mexico has always
required the entire social
security number in order to
register to vote when the
privacy act of nineteen seventy
four was passed New Mexico
received a grandfathering with
regard to start registration
database when the help America
vote act two thousand two was
passed which said that every
state shall use the last four
digits of those voters are
straight number for the motor
vehicle number New Mexico was
exempted from that we are one of
six states of the time exempted
from that New Mexico is one of
three states today that
continues to use the full social
security number for the vote
registration database however a
couple of years ago Madam chair
representative Ely.
Of years ago because there is
concern that the voter
registration that that that the
paper form for voter
registration if you registered
about with someone out in front
of a Walmart.
You're having to give them your
full legal name.
Your address your full date of
birth and your full social
security number.
You're not really sure that
person is going to actually try
that and you're not you don't
know what they're going to do
with that information.
So what we did is for the paper
form we went to the help America
vote act the have a standard of
be able to provide the last four
digits for the the sisters are
the and the number that you have
and then the county clerk would
try would attempt to ascertain
the rest of that information.
Confusion developed.
Between the use of the term the
social security number and the
use of the last four digits so
we're simply attempting to
clarify where we said the social
security number we mean the full
social security number there is
a zero change and the
requirements of New Mexico in
that statement that you just
referenced there.
Zero change that is simply a
clarification so that people
don't get confused between the
last four and the entire line.
Okay I I do think that answers
my question on that because I I
couldn't tell why he added
I think I got my answer I hope
so the same thing with section
twenty two are on page forty
three madam chair and senator
again it's every certificate of
registration completed
electronically shall include the
applicant's full social security
number and transmitted by means
of secure electronic Committee
transmission is secretary state
you're saying that's already
existing we're just making it
clear that right okay
Representative Ely that is
correct all right so now let's
go to section twenty three so
I'm looking at this on page
forty four help me understand
you reference this
what is the voting system
certification committee when was
that created what is it who's
over the members what's that
about certainly Madam chair
representative Ely the lotus is
a certification committee was
was pretty I believe in two
thousand and eleven.
And it is referenced in article
nine of the election code as to
the members and what is this
reserve occasion committee is
made up of the secretary of do
it.
And for additional persons
appointed by the speaker
president pro tem and to
minority leaders who shall be
credit cards to debit credit
cards or other persons
knowledgeable of elections in
the state.
Okay and I'm I'm trying to
figure out I take it two
thousand eleven that would have
been a bill you would have
created or is that somebody else
I I think that's a pretty that
was actually that would have
been before I was elected but
it's a pretty good bet that that
was a bill that I wrote and that
actually may have been another
bill that I wrote two thousand
nine actually to grade one
system certification committee
let's see.
I was wrong about two thousand.
Two thousand ten okay yeah I
mean and they're described in
one dash nine dash five point
oh one dash nine dash seven
point five.
So here it says the county clerk
shall provide for preparation of
preaching borderless and
signature rosters generated from
the official state voter file
for an.
And then it says or not what
trying to hold local alternative
approved by the voters
certification committee help
explain that to me and you know
and I want to be gentle about
this but I I guess you know I'm
always concerned about conflicts
given the fact that I think you
still represent the clerks I
just want to I I want to put
that out there and make clear
I'm a little concerned about
giving them this kind of power
in I want to know what this
about.
Charlie madam chair
Representative Eli the up so the
but just certification
committee.
they they make the
recommendation to the secretary
of state regarding the
certification of voting systems
and the secretary of state
well certified and approved the
use of voting systems in the
state under this bill she gets
to approve them as well as a
certified.
The and so and so the difference
is certification committee is
Thank you very helpful.
To to the secretary of state and
election process in the state
and let me give an example of
that when we did the same day
registration bill we started
with early voting and then we
sat and them up by the state and
upon the approval of the board
of substance certification
committee on election day.
Well what happened then was we
get to that date.
Senator statements presentations
are some questions that the vote
is this certification committee
has in terms of certain of the
functionalities.
And so what you want to do in
elections but when you're
dealing with the process and
public places you in all cases
you want to avoid what my
friend's house for the third and
lecture researcher at MIT calls
of the elbow of death that's
when your cue goes from twenty
minutes to three hours in a
trying to figure out what the
heck just happened.
And so what happens with this
particular in this particular
situation with Senator
restoration is that they
approved as a as a pilot
project.
The use of same day on election
day for the special
congressional election that we
have.
In fact there were some hiccups
that we discovered they were out
of the control of the secretary
of state's office.
But they were between the
secretary of state's office and
the county clerk's office.
And it was so that the county
clerk was able then I'm sorry
secretary St that was able to to
to what what what those kind of
person especially rational
rights which are five of them to
work with them in terms of where
the heck ups were.
Address those issues.
Come back and and and and and
and make a presentation to the
VLCC.
And in fact the system worked
the VLCC then approved same day
registration through election
day once those procedures were
the fact let me give you another
example real quick I don't want
to belabor the point too much
but I had this idea a few years
ago that that we should pre
upload the eligible but
unregistered people into the the
election database they can be
pre approved so that if they
walk in to send a register their
information is already there.
Yeah I put up by the state and
upon approval of our system
certification committee in fact
what I thought was a great idea
the US secretary of state and
the kind of parts later
explained to me not such a great
idea.
It really didn't work.
And so we were treated on that
policy but but by having this
committee the secretary of
state's office and these kind of
course Roybal to work on these
procedures and a collaborative
fashion in order to make sure
that what the voter experiences
is this was process.
The I don't think madam chair
and
Representative Ely I do want to
and I do appreciate your your
your your shoe shape just close
our I do want to point out with
regard to what's that my
representation of the kind of
course I do not provide legal
services to the kind of parts
nor do I work for the kind of
puts affiliate I do however work
for a nonprofit organization
that does provide technical
assistance and training to many
of the kind of clubs around the
state not all the kind of course
runs State and I do not speak
for the kind of Clark's as a
whole and I'm not in a position
to do that.
and I appreciate you clarifying
that I just want to make sure
that we have that out there but
I I can tell you what worries me
about this is is that we're
putting in statute.
Eight and a group that is not
elected
that is all we need to basically
do what I think I have always
assumed the secretary state us
and I get that she is she should
be working collaboratively
collaboratively with them but
I'm worried about putting
something in here that basically
says before we can move forward
in a start that president before
we can move forward we have to
have this kind of not elected
body say Hey we want to do this
because as I'm reading this for
example this that this would
just be by way of example if you
decide if the secretary stages
G. and electronic poll book
alternative is is a keen idea.
and she goes around the country
and has wrecked we're look at
and says this is great.
If the armed Committee of the
voting system certification
committee doesn't approve that
she can't do anything she can go
to them and say please but she's
lost her power to this committee
I mean am I reading that wrong.
Well.
Madam chair and representative
Ely so what the
you're reading it correctly and
incorrectly about that same time
okay
so so I think when when we went
all paper ballots into the sex.
What's up with that between the
primary and the general.
And the secretary of state.
At that time.
Look at a number of different of
voting systems to use of the
state.
Save it sought input from
people.
And picked the voting system by
the way that nobody wanted at
that particular time.
And and are there was there was
no public input.
There was no there were no
Representative to be abroad.
There was no public comment.
There was no public testing
results through the vote is
certification committee testing
that is done to make sure they
they meet the standards of New
Mexico has to be posted on the
secretary of state's website for
at least twenty one days prior
to the decision of the but is
this for certification.
Through the voices reserve K.
committee there such as the open
meetings act.
So the public gets to weigh in
and know what's happening in
terms of various different
systems that are used in the
election process.
They they then have to take up
public vote there are records
except for those are proprietary
are subject to April it actually
is is a model process that we
have in New Mexico where you
don't have backdoor dealings.
With regard to very stuff just
at different systems that take
place.
Well I'm.
madam chair are madam chair and
senator I get that if you're
monitoring a system
and you have a committee that's
doing that you would want that
under the open meetings act I
get that I agree with that
what I'm worried about is is
that any innovation.
In the electoral process
we went there and that's being
used is gonna have to I mean we
are setting the precedent I
think with the US that
it's going to be an unelected
Committee that's going to have
to approve that before the
secretary state can do it
and that really does not make
sense to me I gotta tell you I'm
I'm really troubled by that
because my view is that gives
this committee far too much
power to say wait a minute we're
not gonna do this innovative
thing
and we're just gonna walk and
hang on hang on.
And we seen that in the past or
the county clerk's have done
that and I'm concerned about
that and you know secretary St
whether it's Democrat or
Republican is elected
representative and responsible
to the voters I don't see this
committee is being responsible
with voters
that that's a committee that's
not elected and they're making
decisions about how we can move
forward with electoral processes
rather than simply looking at
you know are we correctly
complying with the existing law
on making sure that we're doing
it correctly that I don't have a
problem with I do have a problem
with this I just have to tell
you I didn't want to do this any
innovative program is going to
have to be run through this
committee and I frankly don't
know who they are and have been
elected them and don't I gotta
tell you.
Madam chair representative of a
light up.
Please name the innovative
process that they're blocked.
What I I'm just saying to you
when we started going to send a
registration we got real
pushback for example from the
county clerks are you were in
those meetings and that took
much longer to accomplish and
I'm thinking the secretary of
state at that point was in favor
of it the county clerks were not
you know we had that open
discussion it was fine but now
you're telling me let's go to
this system where they're not
even in a committee room
nobody elected them and they get
to decide what's going to happen
with the electoral process if
we're going to do something new
or not I don't I got to tell you
that really concerns me I just
have a madam chair
representative like you made a
bold statement that they have
stifled innovation please tell
me what innovation this type of.
I'm I just yet I'm I'm telling
actually actually madam chair
Representative Ely with respect.
The voting system certification
committee voted to have same day
on election day.
Yeah so what innovation did they
stifle okay madam chair senator
you will remember you were
sitting there with
Representative Trujillo this was
my concern in this committee in
back where you came to us and
you said this is going to be
same day voter registration and
it wasn't was three days before
and that was from the county
clerk's and that really
concerned me and continues it so
you're asking me a question I'm
giving you an example Senator it
was a great revenue they were
ready to go the county culture
not that is their right but I'm
not they can certainly express
their opinion but I am worried
that we are turning that kind of
advancement on you know trying
to make registration easier
trying to make it more reliable
that we're turning it over to a
group of people that are not
elected but you're asking me for
what they've stifled they
certainly slow that down and you
were in the room when that
happened madam chair and senator
and madam chair representative
of the light again respectfully.
There was one election when
under the statute we could have
had senator election day that we
did not that was the November
two thousand twenty one regular
local election.
And the delay that kept that
from happening was from issues
that came up in the
congressional election.
Prior to that congressional
action the statute that you
voted for did not allow same day
on election day we phase that
in.
So the only delay was the
November twenty twenty one
regular local election and that
is because of the issues that
were identified.
By the county clerks and the
secretary of state's office with
regard to same day registration
on election day that happened
during the special congressional
election so I respectfully
disagree with your understanding
of history that is not accurate.
Well madam chair Senator you
asking for example we were both
their time and there's a record
of it so it is what it is so now
we've got I'm gonna go to
section thirty three now
explain to me what's happening
with us we're now going to
change the statute on handling
mail ballots to walk me through
that.
Certainly Madam chair
representative Ely so wonder
success fourteen.
is that and with regard to this
section what we do is this is
where we do the verification
process up by the County clerk
prior to the absent voter
election board meeting.
And the and so the character
does verification process and
then when the absent voter
election board meets.
They then verify the I'm sure
they than confirm the
verification process done by the
county clerk's office that's
that's the process that I
referenced.
Then we also have in here.
And this is something that we
did during the general elections
were tempered provision and we
did it during the special
Russell raced through a
temporary provision and it
worked very well is that on
election night we have everybody
go home at eleven o'clock.
And we have them go home at
eleven o'clock because different
sauce to they've been working
for twenty hours straight at
that point we don't want to
making his decisions at the
amendment that are consequence
as to people's votes so we send
them home we have to get some
sleep come back at and they can
work in between nine thirty AM
at nine thirty PM on each
subsequent day.
Not.
When they leave however you have
to have them law enforcement
presence in order to guard the
ballots in law enforcement is
not able to present the county
clerk or to W. has to stay
present and any Chandra watcher
can stay present to make sure
the ballots are secured.
R. Madam chair Senator I guess
I'm I'm not looking the
amendments in context what was
changed in on the Senate floor
because I know there were last
minute changes before came over
us on this section I remember
looking at that but I and I can
look at it the amendments in
context I can I can I can I can
tell you actually it's what was
changed on the Senate floor was
on page seventy two lines
thirteen through seventeen.
Were inserted that's just I'm
sorry does not not not not those
lines
lined up paid seventy two.
Lines
Where is all of the okay at
night is it it is actually it
was inserted paid seventy two at
the end of line I the where it
said that until the verification
our process.
by the kind of part is confirmed
by the absent voter election
board no in around Los rodder
envelope shall be separate.
Madam chair Senator I I lost you
are you looking at the amendment
context our you looking at the
committee substitute no I'm I'm
look at the committee substitute
and I'm that I'm filling in for
you what what would go in yeah I
look at what we want to
committee sub line I at the end
of that line we inserted a
sentence and the sentence that
wind started was that that until
that verification process is
completed No Interpublic's in
our envelopes shall be separated
from which.
Okay I'm sorry I'm not seeing
that.
I'm looking at the bill itself
and I'm looking for substitute
and what you well no there's not
a for substance there's a
finance committee substitute
okay you're looking at the bill
itself you won't see it I was
telling you.
I was telling you where that
information what's I'm looking
at the current version madam
chair Senator I think I'm
looking at the current version
I'm not seeing it.
If you're looking at the bill
madam chair you will not see the
which was the Senate finance
committee substitute you will
not see the language that was
added to the floor because it
was added after the substance if
you look at amendments in
context you will see it.
Our acting on.
Okay.
Okay you wonder a because the
page numbers are different do
you want to reference made to
the page number is it is the
same age is sometimes it's not.
Madam chair representative Ely
in the and there is a context if
you look beginning at the bottom
page seventy two the topic
seventy three you will see.
At the end of that but that's
subsection it now says official
mailing envelope shall not be
opened are separated from the
inner envelopes until the absent
voter election boards
confirmation of the kind of
transportation process has been
completed and hang on I'm
getting there I see it now.
Okay.
On.
Got that.
And then it looks like there was
another change correct.
Is a small one.
But
where I it it's on page job also
to section seventy three on page
seventy seven but it's a small
change I don't think I'm worried
about that but you can change on
I guess the point changes we
take out the word observer and
put in the work challenger yeah
that was a that was a typo Madam
chair representative out I kind
of figured it was something like
that now that okay well I mean
here's the problem for me that's
as far as I've gotten I mean
there's some things I've got
answers to and there's some that
still concern me I gotta tell ya
and this is a two hundred forty
six page bill and with all due
respect Madam chair Senator
we've done this trouble for I am
not comfortable with voting on
this bill today and I'm gonna
ask that it be rolled in till
Friday you have time
we can get this bill out is
there some reason why it has to
go out today
and we you know we we don't just
rely on I'm nervous about it I
gotta tell you and so I want to
know is there some reason why we
could take a look at this bill
on Friday as opposed to voting
on this today and I I think it's
going to Judiciary correct.
Chair representative ill elife
that is the current a committee
assignment for this bill yes
okay
When you say current do you have
some of the work that I don't
have that referrals going to be
removed madam secretary Senator
because I've I'm assuming it's
going to Judiciary correct
that's my cell to this point
okay so it's it's currently.
Adult and judiciary and I don't
think the speaker the speaker
has removed any referrals just
chat
sale have another chance.
And the district of this bill
gets out today Representative
Eli yes I the so madam madam
chair I appreciate that and
Senator give me an explanation
as to why it's so important that
this Lee this committee today as
opposed to Friday and we can
take a look at the bill and
Judiciary and be a clean up
bill.
Chair and representative Ely I
will tell you that the are
coming into this legislative
session
there was actually a commitment
from leadership that this bill
get out of the legislature in
the first ten days of the
session obviously that did not
happen however this bill
affects.
Many aspects of an election that
is already under way not in any
way that that would that would
disrupt the ability of anybody
to run for office.
But it is frankly it's it's
ability to get up to the
governor would like to get up to
the governor while she's still
under the three day signing
period.
Well I mean I I appreciate that
but I log and you can also
appreciate that you know we like
to look at bills in the house
and take a good look at them
and
you know I I see Senate bill
eight and I'm worried that
that's going to come over the
last minute we're not going to
be able to look at that bill
carefully and we're doing the
same with this bill and I am
very worried about it and I here
I understand madam chair and as
the sponsors that you would not
want to roll this bill over but
honestly I it worries me and I
think we have to do this right
with that madam chair all all
all conclude for today but I'm I
can't vote for this bill today I
just can't so I appreciate madam
chair and
center thank you.
Thank you Representative a line.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I guess I
have the advantage of of having
wrestled with this
For more than in just a few days
R. so I I'm one that.
I am comfortable and in passing
this on and and letting the
folks on Judiciary clued in the
representative who spoke our
continued his review and and
take up for the second part of
the of the bill there so madam
chair I would I would make the
motion
for I do pass on.
Senator.
Your
Senator to do our is that the
Senate finance committee
substitute first and Senate bill
six as amended.
Reference where they're on the
server just want this one okay
and I would make motion for do
past of Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
as amended.
R. and they recommend that you
do passed.
Thank you we have a depressed
motion by Representative Ely a
second by Representative K. goes
I don't see anyone my Burt
that's correct thank you I think
I was just used to saying
Representative Eli
Motion by Representative
diverted a second by
Representative a guy it goes.
and I don't see any other folks
that with the questions or
comments of the clerk to call
the roll please.
Representative Chasey.
Past.
Representative Eli.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative green yes ma'am.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair Lewis yes.
So thank you Secretary
and senator and mistrust as a
you have to pass.
Madam chair representative
committee and representative
will be happy to spend as much
time as you would like going
over the provisions of this
bill.
Yeah I appreciate that I'm
uncomfortable so I appreciate
that offered thank you.
Great thank you everyone next we
are going to house joint
resolution nine.
Representative Figueroa when you
raise your hand please other
your great.
We're ready for you.
Madam chair give me some
direction since we've gone over
the committee set up once
already do you want me to do it
again or do you want to just go
to questions I'm I'm happy to go
to questions we did have the
committee said that was just a
matter of some of the
members of the committee that
did not have a copy and the
analysts as well so committee
members.
Moving to pass.
Second.
We have a motion produced has by
Representative guy it goes in a
second by Representative Eli up
for discussion Representative
fiber.
Thank you madam chair
I believe that we
What am a number of changes were
made and if I recall correctly
up out of chair representative
many of the concerns that were
raised our earlier all right you
progressed and and the
subsequent Mehmet serve you not.
Yes madam chair and
representative we did.
Okay.
I appreciate your working on
that Madam chair representative
have the.
I appreciate your listening to
some of the concerns we raised
and maybe some some amendments
that the I thought were
important thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative Figueroa.
I apologize I think what
happened to me when we were
hearing earlier is that I had to
go to another committee and I
didn't hear a call to do the
bill ended up being taken off of
consideration that day and I
guess I don't know what you have
done that makes it different
than when I expressed my
concerns earlier.
Madam chair representative.
On page three of the committee
so we tightened up some of the
qualifications because there
were concerns around that so
lines four five.
Indicate that the commissioner
shall not be a former elected
official except for the retired
judge.
And then there was concern about
the five year versus ten year
prohibition on different types
of folks so we just made it all
ten year appropriations sh.
This page three line twenty one
of twenty two.
We clarified the ethics
commission in their application
and evaluation process should be
looking for folks who are
committed to conducting the
redistricting process in an
honest independent and impartial
fashion.
Thank you for.
About the strike capability
again of the four major minority
leaders of the house and Senate
three strikes each from anywhere
in the pool so we increased that
That leverage.
Narrowed and tightened up the
percentage deviation to plus or
minus five on page five.
And then it's you Representative
range point madam chair and
chair Casey.
On page eight clarify what we
were after clarified the intent
of having commissioners this
close conversations and by
adding a time frame by the next
public meeting so those those
are the changes.
Okay but there's still no
Possibility whatsoever for the
legislature to weigh in.
Except for that creased ability
to strike a certain.
Fox from the pool for the
commission okay thank you very
much.
Any further debate.
Representative okay because I
think you're motion was a do not
pass on house joint resolution
nine a do pass on because
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House joint resolution nine is
that correct that is correct
okay and we have a second by
Representative Eli.
The clerk to call the roll.
Representative Chasey.
No like to explain more about.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert.
Now and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative green no ma'am
and I'd like to exploit my
burgers well.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair Lewis yes.
So but I do for you have a do
pass and will first go to
Representative Chasey to explain
her about.
Thank you madam chair and this I
had said earlier.
We had a lot of testimony and
sentiment expressed that the
commission work very well this
year I don't think it's possible
to have a completely independent
on a political a redistricting
commission and I think we should
continue with the the
Years before this is going to
happen and I think we should try
it what we passed this year and
see if there are.
I think it worked really well
for the house so I would like to
address that.
Thank you Representative I
believe Representative Nibert
was first.
Thank you madam chair of.
I appreciate the representatives
efforts to.
Address some of my concerns but
I'm I'm still concerned about
the five percent plus or minus I
think we could think madam as
well I also
In observing the process you're
just exchanging one group of
folks politics for another and
frankly we are the body that is
directly accountable to the
people this body would not so
for those reasons why I continue
to express my.
Concerns about both favor us.
Thank you representative
Representative bring thank you
madam chair
I've now gone through to
redistricting of sessions after
the first session I started
working at.
What you know independence
redistricting states and I
quickly learned that it didn't
matter who made the maps
lawsuits resulted I think that
it remains at the legislature's
duty and I think the we need to
have the Buck stopped there
thank you madam chair.
Thank you is that everyone that
wanted to explain their vote.
Okay great thank you
Representative.
We are now moving on to.
House memorial.
Thirty five.
Representative Herndon.
We're ready for you.
You have to me on your end.
Thank you madam chair I am here
on line I do have my to experts
here if they are needed they are
in the audience a Daymon
Martinez.
Okay I'm if the experts can
please raise their hands please.
And will permit you to
panelists.
Okay go ahead Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee in presenting house
memorial thirty five the last
time we were before the
committee we had some amendments
to present I would like to move
the amendments up for discussion
and Representative we read that
Chilton number please yes the
two oh two numbers two two two
six zero three point two.
Great thank you.
I'm so we have we can move those
amendments for discussion
purposes.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair members of the committee I
spoke in length with
Representative.
Of rain and we've come to a
consensus on the of the
amendments and the madam chair
what is your prerogative with
respect to the methods do you
want me to read those as what
the changes are.
Representative we just briefly
explain what you did with those
yes.
Discussion earlier and it was
just clarifying some language I
believe yes madam chair members
of the committee it primarily is
just some clarification language
with respect to a page one
beginning at line twenty one
what we did was remove some
excessive language the impact of
and so they did with the so that
the sentence are the where is
being a lot clearer now we also
added.
We also add in on page two on
page three line to we added some
additional in individuals who
would be part of the task force
those individuals include
members of the office of the
governor The New Mexico
municipal league the New Mexico
association of counties of the
new the public employees
retirement association on page
three line sixteen we are struck
the main director because there
is no director of the of the
organization that was listed
there and under page three line
nineteen of we also struck the
word president
because there is no president of
the organization and we added
the New Mexico state fraternal
order of the police logs as a
member of receiving this
information so madam chair
members of the committee it was
says clarify language and
primarily adding additional
needed members to the task
force.
And thank you Representative for
that reminder is there
discussion on the amendment.
What's the will of the
committee.
Madam chair job the attachments
and it.
Great we have a motion to adopt
the amendments by Representative
Chasey and I can second that is
there any objection to adopting
the amendments.
Okay seeing none we have adopted
the amendments and now we're
back to the bill.
Madam chair yes Representative.
S. is amended thank you
Representative Rehm we have that
motion by Representative frame.
And I'll second that.
I'm.
Can we get folks back on camera
so we can.
See if there's any objection.
Representative Eli okay let's go
ahead and I'll do a junction
okay.
I was just waiting.
Is there any objection.
Okay seeing line you have a do
pass on house memorial thirty
five as amended showing all
members present voting in the
affirmative thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Great I'm now we are on to house
bill one eighty one
Representative Gaydos.
Thank you madam chair.
I know that we've got an
amendment and I wanted to make
sure that everybody had received
that did you get that today
madam chair.
I'm I believe we got it a couple
of days ago Representative
so and do you have okay I see
your experts raising their hands
so I'm including them now.
So
go ahead and talk about the bill
and then we can move the
amendments for discussion
purposes once that occurs okay
thank you madam chair
So the committee substitute for
house bill one ninety one was
necessary because we needed to
add expedited licensure to I
licensing types under the
authority of the nursing board
the committee steps to retain
all of the original and much
needed updates to the
professional and occupational
license here process that was in
house bill one ninety one
committee substitute for house
bill ninety one will remove
barriers to doing business in
the state of New Mexico I will
briefly highlight some of the
important changes Senator these
changes will make the process to
apply for and receive a license
faster more effectively if you
already hold a license in
another state US territory
District of or at war district
of Columbia excuse me
if your license is current in
good standing you have and if
you've been practicing for a
minimum of two years you can get
a license in our state.
It provides time limits specific
to issuing a license an
applicant will receive their
license within thirty days it
defines a process to license to
a process to issue a provisional
license and the timeframe for
issuance of a regular license it
provides a process that will
address in incomplete
applications of both the
regulators and the applicants
are aware of the status of these
incomplete application it cleans
up and or eliminates language
that is outdated or incorrect.
It we caught that we compile
sections three that are
incorrectly placed in the U. LA
and places them in the correct
order and within the appropriate
secretary section and most
importantly it aligns with the
uniform license act with the
state of rules act
Representative I'm sorry to
interrupt you but before you go
on to the amendments is this a
committee substitute or it's
just a bill correct it's just a
bill but we had to do a stab at
the beginning and so I just
wanted to clarify what the sub
was that we that we made in the
last committee.
So you did find you have a
committees you had a committee
seven unless committee right we
it it's already been changed it
was already
subbed out.
In the last committees I didn't
realize that
And I'm looking for in our files
and I do see the amendment and
generally we don't Adam and
mints to committee substitutes
that's why I'm wanting some
clarification.
Share if it's our committee
substitute you don't Adam in
minutes but if it's coming to us
as a committee set up.
You could amended.
Madam chair that that's my fault
you asked me I didn't realize it
was the last committee that's
exactly right if it's R. ET and
it's a committee substitute that
we generally don't Amanda our
committee substitute but since
it's coming from commerce we
could amend this we have done
that before at least by custom
there's no real rural but we
were so I think we could do that
thank you and I'm still not
seeing that committee substitute
and our files regardless but
let's go on and I'll I'll get
that clarified I'm just in the
bill so I'm a little bit
compares.
That's what I'm saying in that
share file to yeah.
Okay Representative go ahead and
let's move here amendments for
discussion purposes and then we
can go back to the public and
then that way the public can
know what they're talking about
when they hear about the
amendment and then we'll go
through the process and then
take action on those amendments
thank you thank you madam chair.
Did you want me to move the
committee sever was
Representative be like in a with
that no no no
We have an amendment that was
provided by the Sanchez so
please provide us details on
that Madam okay so madam chair
unfortunately there was a
drafting error error and and and
it included section one of three
the tobacco products act drugs
act and the enforcement of this
act occurs to the department of
public safety rules and
regulations and therefore I
would like to move for
consideration that the amendment
To the commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill ninety one this
amendment removes the tobacco
products act from the uniform
licensing act and we numbers the
following sections of the you
all H. reflect the change and it
it sounds really complicated but
I've got superintendent Linda
Trujillo I think that they can
pry walk us through the process
if there is some questions
regarding that madam chair.
Thank you
superintendent would you like to
add on to that.
You madam chair thank you and
thank you to the Sanchez again
for caring masks this really is
an incredibly important bill
that will help streamline
licensing for a number of
license types that we have
within our department you'll
notice that there are some
license type is that we're not
adding in that's because this is
a tremendously large project for
us to take on at our department
and some of the license types
aren't nearly as similar across
the country as the ones that
have been included and so those
particular license types were
not added in if they're not as
consistent across the country
and we can work on doing them at
a later date the the removal of
the house of section one oh five
is just as the representative
said and that is that it isn't
actually to actually in the
wrong section it shouldn't be in
section sixty one it should be
recompiled but we're not gonna
do that we just removed it
because what we had done is we
had stated that disciplinary
action would be under the the
uniform licensing act and
discovered that that should not
have been included because as
the representative said DPS does
that disciplinary action.
Great thank you are you ready to
Center questions Representative
and madam chair great thank you
so we will go ahead and open the
pull up for those that would
like to raise their hands in
support or in opposition of
health bill one ninety one it's
currently open we'll keep it
open for another ten seconds or
so.
If you would like to speak and
support go ahead and raise your
hand.
And we can calling you first.
Great and we close that we have
thirteen and support and three
in opposition.
So now we go to the public Linda
Siegel you are unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is a very
important bill C. R..
The COVID crisis has really
exacerbated but this has been a
problem for years for various
licensed departments and I'm
speaking now on behalf of the
nurses association it has
streamlined a Google for nurses
coming in from out of state to
receive a prompt license from
the board of nursing we have
been talking to the board of our
nursing for quite a few years
about these issues and nothing
has improved and so this is a
partial solution to that problem
by allowing a nurse who comes
from another state with our
license and no disciplinary
action against that licensed to
within thirty days immediately
get another license and then you
would have the opportunity to
get a permanent license during
the period of the year so that
that person can remain here in
New Mexico and practice sounds
to represent the tees in the
psychologist and the
chiropractors and day to support
this licensing bill because of
the difficulty and and rapid we
issuing licenses from the point
thank you.
Thank you chairman is our you
are muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chairman is our
behalf of love let's health
systems we echo the comments
made by Mr Siegel anything that
would help expedite the
licensing process would greatly
help our state we think
sponsoring we strongly support
this bill.
Robert black.
You are now unmuted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is rob
black and the president and CEO
The New Mexico chamber of
commerce the chamber believes
that to make the state more
economically competitive we must
address systemic barriers that
block the equality of
opportunity for our low income
folks are as bad Hispanic native
American in communities of color
we must also focus on
opportunity gaps that exist in
our urban rural communities we
believe that this reform in H.
B. one ninety one help address
some of these barriers
historically regulations and
permitting and licensing.
Often affect low income people
people of color
disproportionately because they
don't have the capital resources
to make their way through a long
drawn out licensing process we
believe that this.
This order for measure put
forward by Senator here
Representative guy in Austin
many in the bill Sanchez help
address those barriers so we
stand strong support thank you.
David is gonna you are now
needed.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is the
second on on on the policy
director at New Mexico based
nonprofit gold futures gold
futures has worked for many
years to address issues of
occupational licensing and
employment for people with
former convictions and this bill
continues that effort and we are
grateful to the Sanchez we are
also in a serious health care
shortages New Mexico has been
for years only exacerbated by
the COVID nineteen pandemic and
we need to do everything we can
to ensure health care access in
our communities for those
reasons we ask you to support
this bill thank you.
Charlie market is.
You are now unmuted.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity to speak Charlie
Marcus up and members of the
committee.
Charlie mark is registered
lobbyist for desert states
physical therapy network.
With the same reasons that miss
identified physical service are
in support of this we often have
difficulty with someone coming
from again another state and and
the time that it takes so we
appreciate the the intent of
this bill and urge your support
thank you very much.
Lawrence heard and excuse me
your animated.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee alert rand
registered lobbyists for press
turn health care services Linda
C. will really laid it out well
the changes in this bill how
that will help us with our
nursing shortage and I
appreciate the superintendents
including the nurses in the
legislation discussion about
maybe coming back and looking to
help streamline licensing for
doctors as well that's not in
the bill but it's something
we're still working on because
we just really seem kind of the
weaknesses in our system of
getting healthcare providers
licensed in a timely manner so
they can provide services to the
appreciate legislation Sanchez
and hope you will give this a do
pass thank you madam chair.
Gloria Jordy are animated.
Good morning my name is Gloria
Doherty I am the immediate past
president for the nursing
association and the current vice
president The New Mexico nurse
practitioner council with
organizations stand in full
support and hope for a do pass
on this as a frontline health
care workers nurse practitioner
in the pandemic the shortages
and the wait time waiting for
certain relief to come assist in
care to our citizens is very
taxing so this would definitely
assist in getting providers on
the front line getting nurses on
the frontline and helping give
some to relieve to us who are
getting very burnt out.
I hope that you pass.
Lianna Derek you are muted.
You'll have to and then on your
end Lianna.
Okay we'll move on to Rachel
Bevin you are muted.
Good morning everyone my name is
Rachel Bevin and I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council I'm here in support for
house bill one ninety one and we
thought that this bill is
crucial for all the nurses nurse
practitioner nurse midwives in
order to be licensed to practice
in a timely manner and to care
for New Mexicans over the years
our membership and non members
have reached out to me in
frustration due to delays in
obtaining a license to practice
in our state before the pandemic
this was an issue but now it's
crucial that we get our ends and
peas and midwife's license so
that they can work on our state
care for New Mexicans we ask
that you support our nursing
community we ask for due process
and bill one ninety one.
Joshua James you are muted.
I have a question is this bill
still demand the vaccine
mandates for all licensed
practitioners.
And it.
I was gonna say is that public
comment so it's not a question
and answer portion so you can go
ahead and continue with your
comment what this bill does
demand backs mandate and I
absolutely oppose it because if
we didn't have the vaccine
mandate with that plenty of
licensed practitioners in the
state willing to work willing to
work long hours willing to put
their lives on the line thank
you are you.
Andrea Maloney you are muted.
And drill you're have to any on
your end.
Okay.
Good morning thank you for
letting me speak my name is
Andrea Maloney and I am in
support of house bill one ninety
one I've been in the nursing
profession for over twenty years
when I began my nursing
profession as a new nurse I
apply for licensure in the state
of New Mexico where I'm native
New Mexican as well after not
hearing from the board for three
months I applied with the state
of Texas and was approved within
three weeks I began my nursing
career Texas I commuted one hour
each way just so I could work as
a nurse and then later
just about five years later are
sorry five years ago I applied
for my and she license for nurse
practitioner in it was a little
over ninety days before I heard
back and so I am in support of
house bill one ninety one to
test promote nurses wanting to
stay and work in our state and
so are health care is not
separate.
So that concludes the public
comment portion no excuse me is
anyone in opposition.
Robert Loftis you are admitted.
Yes I represent the that New
Mexico chapter of the American
society of landscape architects
landscape architects already
have national reciprocity system
in place and there's a provision
in the bill that requires two
years of practice after
licensure tuner and a license in
New Mexico that doesn't exist in
the current standard and I can
actually create new barrier to
young professionals coming in
from out of state and speaking
reciprocity there's also the
council landscape architecture
registration boards which is the
national and that the currently
working the streamlined standard
for licensure reciprocity and
they're in the process of
identifying discrepancies
between individual state rules
and will be working with each
state to create a national
standard specifically to
facilitate and even more
efficient system of reciprocity
while still ensuring that health
safety and welfare of the public
landscape architects in New
Mexico will be requesting minor
changes or licensure law in the
coming year and we would prefer
to handle any changes or license
act school listed lead with
those new national standards
being considered so we very much
support the nurses we very much
support.
You know easy tax reciprocity
but we need to slow down a bit
when it comes landscape
architects and consider that
national effort thank you.
Such a poll you are muted.
Unsociable executive director of
the New Mexico board of nursing
as the board of nursing was not
consulted related to the
amendments the nursing practice
act this resulted in some
unintended consequences because
the existing expedited licensure
or licensure via endorsement is
struck out in the current
substitution the board of
nursing will be unable to issue
licenses to any nurse was not
practice for a minimum of two
years immediately preceding the
application for an expedited
license I myself would not have
been eligible for licensure in
New Mexico when I moved here in
two thousand and five as I have
been a nurse for only eighteen
months prior to my application
if this bill had been law at the
time.
Well I think that there are
significant safety issues with
the language in this bill
related to the issuance of
expedited license.
As conceptualized in the bill
this should be an alternative
pathway to the existing
licensure pathways not replacing
the existing expedited licensure
this bill may also not New
Mexico out of the nurse
licensure compact which would
result in an increased barrier
to practice as an RN or LPN in
New Mexico the loss of the
continuation in the nurse
licensure compact would also
impact advanced practice
registered nurses currently
seventeen hundred eight parents
use their compact license from
another state as the basis for
their eight Karen likes.
Melissa Charlie you are muted.
Adam chair members of the
committee my name is policy
Charlie I'm the director of
education practice and I would
like to speak to some of the
safety issues related to the
acceptance of education and
licensure from another state so
one of the issues of related to
this is granting full licensure
privilege to practice to a nurse
who has not demonstrated the
minimum competency of passing
the national licensure exam it's
difficult to establish relative
education and practice
equivalents for instance you can
look at a country that is
relatively industrialized a
westernized such as Canada
Ireland or United Kingdom or
even Hong Kong and their pass
rates all very costs and clicks
if we accept their licensure
here in New Mexico you're
accepting the potentially some
nurse who doesn't have the
ability to practice
education of nurses is different
for instance in the United
Kingdom and parts of Canada in
different provinces.
They'll focus on like say you
can select the pathway and adult
fiction adult nursing for
women's health nursing or
pediatric nursing or community
health nursing and not
necessarily again the
competencies and the other areas
which accounts for some of a lot
of differences in the past right
from this process specific
states
and that has been provided in
the and Alice's for those
seeking endorsement from the
United States or its territories
it's important to allow for
verification of.
Thank you now that concludes our
public comment I apologize and
and recognize the opposition
there anyway but let's go ahead
and go to the committee members
I want to say first on the
amendments.
No not on the amendment
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair can we also elevate
Linda Siegel and see if Gail
Armstrong are in the audience so
to be elevated to panelist sure
will you please raise your
hands.
I'm not saying that
Representative.
Okay we can proceed I if they.
They'll text me when they when
they can get on okay we got
Linda Siegel.
Thank you so committee members
we have the amendments before
us.
I'm sure I move adoption of the
amendments.
That hasn't already been made no
it hasn't so we have a motion to
adopt the amendments and I'll
second that.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the amendments.
Madam chair I do have a
procedural question okay.
I was out of the room maybe when
you discussed it but we have a.
Committees substitute so we're
amending.
This is not our committee
substitute so we can amend a
prior committee's substitute
yeah and madam chair if I could
speak to that yeah
Representative Nibert we talked
about that while you were gone
that's right that was enacted
it's a good question was my
mistake to because I thought it
was our committee substitute is
not it's a committee we can
amend that.
And so the the the motion as to
accept amendments to the house
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one ninty one
Madam chair representative
that's correct okay thank you
where fund that is great so we
have a discussion Representative
Chasey.
Try another procedural question
which is do we have the
committee so because when I
looked in the Here file we did
not and we clearly Congress
currently made up of did you did
some of the bill.
Madam I'm.
Representative Chasey it's my
understanding that it's there I
just went to the website and
pull that but yeah I don't I
still don't see it.
We just want to make sure we
have the ones track with the sub
and not the original bill that
that was my only concern madam
chair okay I'm refreshing
it is there.
So the committee substitute as
now and the share file so I
apologize for that delay and now
we have the amendments to the
committee substitute we have a
motion and a second is there any
opposition folks have their
hands up.
So if you have a position where
you just a yell out.
Opposed.
Okay hearing none of will adopt
those amendments Representative
and now on to the bill
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair I just
have a couple more minutes.
What.
I don't have any amendments I.
I do have a couple questions.
Madam chair representative my
first question is I I noticed
that in light of our lengthy
discussion about veterinarians
yesterday that the provisions in
this bill regarding about
narratives is one of the
shortest and I would want to
know what the reason for its
brevity is.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative amended defer
to have my.
My witness Linda trio.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
I hate it.
You would notice that after that
long discussion all we do that
there was in fact some
legislation that was going to go
through the impact of
veterinarians and we didn't want
to have any conflict with that
it's also a practice that is a a
similar to the medical board and
the nursing board is a of
independent from the regulation
licensing department and I
really wanted to have more
conversation with those entities
prior to adding them and so that
would be another one of those
professions so the only thing
that we've done and the reason
that they're even in here is
that we clarified that the rules
are only adopted into the state
rules act the uniform licensing
act rule adoption provisions are
being struck on because they're
in direct conflict with the
state rules act so we removed
them having to do our rules
under the state rules Act and
clarified that any disciplinary
action would be remain under the
uniform licensing that.
Thank you Jim we go into great
detail on some other.
Professions and amber
Representative Marian seem to
Have.
Maybe a little bit different
treatment I just after yesterday
I did jump off the page at the
but but it was a bit unusual
madam chair and and
Former representative.
Okay concern was raised
regarding the nurse licensure
compact may be the ability our
New Mexico to comply with that
are do you have any
concerns or response to that
particular comment because I
think I know my community we
need every possible burst we can
we can get and I would hate to
see us do anything that would.
This allow us from from getting.
Nurses into our community to pro
perform the vital tasks that
they do perform circuit could
you maybe
Discuss a little bit about that
concern that was raised by one
of the public commenters.
And madam chair and and
Representative I'm gonna refer
to Linda Siegel to answer that
first and then if it's not a
complete answer I think the
superintendent could then take
it from there if that would be
okay be great.
Thank you madam chair
representative Nibert this would
have absolutely no impact on the
compact I believe that now there
are.
Twenty seven states who are part
of the compact and if you're
part of the compact and you're a
nurse from another state you
just come here and you practice
we don't know you're here but
but you can practice now what
this is for is a nurse from the
state who is not part of the
compact.
And who wants to move to New
Mexico or come to New Mexico and
practice and that their license
would be expedited in the thirty
day period then they would get a
provisional license for one year
at which time they would have to
find all the documentation that
the board of nursing needs to
give them a permanent license
but it gets nurses immediately
and to the state that are not
part of the compact.
Yeah.
J. R. and and the representative
miss.
That.
That license separate yet to
allow them to practice our
nursing for that period.
I I presume that they then our
observer to see if they are
competent then they may have for
to thank you yes or do some
other things to get their full
license is that what I'm
understanding.
Madam chair representative
Nyberg there's no evaluation by
the board of nursing of the of
that competency unless there's a
complaint to the board of
nursing so it would really be
the responsibility of the
hospital and you know we we we
require for nurses to practice
that they pass a test all the
incorrect and and sometimes it's
difficult the dean of nursing at
UNM occur seven or eight months
to get her license.
Even though she has our license
from four other states she
couldn't get our New Mexico
license because she couldn't get
a copy of her nineteen late
seventies in collects Tax passed
out of California what to occur
months for them to go into the
archives and find that yes.
That she was a competent nurse
and and had passed that test
those are the kinds of things
we're trying to avoid for nurses
who want to practice here and
and and the provisional licence
and Abels that to occur.
Thank you
one last question by just
reading quickly through this up
on page twenty four line fifteen
we struck the words set us seven
and answer to the work resident.
And that seems like a
Change to me I think everything
we do is for the citizens of
them you know other people
coming to our state whether the
residents or or visitors or
whatever their statuses right
and get the get the
so what we try to do is a state
for.
Act health well being of our
citizens but I I'm I've always
seen our duty is to to.
Protect the health.
Is Your welfare of the citizens
of New Mexico so the group could
change just doesn't make any
sense to me but it's it's it's
minor but if there was an intent
to always focus on residents
about visitors I would have a
applicants are any comment in
that regard madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair and
Representative again all and
referred to superintendent
Trujillo since I know she's the
one that did the actual changes
and so she can tell us your
thoughts on why she did that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative it really was
just to clean up you know how
when you do bill drafting and
you have other issues and the
Legislative Council drafter
we'll go through and change
words like G. to license the
this was a change that the
drafter maybe apparently we're
going to work we're we're taking
away the term system and and
turning that to resident but
that certainly doesn't mean that
those are the only individuals
that the boards would have a
responsibility for so that was
just one of those drafting
updates that were provided there
was no intent behind it for any
anything else.
So so madam chair and
representative and and former
representative of the the word
residents were we're not focused
on really residents what just
like before we weren't really.
Focus on citizens it was just
the wrong moment quite sure but
I mean when when I see residents
that means maybe a visitor of
the state in a hotel does it get
the benefits of it in that spot
your attention as as I hear it
where that issue would never
arise when I see the words set
us and because.
I think generally our duties as
a government.
Are to the citizens of the state
at the that provides the
umbrella for everybody else but
changing it from service and the
rest of that.
I'm not sure that's a.
I'm not sure that's a well
thought out move if Legislative
Council yours also I've been
struck in there
bill drafters to do that.
So so I understand that that's
something your department is
doing or or is just Legislative
Council Service Madam chair
representative yeah that was not
a request that we made in the
scope of this it was it was one
of those changes that were was
added in.
Well somebody else agree to
agree we may want to believe
that change industries but
serviceable and that's the only
place that I saw our if maybe
just somewhere else in here but
I do I did see it literally
dropped off the period to do so
without madam chair and
representative thank you
I would like to.
Maybe there's a little bit about
that that one change a lot
twenty four page twenty four one
fifty thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative I'm
sure Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you colleagues and that good
morning.
Superintendent and former
Representative.
Good morning thank you for
bringing this bill it's
important to
in our community in northwest
New Mexico.
We are having a hard time
keeping up with health care on
behalf of our citizens and
constituents and health care
could be so important right now
our emergency rooms are
overflowing and we're in such
dire need of additional health
care providers and nurses.
And I think this would be a good
opportunity especially that
we're close to Arizona Utah
Colorado.
as our neighboring states and I
think Representative Nibert SO
could good questions about that
provision of licensure so
that answered some of my
questions so just wanted to
thank you for bringing this bill
forward and I supported thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Share sorry.
This is Representative Marshall
some more unlimited pass on the
bill.
As as a matter.
As we have to pass on house bill
one ninety one as amended by
Representative Zamora and a
second by Representative Eli.
is there further discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
two passed motion.
Okay seeing none of that you
have a due pass as amended
showing all members present
voting in the affirmative thank
you Representative.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
Great well that concludes our
agenda for today and I want to
thank everyone including the
members of the public that join
us and I wish everyone a good
day Richard.
