Mr speaker agriculture as sick
as a water resources committee
to ms been referred house
Mr speaker move adoption we are
an adoption of the federal
community port and house
memorial sixteen of those in
favor say of this and I.
Those may be as of the committee
consideration point in with
recommendation that do pass and
this referred to the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Susan K. and a chair Mr speaker
move adoption we are not
Was a test of the committee for
doctors Mr speaker sick at your
I don't cultures they give the
water resources committee to is
been referred Senate bill
seventy has had it under
consideration forcing with
seventy of those favors in
advising I.
It was mostly the is are going
to put up to.
Mr speaker your appropriations
that small chair Mr speaker move
adoption wherever we're on
adoption of the federal
committee report on house health
committee in.
Try this again.
signify by saying saying.
Of those opposing not.
This is have it delivered up to.
adoption for that option with
federal committee report on
house bill three seventy five of
those who favor state for the
same time.
Was made the as of a committee
adoption we are on adoption of
federal committee report on
house bill four forty nine of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Was me yes of the good part
about that Mr speaker I
Bill five fifty to pass
respectfully submitted a that
small chance Mr speaker move
adoption we are an adoption of
an unfavorable committee report
on house bill five fifty but a
favorable committee report on
house appropriations and finance
is adopted.
Mr speaker your consumer and
public affairs committee to is
been referred house bill three
zero six has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that I do not
pass but that house consumer and
public affairs committee
Mr speaker moved for adoption we
are in adoption adoption of no
federal committee report on
house with three zero six but a
favorable committee report on
house consumer public affairs
committee supposed to browse
referred house bill three twenty
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation that
that do pass and that's referred
to the transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee respectfully submitted
Was me yes have a good record up
to.
Deleted from earlier visited
Chasey.
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill two seventy
and requests the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
sherry do Lujan Senate chief
committee substitute for Senate
bill one forty seven as amended
with emergency clause Senate
bill one eighty two as amended
Senate bill to twenty two as
bill two eighty as amended
Senate bill three ninety one as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted sure do
legislation state of direction
it is so ordered click to read.
Senate bill two seventy
introduced by senator Correa
introduced by senator Correa
Hemphill Senate bill two seventy
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
providing tax expenditure budget
providing for destination be
sourcing for the Canada cannabis
excise tax requiring the
taxation revenue department to
make publicly available certain
renewed if the licensee is
entering one taxpayer for
certain taxes amending certain
provisions for a claim for
refund amending definitions in
the corporate income and
franchise tax act in the gross
the gross receipts tax exemption
for certain health care
providers including the CO two
government agencies of licenses
to use certain digital goods in
certain gross receipts tax and
gross receipts taxes the leading
expired exemption from motor
vehicle excise tax refund the
position of the trip Tax
clarifying the premium taxes
imposed uncertain taxpayers and
same section of rob repealing
laws twenty twenty one chapter
sixty five section thirteen
amending repealing and acting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight declaring an
bill one forty seven as amended.
Representative.
seven as amended way it's an
emergency clause advantage was
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house
taxation and revenue committee.
Senate bill one eighty two as
amended introduced by senators
coordinator in the department of
environment requiring the
tourism department to cooperate
with federal land management
agencies to develop a statewide
waste reduction program amending
diamond Senate bill one eighty
two as amended having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee then
the house government elections
documents relating to water
rights and water data remain
within the water district where
the documents were filed Senate
bill to twenty two as amended
water resources committee this
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty six as amended
and act relating to notarial
officers and motorists Public
amending personal appearance
requirements for having
access to information is a
grounds to refuse to perform
notarial acts provided for the
official stamp in specified
circumstances clarifying
official stamp requirements
legislative requirements for a
certificate of notarial acts
amending continuing legal
the commission of a terrible
officer.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty six as amended
committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty as amended and
act relating to cybersecurity
and acting the cybersecurity act
creating the cyber security
act inspection of public records
act request reports making
appropriation Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
rules committee substitute for
Senate finance committees of the
diversion route rules committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty as amended have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee this
reporting authority of certain
members of the broader trust
board changing membership of the
water trust board Senate bill
three ninety one as amended
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
agriculture as a guest in water
resources committee.
and miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered
eleven Chavis to have somebody
to introduce us to.
As you.
As you for me and shocked me to
my core last night the this is
So I'm very proud and Graham
Paul I'll look forward to seeing
him soon Sir.
Which made a less.
just just a short announcement.
Several of us of.
Are hopeful that.
night I can still taste I had
smoked one in twenty years and I
don't think we go through that
again anytime soon so thank you
Sir.
Members we have agent bill to
introduce that is House Bill
five forty five the two to five
number is two two five eight
I'd like to remove it from the
house rules in order business
committee.
And referred to the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
Again that is House Bill five
committee and then referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
See no objection it is so
ordered.
is so ordered.
Members so I'd like to direct
your attention to item.
The number.
to that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
three fifty three on final
passage has been taken it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
issues bonds not to exceed two
hundred sixty seven million
dollars in the net proceeds as
adjusted for inflation for
public improvements that will be
owned by the City of Albuquerque
with limited is Mr speaker a tax
increment development had
district is a mechanism to
support economic development and
job creation by providing gross
receipts tax financing for
Thank you Mr speaker will
gentlelady yields I feel to my
good friend from all those
counties.
Gentlelady
understand some of the success
stories of how to do it has been
used and what resulted from
that.
infrastructure in areas where we
might not usually have it a
great example would be the Taos
ski valley which was attended
and also the city of Los crucis.
aware that has has been brought
to me on on the tip process and
not necessarily with this one
but of.
Residents that are in the
general area.
That are not inside the tiered.
Can.
A increase in property taxes
you're aware that.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am.
And Mr speaker gentle lady that
that issue.
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
yes that's absolutely correct.
And gentle lady
with in this area.
process and have they have they
had the interaction with with
the process Mr speaker gentlemen
thank you for the question so
are here today discussing in
front of the legislature in
order to even begin at ten you
have to form a committee you
broader and you also have to
give notice of for any of in any
anyone who could be locally
affected or even not so so that
Gentlelady the structure I think
is important for the body to
understand
in this case
Of the two board would the and
rely on global investment is
that.
Can you talk a little bit about
how the transaction works Mr
the pits the specific developer
or the beneficiary of the Ted
would be going out and utilizing
otherwise roads
Click infrastructure that's
going to benefit anybody around
that area they utilize thank you
used to pay that bond back again
incrementally.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady this this process the end
had this kid not been
implemented is that correct Mr
speaker gentleman yes that's
correct.
And Mr speaker gentle lady can
Mr speaker gentleman there are
restrictions on the utilization
of capital outlay from money and
stay in the Ted statute
everything the ticket is
Mr speaker and gentle lady I as
as your experts will attest to I
have a little bit of.
that said.
The utilization of this tool for
fruitful for not only the
residents of Albuquerque in this
case but it is also a calling
those of negatives that that I'm
that I have been concerned with
so I would tell you that I think
the ticket process.
Is
Is one that.
areas too because development
that we desperately need so
Mister speaker gentle lady thank
you for your time responded the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative dela Cruz.
this forward the area or south
campus is located is is an area
Mr speaker has been in great
need for development for a long
community around that location
as well as the greater community
I have a little bit of
experience with kids but
especially with leader which is
a little bit different vehicle
fell funded we were able to do a
limited ground for the developer
to provide infrastructure around
that particular property.
multiplier effect that happens
with with these type of funding
vehicles and to develop the
subsequent development so Mister
speaker I just want to commend
the gentle lady and thank you so
I yield to my **** my kind
friend from Lee County.
This
is further expanding the the
Mr speaker gentleman the owner
of the property is UNM the
University of New Mexico.
Would be just more than Quarles
this other than the increments
of will be coming from gross
receipts.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
they wouldn't be the the.
incrementally paid off by a
gross receipts tax so there's
really no other public money
involves.
Speaker gentle lady some of the
speaker gentleman no that's not
accurate.
The bonds are used to be
reimbursed after those that have
built the infrastructure have
already.
Build the infrastructure
themselves.
Mr speaker it's by the private
development who pays up front
and then we'll be paid back by
You Mr speaker gentle lady
thank.
Maybe questions been
misunderstood the public
The bonding or is it financed by
the private developer.
Who is in reimbursed.
Mr speaker gentle lady in this
case that would be Lobo
Development the.
Subsidiary of U. N. M. if you
will.
specifically the beneficiary of
the to it or the Ted they are
more the coordinator of the in
the.
Jim would you still somewhat
confused.
Please listen to the rest of the
day thank you for your answers.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
kids.
Mr speaker I yield to my friend
from Bernalillo county.
actually voted for it at the
local level I'm actually very
delighted that this ticket is
coming to us at the state level
What we do is we establish
of a boundary and then sort of a
master plan for how that area
could grow in the future
at that level in that same
master plan is basically coming
before you here this area has
been a great area of
properties that are involved in
that in that boundary area.
and basically of the two kid is
an endeavor between local
gross receipts and property
taxes generated from the chair
and I I sort of.
streets drainage water and sewer
lines as well as transit
improvements trails and
recreational facilities so I
sort of an athletic area because
you have the pit adjacent to
this area you have the local
that is already developed and
kids are common ground in
Albuquerque
and I.
envisioned and comes to fruition
thank you Mr speaker there's
further debate the gentleman
from Canada granted and I'll go
Representative that us us thank
this study this and I've been
listening but so my
understanding is of course is
going to be there it area with
the by the airport is that right
now Mr speaker yes Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
the infrastructure streets and
all the stuff that's going on
that we're talking about the
what I don't know the entire
development but the I've seen
this in Los crucis as wide I
think I have an idea and so they
it should develop more G. R. T..
And the only take the top of
that they don't in other words
accounted touch the base that is
already there only in that
and gentleman yes your
understanding is correct the
speaker gentle lady and outside
of that area.
You can go outside of that area
so long as it complements the
the the project itself so for
instance it's near I. twenty
five so they needed an exit or
to why the exit or something
back these bonds is that the way
I understand it Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman yes correct thank you
this is a good bill thank you so
from Bernalillo yield I yield my
friend from Los Alamos County
right thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady I just like to
understand a little bit more
about how this is all going to
specific law that allows for
such
Corporations gentle lady Mr
speaker that's right correct Mr
speaker gentle lady that is
two committees Mr speaker gentle
lady that I've I've been in.
And so I want to understand a
little better.
confusion some of the funds for
the area will be coming from the
local development Corp in other
parts the funds will be coming
from private industry.
other private developers Mr
speaker gentle lady anybody
who's interested in developing
within the dead.
Whatever that may be
speaker generally maybe I
misunderstood you I understood
you to say that you had
currently lined up other private
developers did I misunderstand
various conversations on this
bill thank you gentle lady there
are some retail large retail
chains that have committed to
thousand square feet or more to
to build out is that all right
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
lady that's correct and all of
that was done without without
specific process that is
promulgated by seated statue
the New Mexico finance
administration and then it
happened and that has to go to
New Mexico board of finance and
then and only then after having
Mr speaker gentle lady love we
know Mr speaker gentle lady that
the county of Bernalillo in the
And we know that the the City of
Albuquerque and the county of
Bernalillo and you want them the
this project is that not right
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct okay in a do we not also
agreed gentle lady and Mr
the final step in which is the
state would become
part of the test process Mr
speaker gentle way so is that to
save and the state is not yet a
Mr speaker gentle lady we're
talking about right now so we're
participating.
Very good thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady and without the
state's participation gentle
county stated have been able to
recruit three or four relatively
large participants in the ticket
do I understand that to be the
through because of the glowing
approval that it is received on
the in various levels of
government all if the municipal
level here to the state of the
board of finance in Mexico
be part of this process so that
they can
The benefits of the new
infrastructure and and help be
part of a successful Ted in the
confident that the state of New
Mexico is willing and able to
participate in this too and and
it is based on that that these
companies have already committed
nothing is ever a hundred
percent absolutely I'm very
these companies I'm sure have
representatives that are
watching us here tonight and are
expecting and hoping that the
get started Mr speaker gentle
lady is there anything in the
agreements that these entities
have with Lobo Development that
in those commitments and they
are taking that chance because
of the funds confidence they
feel on this project.
work is it's the belief that
we're going to be get a
developing incremental G. R. T.
that would not otherwise be
developed with absence of this
retail establishments to commit
to participate in the ticket do
I understand that correctly Mr
speaker gentle lady you do.
Thank you and Mister speaker
attributed to these three or
four entities that have already
committed to Lobo Development.
Mr speaker gentle lady I mean I
particular area it is a hundred
percent certain that there will
be no G. R. T. produced at all
anyway so I mean we can talk
about we can.
there are two tubes in place Mr
speaker gentle lady and that
there are three or four large
developments that have committed
Mr speaker gentle lady so the
baseline was set last July and I
think it's important that we
all based upon paper please go
paperwork that people like you
and me deal with every day but
now the baseline was last year
and we have not started the
Bernalillo Lobo development was
established in July there is no
state G. R. T. there is no state
So Mister speaker gentle lady
the base lining is all
collections.
All current collections for tax
and Representative.
Mr speaker gentle lady help me
understand that
I understand that T. TRD.
Has access to revenue data.
But that was established for the
development that is proceeding
through the the Albuquerque and
Bernalillo kids and my
misunderstanding something.
baseline is set only upon the
revenue from that district and
has nothing else to do with
what.
It's it's it's a specific point
in time.
that will relate to the revenues
that are generated should this
to be approved by the state of
New Mexico and the state of New
baseline and not set by TRD and
then anything.
That set and above from the
baseline would be considered the
inclement.
participation it will not occur
until later this year.
We also know that there are
already commitments for
development of the ticket in the
So the question I have for you
gentle lady and Mr speaker is
why should the state have to
commit.
Four G. R. T. that's already
been committed or are projected
by these three year for entities
that have already committed why
This is regionally so the state
it just is the the project from
a temporal time line as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
development would not occur.
I'm very skeptical that these
things actually work but
assuming they do.
I find it.
participation this development
would not occur because we know
it is already occurring and you
feel and I know the local
development is very pleased by
requirement given the activities
that we've already seen and the
evidence that you have provided
to us and throughout the
committee process Mr speaker and
gentle lady
fifty six million dollars over
twenty five years I would to any
city would but.
legislative oversight of how it
is going to be spent in very
little legislative
accountability Mr speaker and
to obtain appropriations Mr
speaker and gentle lady from the
state we would at least Mr
speaker and gentle lady have the
ability to have the LFC evaluate
understanding Mr speaker of what
is going on with that project
but by you by pledging State G.
R. T. funds we lose all of those
speaker and gentle lady that we
not pass this legislation thank
you very much Mr speaker there's
for divisional members on the
web Representative Harper.
anxiously to this debate because
I'm strange I don't
but I've been enjoying this
debate it's I appreciate that
eight years ago if I remember
right it was the the task
evaluated and we had a great
discussion and we have lots of
new faces here and so I just
really wanna spend like two
You you set up a geographic
location right it's got
boundaries and and in this case
it's the UNM south campus area.
steps for approval and this is
all in our statute right now in
Mr generally this is the very
last step we're doing right now
also MFA.
And and I FE and all these
people refuse to.
You know the big documents that.
is were proving whether the
tended can go out for bonds the
two working over bonds okay.
So that's what right now but how
terminal in dollars madam chair
sits two million dollars that is
locked.
Those two million dollars are
always going to go to you know
the state portion and to the
This point they have no money
they can bond against.
There's no revenue stream
because right now the wind is
whipping internally in dollars
spend ten million dollars to do
some road work and then other
folks come in and they build
buildings they built in a strip
malls or restaurants or whatever
we're making four million
instead of two million.
Now they have something they can
bond against and what's what
what this current structure says
is okay that two million still
It's only the other half of that
rules that they can bond
against.
Now this is great because if we
don't realize that growth if we
don't see that growth and your
team guess what the developers
are left holding the bag not the
state the developers put their
Where yes the state is going to
share.
But it's only if the growth
happens and it's not all that
Mexico and all the other states
do this as well they've been
actually some really successful
University Ted's in other states
it's a list mostly crystal thank
you Mr speaker thank you
generally there's a lady from
McKinley reserve Lundstrom thank
page three the financial summary
and it's been prepared by the
development group.
tax at two hundred ninety two
million property taxes twenty
eight million for total three
hundred thirty six million I
guess my my general question is
on this when we're looking at
Mr speaker gentle lady yes it
does.
And so thank you Mr speaker that
I'm also looking gentle lady at
the tiered revenue uses says
administration of fifty eight
million for a total of three
hundred thirty six million so
when we're looking at the bond
issuance and finance and
Mr speaker gentle lady it's
actually both so the to the
board will provide some
oversight but actually each year
Mr speaker gentle lady the to
the board.
So I'm also looking at
Mr speaker gentle lady that what
looks like to building and
building improvements for R. and
D. and of innovation in parking
structures Mr speaker gentle
innovation that is a company
that's interested in locating in
this to.
Mr speaker generally I'm sorry
can you repeat your question Mr
infrastructure piece is out for
you specifically or is it an R&D
company this gonna locate their.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
for UNM.
five interchange at seventy five
million.
I guess my question Mr speaker
gentle lady is we we talked
extensively today about the P.
million.
Did you think at all about other
sources or is this just all one
combined.
Yes use.
would go back to do it DOT to
support the rebuilding of of
interchanges and other road
projects.
of through the regular process.
Mr seasonally no so this would
be private enterprise investing
in this particular
But then the revenue sources are
a little higher two hundred
seventy eight million because of
the way these appear how these
or the build out could could you
tell me that.
Mr Donnelly the full term build
out is twenty eight years.
So you could have phase one that
gets completed inside the
Geographic Area then phase two
and that gets completed is that
is that the approach for this
This is only the first phase
commercial development in
support G. R. T. growth
immediately.
attract the commercial
development inside the two so
will that be done in parallel Mr
speaker gentle lady I'm I'm
sorry when I meant commercial
it was going to be phased over
twenty eight of over twenty
eight year period and what goes
into the first phase.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Santa Fe of.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
If you could do me a favor and
look up the head of the U. and
that be correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr domino's be phased.
For the developer.
What is.
And I may miss it inside the
bill I may miss inside the F. R.
don't really have an R. O. Y. on
on on the Ted
Mr speaker Jim is not usually
Mr speaker and gentle lady maybe
face a little bit raised a
little bit differently.
We have a developer coming in
Harper's definition of all the
taxes when we start getting a
return.
What is the maximum return say I
spent.
Office of the twenty eight years
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for the clarification so I think
if you'll remember chair
Chandler's comments about the
fifty some odd million dollars
million dollars back in gross
receipts.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
That's the expectation on what
Everything's hitting the targets
what's the maximum amount of
return that that developer
should they say through this the
full return of our reimbursement
of their cost.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so if
I understand the response.
Mr speaker gentlemen I'm each
the project also again this is
for a capitalistic society make
what they need to make an open
reimbursement return.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's where I was trying
or was the profit built into the
project and Mr speaker and
gentle lady answer my question
thank you so much.
There is a for the second time
I yield to my friend again from
all those counties including
Chavis.
Speaker I just thought.
As with all this into this and
tried to discern you know what
Which I do like you and M. as
part of Albuquerque N. as in
institutional part of New
Mexico.
What.
Will allow a growth in G. R. T.
to the state.
And they will incur significant.
Appreciation of property values.
another term this body passed
and I R. B. recently.
Back with we have.
Spent quite a lot of money.
directive to the general fund.
That particular entity.
Is not a corporate system of New
You in the M. Bius.
In this case it's you and and I
would say the same if it was
someone else that that was New
Mexico state it's an
against this in committee.
Because I had questions about
that.
But I have done research I
believe I'm right now that the
process.
bad need of development it will
cause you in the M. to become.
Don't make a lot of money on
this because the appreciation of
their properties going to go up
some of the our bodies that with
past.
Thank you Mr chairman our
mission Baker there's for
dimension lady from really
wasn't wasn't the fan tells
Representative Cadena.
What is the mission of UNM.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
mission UNM is educated students
again alley what was that
amount.
Mrs that's.
Eighty million and Mr speaker
eighty million.
Is there advance but not in the
ticket Mr speaker generally
you know and I probably don't
know enough to ask the right
questions but it seems to me.
This is a lot of money that
we're investing in U and M. to
six million dollars to do this.
From.
Promises on our G. R. T..
And
I I'm just wondering if that's
And was this about the same area
where they were going to build
the United the stadium.
Mr speaker gentle lady of that
is a multi part question I'm
you Ms mission UNM's mission is
to educate students to stage
it's the premier flagship
educational institution of the
state however
are available to take into
account the student experience
and for many people who've been
in and around this area for many
think the university which I
cannot speak for Mister speaker
gentle lady at one point
thought.
Because they're giving people
more chances more opportunities
to work more opportunities to
have experiences more
opportunities to live in other
places or utilize infrastructure
institutional charge maybe maybe
not.
But I think the most important
part of it is that the
university is doing what it has
to what it can to improve the
area to improve the lives of its
and that this is this is kind of
a national problem I mean the
certainly the Univ at CYFD is in
a blighted area that has
happened to many universities
for a lot of this a universities
that started in major cities and
experience huge.
throughout this country I'm just
I I get I wish I had a better
question but I'm just struggling
that we should go and I I don't
expect an answer from you but
that is the question I'm
struggling with thank you thank
you Mr speaker si no further
debate gentle lady to close
of house bill three fifty three
the vote is now open.
Both will lose Representative
Fifty three in the affirmative
twelve and the negative house
The record reflect that election
is a server placing House Bill
three zero four on final passage
has been taking it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill thank you Mr
experts who have been patiently
waiting outside if they arrive
soon Greg Trujillo from P. R.
eight and David are to letter
from E. R. A..
magistrate retirement system or
that judicial retirement system
to create a special needs trust
if they have an adult child with
impair that individual's ability
to receive his or her Medicaid
budget.
And with that Mr speaker I stand
I.
I think I support this bill I
just want to ask a couple
clarifying questions so I
understand sort of the the
consequences maybe of an Action
this legislation so.
The trustee of the trust and
money naming the trust itself on
my naming the beneficiary.
Speaker and gentleman now.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo but it would become
Mr speaker gentleman it reverts
to Medicaid.
Mister speaker July from
the common place that I see it
and so I want to set up a trust
so that way my child is taking
care of that here she is
eligible for Medicaid after I
gentle lady and so I think what
you're saying is if if if and
when my child passes away and
there's a balance left in the
trust the balance doesn't go to
Mr speaker gentleman the trust
ands and the funds revert to
Medicaid.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so I I
go to Medicaid or is that within
the rules within Medicaid.
Mr speaker gentleman it's
dictated by federal law.
because that I think Medicaid is
run through the state but I
guess what I'm getting at is
that and I like the concept
right so you have someone who's
special needs you won't be able
sense it may not be fair that
you work your entire life you
choose you know option B. or C.
that you don't receive a hundred
percent so you're you you select
the benefits sure the spouse or
do here I think that makes sense
but at the same token is one
asking questions because and
what we need to make sure to
that we're not causing that
budget treated to all this and
Gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo county
yields ideal Mr speaker Mr
speaker just a couple questions
Passes away for their survivor
passes away.
The.
additional impact to the
retirement plans of the funds is
that correct Mr speaker sorry
gentlemen that's correct there's
a speaker gentle lady thank you.
bill three zero for the vote is
now open.
Was about to close.
One of sixty five in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house bill three zero four has
duly passed this house.
has been taken it is also the
debate amendment or substitution
the gentleman to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker so
what this bill does is it takes
our New Mexico state statutes
regarding five twenty nine
Can we look to the amendment
well it gets passed out Mr
speaker I move house floor
amendment number one to house
like to introduce my experts
please do thank you Mr speaker
so I have here seem to be having
is Natalie Cordova and Brad both
of our the to guard yes sorry
or guard is legal counsel for
the board.
Thank you gentlemen.
Let's hold off one second will
be when it gets passed out and
they'll have you explain it.
Regimen appears that it's been
passed out when you go and
explain the amendment thank you
Mr speaker I apologize the body
missed one statute whenever we
are having a bill drafted and
consulting with the attorney
behind me who practices in the
serve the law he caught that
statutes that system
C. line you have an amended bill
I think the bill gentleman thank
you Mr speaker with that I stand
for questions there is debate
the gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
looks like I now need to fund
one of these accounts.
Mr speaker I I agree and and I
think I'd be happy to contribute
to that account.
it's a way of for people to use
pre tax dollars to fund an
educational count for Children
grandchildren what have you and
from Chavis as long as it's for
a qualified educational expense
that's correct so Mister speaker
and gentleman I I believe that
this is a great benefit to the
state employees and that we
thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill three forty two
as amended do now pass final
passage of house bill three
negative house bill three forty
two as amended has duly passed
this house gentleman from some
again and towards are you ready
and item number twenty nine.
final purpose my apologies but
we try again that the record
reflect that elections are for
placing House labor veterans
some of their friends Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety nine as amended has just
been taken it is now subject to
substitute for house bill twenty
nine in the construction
industry and acting the elevator
safety act providing for
inspection and registration of
the elevators are speaker right
now our state doesn't allow that
Sen further debate and close.
Well thank you Mr speaker.
The house bill.
labor Senator.
It's contagious contagious.
We are on final passage of house
House labor veterans Military
Affairs Committee subsidy for
House Bill to ninety nine as
amended has duly passed this
house.
reflect that election is server
placing House government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill two seven seven on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
for substitution the gentleman
up here this is captain Salazar
from the Albuquerque fire
department.
Okay the first thing that this
bill does is last year we passed
increases the benefits to the
family of fallen firefighters to
one million dollars to be equal
match of the fallen police
immediately upon the governor's
signature.
With this bill we correct that
this bill says the effective
date for these changes to be
passed by the legislature and
that is the date that it should
have gone into effect finally
the bill updates the threshold
is always sufficient balances to
make the payment should a
tragedy occur.
I really do appreciate the.
And.
I'd like to thank my sponsors Mr
Mr speaker.
I'd also like to thank all of
those who have signed on to the
bill supporters through two
That
house bill two seventy seven do
now pass.
Also with the committee so.
The vote is now open.
The book about to close.
The vote is one of sixty six in
the affirmative zero negative
house government elections and
Thank you Mr speaker when we get
to that point that the record
reflect that election is server
placing House joint resolution I
on final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
What it does it proposes an
amendment to article a six and
fifteen of the New Mexico
constitution extended property
the current property tax
the windows and doors basically
I'm not going to accept some of
the federals but on the other
end federal disability rating
program basically Mr speaker
what this bill does right now if
Senator this bill if you are
sixty percent disabled the
negative sixty percent discount
this bill Senator has a long
accident died over there ten
years ago and then it all went
to the Senate floor and and not
pass because they ran out of
time and four years ago and got
committee hearing all really.
But Mr speaker I would like to
have my call sponsor
I have.
Thank you Mr speaker of you know
all members of the body.
You know I thought talk a lot
about Vietnam because I'm a
Vietnam veteran.
thousand.
I can die there.
We had a hundred sixty thousand
wounded there Mister speaker and
a lot of New Mexico and we have
of legislation caused me to
remember we have a hundred forty
thousand better in the state of
New Mexico and not all of our
disabled but there is a lot of
veterans of those disabilities
sign on a pro number one of my
goals by the the sponsor is also
a Vietnam veteran.
And he knows what it is to be
always over five or six I think
and I Senator.
Mr speaker the gentleman from
the.
In my neighborhood right behind
me and the it's my neighborhood
colors.
The legislature when it comes to
precedent Veterans bills it's
like pulling teeth so I'm happy
And you know all about this
bill.
This is the state thank you to
all over a hundred forty
thousand New Mexicans of that
that this thing goes through the
Representative are going to be
working on this for years in all
of the
under Mr speaker to be a gold
sponsor with them because at the
Mr speaker with that Mr speaker
I move that house joint
commissions and I taxes have we
are final passage of house
resolution I.
in the past this house.
J. lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
three oh seven and as always we
have a packed agenda members
sick note gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
Hastert Education Committee will
eight thirty the morning room
three seventy every signal the
lady from McKinley is San Juan
Representative Johnson thank you
Mr speaker your house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee will meet tomorrow
Members I.
A New Mexico thank you madam
Senate bill one seventy eight at
the request of which has been
referred to the house of answers
Committee and the House
Appropriations Committee at the
Committee referral can only keep
the house appropriations and
finance committee referral.
Understood.
Clear as.
Monday.
appropriations and finance
committee for it is so ordered.
Any other announcements before
we leave donated from Santa Fe
from previous years to maybe
start a little bit later on
Saturday morning and and a
little bit earlier on Friday
afternoon the party begins at
about the rest of us have to be
on the floor to worry being for
third reading Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent for all
members to be excuse but still
Yes absolutely Mr speaker us all
right members were gonna do a
little bit the reading tomorrow
morning during the morning
session as well as some of the
ceremonial this is that we have
and enjoy themselves at this one
hundred bill party the federal
funds for the staff.
Saturday afternoon gentleman
from Sunderland Representative
Harper.
Senator.
Space update.
what about in the morning our
time
a SpaceX rocket launched with
the cruise rag in New for
astronauts to the international
other nations to take a question
odds to the international space
station and back.
And SpaceX has given the United
on a falcon nine rocket which of
course the to the landing
perfectly that we just reached
the hundred.
Mark of one hundred safe state
landings from falcon nine
And you're trying to balance it
as you're coming down that's how
crazy hard that science promise
so it's incredible that we can
very exciting rental costs.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
you'll.
thousand twenty three thousand
services until ten thirty
tomorrow morning.
