Cultural affairs committee.
Is.
Representative.
Make.
Representative we have all the
way up here.
This section is there.
The process was stand for the.
Representative Garcia and.
For the land grants and
development.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee
House memorial forty one is
essentially is asking the Rio
Arriba county commission to
transfer.
The the escalate the building.
Which was constructed the.
by the community economists the
errors of the.
Of one of the some of this land
grants and I'm not going to
dwell on the history of that but
I do want to share with the
committee before I turn it over
to my experts you know
some of the initiatives that the
land grant interim committee has
had with the one about the style
of this land grant in terms of
moving some other issues forward
and helping them alleviate some
of the problems that that land
grant had in terms of really
consolidating the community
around the
part of the positive path
forward in terms of the and
developing and improving the
land grant and you know Mr chair
our land grant you Committee was
there in communis which is the
only village within the home
about the selling this land
grants
in twenty thirteen.
And
upon our visit we kind of adult
with two particular issues one
was a a Water of potable water
project
within the land grant that was
lacking of funding to the tune
of forty eight thousand to
complete the project and the the
minutes of the mystic and the
choir the funding.
To basically do the the water
project
and what ended up happening is
that in the final analysis there
was only enough money to
basically just provide the
village with with half of the
hook ups the bills the No the
well they did bill bill the the
the resolute the tank the water
tank but they couldn't but the
the environment department will
not allow the village to
basically access
the water system until the whole
village was hooked up and that
meant that they still need a
funding for half of the village
that wasn't hooked up.
Well upon our investigation we
discovered that.
That the reason that the needs
of the Mexican that have.
Enough money is that the members
of the mission of mistaken
vessel.
Half of the funding.
So what the interim committee
did is we stepped up
I was able to get line of our
members to commit
Approximately five thousand six
thousand dollars each to come up
with that forty eight thousand
to complete the project and
that's what we did and the and
the village is able to move
forward and connected me to the
majority of the community that
wasn't hooked up and now they
have a functional level photo
Water System.
The other initiative have to do
with the building in question
this will lead the.
Mr chair
we toured in that that grant
interim committee back in twenty
thirteen we we toured the
village and part of our tour was
this early childhood development
centre in the escalate the
ability.
Of which is that question at
that issue here today in terms
of the transfer.
And Mr chair
the the that early childhood
program is so essential to that
region mainly because it's a
regional early childhood.
development program.
That brings in children from
that whole region Lindroth
Guyana well you ought to
and other religious of the queue
The young field the the mess up
on a hill and this or that so
that that that little early
childhood development center
served up
a gigantic void in terms of
providing early childhood
services.
There with their main issue was
the need for a bus.
And
the bus that they had Mr chair
All the seats were taped up with
duct tape.
Of the majority of the windows
what would not lower or raise
because they were stuck.
You know and all the amenities
in the bus at agency functions
there was no radio the
windshield wipers would kind of
go off the line or whatever but
to make a long story short again
this land line when you
committee stepped up none of our
members pitched in eight
thousand dollars and we were to
get the seventy five thousand
dollars for that of that bus
that believe it or not there's
this little of oil that runs
through the village and that bus
would get stuck in not even two
inches of water.
At the end of oil but the so
Mister chair this this land
grant has been really
Heroic.
In addressing their needs and
their concerns you know from the
very onset when it was
established until present day.
And so I want to take that into
consideration when we were
making the decision on the
request before you and with that
Mr chair of like to yield to one
of my experts and if she could
identify herself and also get
into the crux of why we're here
today Mr chair.
How to madam chair which is.
Thank you Mr vice chair go and
proceed thank good morning my
name is Melissa Roxanne
Velasquez and I actually
represent the one about about
this land grants both as a pair
of the land grant and also as a
community member of communists
and first of all I'd like to
start with just really thanking
Representative Miguel Garcia for
how he has helped our tremendous
community of communists if you
are not familiar with communists
it is a very small rural
isolated village I think the
twenty twenty one American
Community Survey estimated the
population between fifty to one
hundred so we are one of the
smallest villages in northern
New Mexico.
to my left and I also like to
introduce the one but he stunned
as Land Grant president which is
he then about this also known as
Heaney and sitting in the
chambers we have
two additional members of the
plan but taste of a dance Land
Grant and then also we have
Rio Arriba county commissioner
my system on this some we thank
him for being here and
supporting our efforts so just
to give you a little brief
history of the one but two seven
this land grant it began in
eighteen oh seven when a man by
the name of one but to some of
this petition the I'll call it a
of the town of Abbey Q.
in requesting that a grant be
issued to him and seven
companions that were traveling
hand with Pam for perhaps more
than two thousand what as of
land in the coming on this path
and not just.
Which is essentially kind of the
communist valley
Garcia then forwarded that
petition to the governor walking
that that out of Allen caster on
February twelfth of eighteen oh
seven with the recommendations
that the requested grant be made
and given.
So on December sixteenth
eighteen oh seven they finally
issued the grant to one but yes
about this and the land grant
and it actually became a patent
to land grant on June nineteenth
of nineteen thirteen so really a
lot of deep history and just a
lot of governmental history as
well being signed by president
Woodrow Wilson himself so that's
quite an achievement for the
land grant.
as I mentioned before are small
isolated community if you drive
there you're going to drive
about three to five miles into
the village you won't find a gas
station you won't find a post
office you won't find a store
there are no facilities of any
kind and you won't have cell
cell phone reception sometimes
you know the weather is so bad
you know if you drive in there
you may not be coming back out
and so it's just you know just
to to give a brief history of
just how isolated our community
really is.
And so one of our main
facilities that we do have is
this building known as the
escalate the and just to give a
history there was the school is
actually made in eighteen sixty
right in the village center so
before New Mexico even became a
state we had our own operate in
school it was then later moved
to the top of the hill known as
liquid chia in nineteen forty
eight and the villagers maybe
that building.
it became it served as a
carpentry and trade shop a
weaving sewing and craft shop
and later a recreational center
along with being on operating
school.
In nineteen seventy three the
community of communist received
a grant with the save the
children foundation out of
Connecticut to actually erect a
building that could provide the
children with a really nice
facility and so the on channels
of the one about two thousand as
land grants basically we're the
ones who then maybe the building
so they gathered materials from
the one forty seven designed
grant and all of the earth and
materials and they actually hand
made the adobe bricks that went
into making this structure so it
took him a couple of years but
my nineteen seventy nine and
nineteen eighty the facility was
made and it became a building.
And really serves as a huge
pillar for the community we've
had voting elections there we've
had funerals there we've had
wedding receptions there we've
had you know activities of all
kinds in this building because
this is basically our one
building of the community where
people can actually gather as a
group and so
The it also houses as
Representative Garcia alluded to
earlier and also houses our
communist early childhood center
which basically shares the left
wing of the building and so yeah
what we are asking today we met
with the county commissioner of
was been very supportive of this
endeavor and we also met with
the county manager for review
Rio Arriba county about a
possible transfer on to the one
that taste of of this land grant
who now has an annual budget and
who is considered a political
subdivision of the state and we
talked about a government to
government transfer so that we
could find more resources for
the community right now this is
a building that stands in the
middle of the community but
remains locked most of the time
on the early childhood centers
open maybe two or three days a
week but the rest of the time
this building remains closed
if somebody needs to use the
building they have to drive one
hour to Espanola pay a fee to
get a key sometimes the fee is
waived other times you know it's
not and then go back to the
community and and be able to
vote to get into the building
and so we just we really felt
the need that you know to serve
our community better and to
provide for our residents you
know we really thought this
government to government
transfer would be necessary
being as small as we are in this
will surprise even me we have
twelve operating organs
vacations in Khan Younis both
the government and nonprofit and
social organizations and they
include you know the one that
testament as Land Grant the one
but yes of a debt advisory group
yes second the Audi Busacca
Commission The pulled by that up
a second association the message
that then the ogress raising a.
Association the young still
grazing Association the M. D.
WCAU the water association the
nonprofit communis early
childhood center of a branch of
the knights of Columbus
concilio the more other this on
me get out content and the sonic
and Catholic Church and so what
we can with today is we reached
a few of these organizations and
they actually we're willing to
sign a letter of support for
this endeavor and sent we think
this is a good thing and yes we
want to be able to use this
building when we can so so with
that I think I'll turn it back
over to representative Garcia
Madam chair of the Fauria be
able to the president of the
Minnesota I do want to reflect
on the that the counties in the
past have made transfers
directly to land grants.
one in particular is the COVID
land grants that the Milan grant
that through the legislative
initiatives mainly and
Representative about us and the
representative but a lot.
It put money into building a
brand new community center in
that the man
the community Land Grant
Committee and the there was
issues with the county of
violence in a that they
basically have no money to
operate it.
So the land grants that up and
said you know we become a
political subdivision in two
thousand and nine
even though the agency had
existed since the the mid
seventeen hundreds and I I went
to the county commission meeting
file with the board of trustees
of the COVID language and making
the request and the minutes a
county had no.
Don't know problems in terms of
doing the transfer seeing that
the land grant was in a better
position to basically seek
operating money's C. capital
outlay monies to improve the the
the lots at cetera in other
cases madam chair was that the
he can land grant the in the
Torrance County again and all
community center
then again the same process the
land grant went before Torrance
County and again Torrance County
so that they can operate it they
didn't have the funds but that
the Land Grant County economic
ramping focal subdivision had
access to resources many capital
outlay money from us you know
and grant monies from non
profits and so that transfer
also
transpired as well and having
said that I'd like to kind of
turn it over to our valiant
president of the
One of the so of this land
grants for some comments
regarding this and that thank
you for a thank you for having
us today
you know there's not a whole lot
more I can say about this that
Melissa has an already kind of
reflected on it.
Just that we we are really
really in need of this building
to be accessible.
To our convenience right now you
know we would like to get
internet to it our kids are
having a lot of problems with
you know getting all the school
work done know that everybody's
doing virtual learning
this is like a great opportunity
for us to offer this and you
know maybe get some computers
for all these kids to.
Come in and do what they have to
do their business not only that
but you know even like older
people that are not like myself
computer literate.
That Melissa could guide us
through all this stuff you know
and Melissa has such a good plan
for this community that we hope
to consider a.
You know how to helping us with
this building so that we can
move forward and and make this a
successful beautiful community
solar.
With that by.
Thank you thank you madam chair
with that we stand for questions
thank you representative Garcia
Representative ms Vasquez and.
About that appreciate it we're
gonna go to the audience if
you're in favor of at house my
goodness the more I just I just
presented myself House memorial
forty one please raise your hand
if you're in support of house
memorial if you're in
opposition.
Okay and the zoom I think if
you're in support of this bill
raise your hands this memorial
there I four we're going to do
about a minute for for each
Madam if you'd like to speak
publicly come up in support of
this bill come up to the front
first and
Here's a microphone if you'd
like to speak in support you're
welcome to.
Representative I'm chairman my
name is voices of money rich
started in going on as I grew up
with my problem and I support
this is very important for the
community communis and it would
help the process surrounding
communities the.
To get more education the
computer so I support thank you
thank you commissioner.
Anyone else in the audience.
Good morning Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is Henry Adam what is and I
worked the majority of my career
in nonprofit organizations that
were run by community center I
know the importance of them
to be able to plan to dream and
to complete what the what is
needed in their communities and
I support all their endeavors.
And I think you.
Thank you.
Anyone else in the audience.
We will go to the zoom yeah
first up is this miss Baca and
you said Baca.
The.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Anne
said Baca and I work for the New
Mexico land grant council I
would just like to speak in
support of this bill and I would
like to say that the council
staff is happy to assist the
Wonda piece of all this land
grant in the transfer.
Thank you thank you Mr Mr Steve
political.
Needs new.
Mr Pellegrini to me there you
go.
Yes my name is Steve Polack of
what is yes the the some of
those Madam speaker members of
the committee I am the president
of the total money of and grant
and we support the endeavors for
one ball to stop Land Grant of
on that house memorial forty one
and we ask for do pass on this
thank you very much is very much
needed all of our communities we
have a the old buildings that
are have have need renovation
and could be useful by the
communities thank you very much
thank you Mr political now we
have looking our way of.
Yes good morning madam chair
and.
Of committee members I'm here of
representing the community about
this the New Mexico.
And the Ontario no under a
community land grant and I just
wanted to express my and our
support as a community for this
bill and for this community to
receive the school building
in our own.
Community history we have a
similar situation in process
fortunately we we have our
traditional as quickly done that
for generations our families
have been.
part of and learn through and
now it's our community center
and we just hope the committee
met the committee members here
today can really value
this community in this land
grants wishes to really self
governed and really have a place
for them to be able to do what
they need to do within their own
community and continue building
the generational generational
growth learning and healing and
and with that I and the rest of
my time back thank you very
much.
Thank you so much are working
next we have missed for the.
Can you hear me yes.
madam chair members of the
committee this is on the up and
yell with the New Mexico land
grabbers and conceptual and I'm
speaking on behalf of the twenty
nine land grants that are under
our umbrella we are in one
hundred percent full support of
this house memorial which will
allow the land grant one of the
stuff like this to get a bill do
they can use to serve their
communities in a better way
so we supported one hundred
percent and thank you for the
opportunity to express our
support.
Thank you so much next up is
letter Martinez.
Good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Leonard Martinez president of
that's all we can get a job
alignment staff are we status
will support a possible forty
one I don't want to start by
this let's say is our tolerant
put it is.
Our neighbor former two hundred
years we have been joined at the
hip.
All together we're part yet this
machine also be more models and
we send all our kids little kids
to our
the publication of this for
their unity program and thank
you again madam chair thank you
so much that wraps up
comments from the audience now
I'd like to go to the committee
of agency at Representative
Sweetser first thank you madam
chair of.
I'd like to welcome our county
commissioner my good friend Mrs
Morales from my home Connery but
my neighbors over here from a
all to slow Costa mesa boda I
fully support this and
glad to see if you guys gonna
put that to use and that it's
not sitting there so thank you
madam chair I hope I get to what
I have to leave in here shortly
but that all the short here
hello Representative here
Representative has them thank
you madam chair Representative I
know like in article of the land
grant we took over the school
need to but we had to go through
the west Las Vegas school
district do you guys know why
you guys are going to this
manual schools.
On the the Espanola school
district is not internal you I
do not have a school no now
thank you Mr I we have a school
district but it doesn't fall
under Espenilla schools that
falls under him as mountain but
and this mountain does not have
ownership of that facility it's
Rio Arriba county because yeah
like I said I can article of the
land grants that's what we
thought we long to with
something the school district
was in the district so we had to
go to the and then my second
question madam chair Mister
Representative why have you guys
gone to county directly why is a
memorial can you explain to us
why you brought the memorial
Representative please I don't
know if I if I can just so we
it's very different with the
county manager regarding the
issue and so she was it was
Lucius Sanchez and she was very
open to a government to
government transfer at that time
so so we have been in
discussions with the county so
but my question of why the
memorial fund I'm just curious
why the memorial flight the
county would and just transfer
the property over if they have
the support.
Madam chair representative
because then all of the.
The land grant basically came
on.
Came to me
doing the treaty.
A day and just the if.
We could draft is a memorial.
To kind of stand behind the
community in their negotiations
with the county so that that the
memorial would have the weight
of the Legislature standing
behind the community and their
request to do the transfer thank
you that's all the more
questions and I will support as
well thank you Representative
anymore Maria.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you for
bringing this
I'm I I love this idea I am from
the that the main areas so I
understand what it the the
benefits of having that kind of
building a transferred to a land
grant that is going to care for
it and and provide services my
question for you is what is your
what is your hopes do you plan
on having it staff throughout
the the the week of like someone
always there always open type of
thing.
So we'd like to to develop a
management plan for it right now
we have twelve organizations
that meet on a regular basis
they all have quarterly meetings
so itself facility that really
needs to be open regularly to
accommodate those meetings
the idea is to have it open for
a certain amount of hours during
the day and
Put it computers and sort of a
learning center in that building
we have a lot of elderly we have
a lot of people that don't have
their own computer and printers
and things of that nature it is
really a burden on a lot of our
population to have to drive an
hour fuel up of cast tank when
we can do something in a
relatively easy and at a low
cost right there in that
building and so yeah the plan is
to have it open on a more daily
basis and really accommodate a
lot of these organizations Madam
chair representative Maria
Because the one but the state is
a political subdivisions
they will be getting
operating monies
general operating monies from
the state legislature in terms
of the revenue sharing plan that
we passed last year so there's
that access to possibly
operating funds for the escalate
the on the other hand then it
madam chair we have some land
grants denticle land run in
particular that is running to
programs.
off of junior funding from some
of us and this will be the
second year that they'll that
they'll be having funds Junia
funds to run a full fledged
senior program the first land
grants to actually run its own
senior program.
And I think she called and the
other program is a youth
program.
that ties in the for H. and some
of the others of the youth
programs from the elementary
because they only have that one
elementary school and the in the
village
so to answer your question chair
representative Moran there there
are these opportunities through
the revenue sharing plan that
land grants seven plays as of
last year and to need funding.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and representative that was
actually going to be my next
question is if you had the
funding for this because thank
god you are a political
subdivisions so you can gather
it by other means or even
capital outlay and that kind of
stuff too do you have any plans
I would live I wish I could have
seen some pictures of it is it a
like a full restored because I
know I was reading some history
on some of the other ones that
there used to be two buildings
in this is the only one that's
still standing and art is it
like a fully restored building
or any solicitation website and
our website is W. W. W. J. B. V.
L. T. dot org.
And there's actually a picture
of our building on one of those
photographs
yeah so yeah there was two
buildings with the earlier one
being built in nineteen forty
eight that was on very
unfortunately a historic
building that was taken down by
Rio Arriba County and
and sort of one building just
remain standing the one that was
built in the seventies so
excellent thank you madam chair
that's all I have thank you
thank you Representative Lujan.
Madam thanks for bringing more
four we can see with the that
revenue sharing that we we
passed last year getting our
communities more active and and
and having to move toward more
for filling activities and this
is one of them so thank you for
bringing this forward you know
it's good to see the multiple of
land grants your neighbors and
everybody coming together on
this this is this is this is
exciting this is what we we
really wanted to see happen with
that kind of
Incentive so this is an
investment in the communities
and I will be voting for this
and maybe what we'll see more
actionable things coming down in
the future and Representative
thank you for your your
attention and your dedication to
our land grants in our
communities and making sure that
you're making all those
connections and getting things
done thank you madam chair
that's all I have to say thank
you Representative SS.
Thank you madam chair I I think
thank you Representative for
bringing this up even a fighter
for and grant.
My question and I didn't get a
clear answer maybe it was me
that in here it says here is
here collier county
commissioners I think your three
man commission there.
Sorry are your caricatures
behind
transferring the the the
building.
Madam chair representative
process
I think that's the the the the
negotiations are moving forward
for sure the the current county
commissioner in the audience
Weiss's Morales is definitely
behind this
in terms of the outreach that
that Melissa has done with the
other
to commissioners I'm not sure
what the relationship is there
but she can respond to that I
know for a fact that there has
been ongoing dialogue with the.
Past the county manager that was
That was basically a terminated
a couple days ago so they have
to kind of re in in in kind of
re ignite that relationship with
the county manager
and but if you could address
that then this so I have Rio
Arriba county commission
invoices Madison audience today
because he is actually the
county commission at whole falls
within our district and so he
represents us and so he has been
the one that I have been in
discussions with I understand
that there are two county
commissioners that yes
became county commissioners and
I will let my sis actually speak
to that he knows more about sort
of the kind we have
in you but I wasn't sure.
I'm pretty sure those support is
because we have so many
buildings in our county we don't
have the money to pay the
insurances and to maintain a so
I'm I'm a hundred percent sure
there will still support me on
this.
Thank you.
If.
Thank you madam chair that was
one of the important thing for
me is to know what whose
district is you know that that
holds a lot of water with me and
all I think it's important for
us to listen to the people who
electors per those those
individuals in those districts
or whatever didn't does matter
what
what your offices I think you.
The whole some water you know
in in that decision so it's that
was my big thing the other thing
is do you have plans on on using
the when you say it for the
community as a committee of
public of community service
building or a place like that so
you are you gonna run it with
volunteers and you did a good
job you your reply mind madam
chair this disclosure you might
your reverse all questions I'm
about us he says I was are gonna
ask about doing your money who
was helping out in these he's
ahead of me so that's why I
waited but my my question is do
you have do you have volunteers
that are maybe going to help
with this and I'll just add to
to keep it short the gonna have
wifi in there sounds like and
then and then you better have
coffee and doughnuts were no
auto higher Madam chair
representative I have a copy New
Mexico to the.
Well you've got me we've been at
this okay good every way Madam
chair of the have ritually and
the my blue and green chili I
think I was grateful for the
yeah you made we made gentle
restaurant.
So no manager that was my big
thing is is to see where the the
county but if if the commission
himself feels that he has their
new I hope the Madam chair
representative they don't fire
the county the county manager
over this issue.
I'm not sure but
anyway.
Representative came up it was a
couple days that's it Madam
thank you just want to make
everybody smile madam chair
Thursday maintenance hungry miss
my little bit
thank you present that access at
your madam chair before.
I just want to let them know
that they have to modest party
because I know in our community.
Schools that we have a new
year's party we had it we
haven't had in a long time so
we're waiting to go a facility
at the
chair I am the commotion for do
pass on house rule forty one.
Great.
Representative Lujan.
Representative more of a million
yes.
Representative Terrazas yes.
Vice chair because they are a
yes and chair or tennis yes.
You have a do pass on house
memorial thank you very much
lady who heard what you've
promised you remember that
donuts and biscuits to those of
us so let them.
And thank you very much and
before before we adjourn I see
there's lots of young people in
the the audience today
to someone I just tell us who
you are where you're from you
guys.
Seven I'm showing it under
school had me at the factors
here to talk to representatives
and learn about how the process
works here in the states very.
Welcome welcome thank you so
much
would you all like to well to
Representative to introduce
yourselves.
It's it's not usual but I just
you know anything that we can do
to support young people working
through the involved in civic
engagement is it as important
thing so just just tell us your
name about possibly if you will
that offices
the first
quarter.
My name's Taylor Rowland I am
the secretary of I think chapter
and the senior this year hi my
name is Nancy Cordova and
treasure and I am HSD hi my name
is by one I'm an infinite and
I'm currently don't hold off.
But if if I ninety five chair if
were you guys from ID here.
Be aware of public charter
school law for this New Mexico
okay my district yes okay this
name right so secure us.
From the planet after and I'm
the treasure we just consumers
want to.
Sure did you bring facility.
She is a good cook she makes off
Additionally you
Representative one case of
death.
President.
able to DO number here and I'm
student adviser.
My name's Barbaro to make
greater and so.
Wonderful.
Have a.
All wonderful madam chair.
I just hope madam chair that
these young individuals don't
just with the vetted visit us
once the continued COVID pay
attention to what legislation
with the supported or they don't
support it be involved pay
attention listen to what's going
on we need to see you guys up in
the gallery it more than just
one time I'd love to see you
guys it's a very they're very
important part of our
legislative process manager Mr
chair representative a we have
this side as well.
I have Tyler glorified a
Sentinel for Cleveland high
school interactions wonderful
thank you.
Hi on the Lee I'm the vice
president of.
One hundred secretary for.
Emily games the reporter for
Cleveland high school chair if I
may want to Sentinel Sentinel
Sentinel Mr right right the
staff at the.
Billboard center the sergeant at
arms.
In our hi we're so glad that
you're here we're we're gonna
during this committee but I'm
I'm so honored that you were
able to come and see the very
end of it and the vote and and
thank you where we're all
running around so just so you
know have grab us when you want
to chat.
That we're good all right this
meeting is adjourned thank you
madam thank you.
