So much thank you madam chair
and members of the committee
again not my name is Dr George
let the I do work for the New
Mexico land grant council as
well as the UNM language studies
program it's a pleasure being
with you guys here this morning
to provide you with some
information about land grants I
know that many of you are new
members of this committee and
some of your new to the
legislature and so it's always
good to be able to have an
opportunity to provide you guys
with some background
information.
So what hopefully you guys have
copies of the presentation feel
free to follow along on if you
like.
And if you at any point have any
questions on something
specifically that I'm covering
for free to stop me or we can
just wait until the end.
So to begin with
the term Land Grant Merced is is
a term that of it's it's here in
New Mexico both of the term Land
Grant and Merced are
interchangeable
Essentially a land grant is the
English version of Miller said
and the term is used to refer to
grants of land that were given
by this Spanish crown of the
Mexican government between sixty
ninety two in nineteen forty
six.
We actually have some land
grants that are a little bit
older than eighteen forty six
they came into New Mexico as
part of the guests to purchase
down in the Los crucis area.
I was originally granted they
ranged in size from several
thousand acres to several
hundred acres and so these were
communities that were either
existing such as the the pueblo
communities here that the Indian
public tribes that already
existed and which receive grants
from of for their title from
from the Spanish crown and then
also communities that were is
being established and so in
order establish these
communities there was a need for
a property
for those communities to be able
to sustain themselves and so the
common lands were to provide for
that I'll talk a little bit
about that in a bit today the
term like grammar said as used
in the statutes forty nine one
in forty nine for refers to land
grants as local government
entities.
There are
Kind of two different
distinctions for land grants
individual land grants versus
community land grants is a term
that you often hear an
individual
So in total there was two
hundred and ninety five land
grants or granted by either
Spain or Mexico in what is now
New Mexico and southern Colorado
Of these hundred fifty four were
what we consider community land
grants and that means that they
were given to either of a group
of families or individual on
behalf of a group of families in
order to establish or settle in
you community and then a hundred
forty one of those were it to
individuals when grants were
given individuals they were
given usually for service to the
crown and the.
We're for the purposes of also
establishing community so what's
interesting is an in Spanish law
both community land grants that
were given to multiple
individuals for community and
individual and grants were given
to one individual I still have
the requirement of settling
people on the land the main
difference was that in the
community requests you could
gonna have a locally elected
town council that would oversee
the the management of the COVID
lands where is the individual
land grants it was that
individual receive the grant
that had the ability to to
determine who the man would be
in who the they actually would
have the title of a call that
which was like a more they can
appoint their town council that
was a position that they would
have for life and would pass on
to their children so long as the
only grant.
of the eighty two of the
community grants eighty two of
them including the twenty three
public grants were issued by the
Spanish crown and forty nine
were issued by the Mexican
government after the establish
independence in eighteen twenty
one.
there are all of the non public
requests in New Mexico were
predominately settle by either
mestizos which were individuals
who were of mixed up the the
American leading European
Spanish blood or any settles
which were full blooded native
Americans who became
hispanicized.
So land grants on share similar
characteristics they all had
their strict boundaries of the
land grants establish individual
documentation they contain both
private and public land so there
are private lands held with the
land grants historically those
were to establish the housing as
well as maybe a small plot for
guarded and for your home and
then on the majority vast
majority of the lands were held
in common for the beneficial use
of the entire community and that
included with the common land
and the COVID waters
these are the common lands are
very important the historically
and still to this day the ID
since we provide all the natural
resources that a community
needed to establish itself and
the Is land these communities
today land grants rely on those
common lands as part of their
sort of the cultural fabric of
of those communities and uses
include the pastor and and
watering of livestock the
gathering of fuel would for
heating their homes as well as a
heat source for cooking as many
of you may know still in parts
of northern New Mexico because
of a lack of natural gas
fuel what is a major source for
heating homes in the winter time
and help sort of folks offset
the high cost of propane.
Also the gathering of now the
natural resources for building
materials so this includes
timber I could include soils and
rocks depending on what was the
more abundant resource in a town
you can always kind of figure
that out when they're
established because all the old
buildings are either going to be
more out of hock on this page or
a new style of building homes
with the because instead of
using because these kind of
posts setting up better than in
case divide or they may be all
rock or they may be out of a
little bit so it just really
depends on what was the the most
abundant resource that was
closest to the community at the
time it was established also in
the gathering of of floor our
vegetation for various purposes
this can include medicinal
purposes religious purposes as
well as as a food source.
hunting and fishing also the
common lands we are used for
that even to this day a
religious and cultural purposes
in most Land Grant communities
the cemeteries that are used
actually our own belong to the
land grant on the they manage
those for for folks to be able
to to bury their loved ones when
they passed on also the
placement of community
infrastructure such as water
waste water treatment we have
some land grants that have
wastewater lagoons located on
the COVID lands or their of
water drinking systems the tanks
also roads most of the roads in
Land Grant communities still
belong to the grant they maybe
know maintainer managed by the
county or sometimes our state I
we but the ground underneath the
highway is actually still owned
by the land grant we've had
instances where the land grants
with that state highway is gone
and re alligned the road and
when they do that they actually
turn the property back they'll
do a transfer will get you
acquire new right of way
somewhere in the grant to maybe
straight in the road and they
abandoned the old property goes
back in reverts to the land
grants also Ecker cultural
purposes some land grants have
community orchards or they might
have community garden spaces
etcetera and then obviously just
recreational purposes would come
into sort of a modern modern day
folks you some of the comments
for camping or for picnicking in
those types of uses.
Today there are approximately a
thirty five act land grants that
are organized with some type of
a governance structure so from
the hundred and fifty four we
were talking about earlier
there's only about thirty five
that remain active today of
those twenty three are governed
as units of local government
under chapter forty nine one and
forty nine for so they are
recognizes political
subdivisions of the state which
I know those some questions
about that a couple of meetings
back and a political subdivision
is essentially just a local unit
of government that's been
recognized by the state of New
Mexico.
Of the remaining land grants
organized and separate statutes
that are governed them or as
private entities with someone
requests that are that have
converted to a livestock
cooperatives for example that
maintain manage the the common
lands and the common resources
that that was due to
the potential loss of lands
during the thirties when they
started getting taxed a lot of
the new deal programs came in
and provided loans to the land
grants to be able to pay the
delinquent taxes in order to do
that though many of the
committees had to convert to
livestock cooperatives and so
the livestock cooperative now
manages the assets of the grant
we also have some land grants
that are organized by
corporations where they have
shareholders that'll have sort
of interest stake in the
ownership and management of the
COVID lands and so those ones
are organized a little bit
different and then we do have
other land grants that are
recognized Pacific Lee in
statute when land grants
statutes were being pastor the
charcoal period initially they
were passing land grants for
teachers are legislation for
each specific Land Grant and so
you can have a list of to a
whole bunch different land
grants that have their own
separate statutes and then they
started actually doing some
groupings of land grants with
some general legislation that
would apply to land grants and
so there's three different
pieces of legislation that
passed in regard to that today
most land grants following the
general provisions and I'll talk
about those a little bit
collectively the land grants are
existence manage well over two
hundred thousand acres of COVID
land throughout the state of New
Mexico now this is a only about
three percent of the total lands
that the originally held
understand New Mexico those a
registered in the millions but
because of our land lost to do
various reasons which I'll talk
about here in a bit today most
land in total land grants only
have about three percent or two
hundred plus thousand acres that
they manage.
And of those land grants the
largest one is the ontological
and grant which itself that has
more than half of of all the
common lands they have about a
hundred four thousand acres that
they manage on that's still only
about a third of what the
original land grant was they
lost a lot of it through land
speculation in the education
process as well as through
delinquent tax years and so then
the from there on land grants
and
the next biggest ones I think
that we are and that's what has
about thirty thousand acres and
then they go down to somehow
move the seventeen or eighteen
thousand acres to the less than
ten thousand acres and we have
some land grants that maybe only
have a couple acres but they may
have a community center that
they own and that they manage
for services for the community.
So what happened on the land
grants most became defunct due
to land loss Hernandez was
either as a direct result of the
federal land education process
that was required and defeated
when we don't go which I'll talk
a little bit about more later
The presentation also land
speculation there was a lot of
individuals when land grants for
first confirmed they came in and
were able to get interested in
the land grants and then
partition them to for partition
and oftentimes the communities
never even realize that they
lost the land the just lost
access to it and it wasn't
discovered until you know
sometimes ten twenty thirty
years later were absent to and
come in and start fencing off
the property that they realize
that they had actually been a
loss of the land delinquent tax
property seizures
the state of New Mexico after
land grants became patented
around the nineteen thirties
started taxing land grants
understand New Mexico actually
didn't pay taxes on the comments
because it was communal ends
that were guaranteed by the
community can be alienated or
sold and they didn't get taxed
on and hundred under the state
the begin taxing thank grants so
immediately a lot of land grants
lost land because they were land
rich but cash poor I had no way
of paying the taxes on the
properties and then also through
encroachments in adverse
possession over the years you
had individuals sometimes even
from within the community so we
just kind of extend their
private claims and then maybe
make an adverse possession claim
down the road from there
actually no longer able to do
that I don't explain that a
little bit here in a minute.
So under state law all the
statutes that pertain to land
grants can be found in chapter
forty nine of the New Mexico
statutes these actually find
their origin of all the land
grants statutes find their
origin during the territorial
period.
there are two articles
specifically articles wanted for
the recognize land grants as
local units of government or
political subdivisions of the
state of New Mexico
that first occurred in two
thousand and four and then we've
had some land grants that have
sort of been added to that
process subsequent to that
there are eight other articles
recognizing other governance
structures for land grants and
those are those that have
specific statutes are not
considered local units of
government the courts have
defined them as quite as I
municipal entities which means
they're semi pro public semi
private entities
and then article eleven of
chapter forty nine establishes
both a land grant council and
also established through passage
of legislation last year the
land grammar said assistance
fund which provides a guaranteed
revenue stream for land grants
from the state of New Mexico.
And it's only for those land
grants that are operating as
units of government.
So as you it's a government as I
mentioned there are twenty three
twenty two of those are under
forty nine one which is known as
the general provisions it's
interesting because the general
provisions actually where the
last statute relating to land
grants that was passed during
the territorial legislature in
nineteen oh seven and that was
kind of a catch all to to catch
any Land Grant that wasn't
covered by any other previous
statute
when the statutory compiled
through the New Mexico palatial
Commission
the place the general provisions
as the first article of the
statute and I think that created
some confusion for folks that
time and and went over the
history of land grants many of
the land grants to didn't have a
specific statute there was no
official list as to where you're
governed there was a couple of
other statutes which are now
article two requests there were
also sort of catch alls on those
each of those statutes of those
two different inexpensive those
and they each had a sunset
clause of five years so land
grants have to take a positive
step forward to be recognized in
that process but there is no
sort of master list so over the
years and the courts as well as
sort of confused and mixed land
grants all into the general
provisions and so those are the
statutes that we focus most on
today.
the six land grants there are
only six land grants that are
name specifically in the general
provisions those are the tenant
Amanda at the school but not the
land grant the San Antonio the
real cool about the months on on
the state we are in the holy
land grants
historically there were no land
grants named in the statute but
there is an provision within
that statute that allows for
land grants that are organized
any other statute to be
recognized under the statute and
repeal their their previous
statute or just come under if
they were under for example
article to and so beginning in
two thousand six we had land
grants that started coming under
the statutes in order to be
recognized as and the governor's
political subdivisions of the
state and so these are the six
land grants that are that are
name of the statute
and the other land grants the
other seventeen land grants that
operate at each including GDP
which has its own statute
recognizing it and then the
other land grants are all units
of government the comply with
the statutes they do everything
to meet them but they're not
named in statute which is cost a
little bit of confusion in the
past and that's why
one of the sort of issues
missions we hope to do is
actually get all the land grants
are currently operating as
political subdivisions named in
the statute and these are all
and requests that have received
patents and that have been in
existence since their inception
and they just need a recognition
under the statutes provide
variety of reasons one it would
clarify which land grants are
governed by the general
provisions and are therefore
considered local units of
government it is also important
for the proper recognition of
the governance status of these
land grants by the federal state
and other local government
entities I'll give you some
examples because we have someone
requests that are named in
statute they've had issues
getting the government license
plates from the department
transportation for the motor
vehicle.
Division I'm sorry
they've had trouble getting
eligible to purchase from GSD
through the surplus auctions
that they have
sometimes counties aren't aware
sort of their jurisdiction and
they're not sure if the units a
government and so they'll have
jurisdictional questions or
issues with the counties we've
also had federal agencies that
have not been able to fund
programs for land grants just
most recently the Santa Barbara
Land Grant impending Osco has
been engaging in some field what
projects for the community and
they were trying to get some
help from the National Guard to
deliver some of those field
what's that were coming off of
the the burn scar from the
fires.
and because the work listed the
National Guard had to go through
the county that's what we're
going to do with the county to
to go through the county because
of their status was was just not
clear in the statute it also
clarifies the status for the
private sector
In terms of the banking for
example when land grants I go to
open bank accounts because
they're not it's not completely
clear that they're in statute
sometimes the banks don't know
how to deal with them in the the
considered to be maybe like a
LLC or some type of a corporate
body that's more of a the
business type also tax exemption
from retail taxes units a
government they do rate Services
taxes on services but they don't
pay taxes on tangible goods so
being able to clarify that for
retail private retailers and
then also clearly data
delineates which land grants are
eligible from distributions from
the land grant research
assistance fund that was created
last year
the agencies like the state
auditor's office with knows what
will know which land grants
specifically have to report to
them because they'll be listed
in statute as well as the
department of finance
administration local government
division budget finance bureau
it'll make clear which land
grants are eligible for capital
outlay appropriations from the
legislature as well as other
governmental friends.
So under the general provisions
are number of authorities that
land grants have all of the
management authority for land
grants is vested in the board of
trustees and that's been
established through legislation
the board of trustees elected in
accordance with the statutes as
well as the by laws for some
very specific provisions in the
by laws that spell out what what
am I going to do in terms of
their elections and then also
what they must have contained in
their by laws as relates to the
elections the board of trustees
are then empowered by the
statutes to control care for and
manage the COVID lands and
assets of the land grants as
well as can be lease or mortgage
the COVID lands in accordance
with their by laws they can
determine the uses of the land
of the COVID lands as well as
set the prices for those uses
they're able to and to make my
laws rules and regulations
they're also able to determine
zoning of the COVID lands so the
common lands owned by Land Grant
is actually under their soldiers
diction if a land grant has a.
Comprehensive plans that they've
adopted then they have a zone
Authority apart from the county
so a County we'll have the jobs
owning jurisdiction over all the
private lands maybe within a
land grant but they don't have
jurisdiction over the comments
of the requests so I think I can
determine the the the land use
as well as the economic
development in the
infrastructure for their
communities and
they also have the ability to
enter into government to
government memorandums of
understanding with both state
federal and tribal governments
those are all on authorities
they have under the statute.
Obligations that land grants
have as as local units of
government they must comply with
the open meetings act they must
comply with the inspection of
public records act with the
state audit act they have to
submit annual budgets and
quarterly reports to the
department of finance and
administration they are unlike
other units a government in the
state of New Mexico land grants
pay property taxes so the do you
rate property taxes for the
plans that they have so the even
though the now receiving
distribution there's actually
money that they give back to the
coffers of the state
and then also reporting to the
Land Grant registry which is
housed at by the New Mexico land
border are managed by New Mexico
in the council and the reporting
requirements are that every time
a land grant has an election
they must update the the list of
their officers for
for the registry and then
anytime they make any changes to
their by laws they have to file
those changes of their by laws
with the with the registry as
well.
Now as you as a government these
land grants also received
certain protections this
includes being covered by the
tort claims act so land grants
are immune to most tort claims
and for those tort claims that
they can be sued for for example
if they own a vehicle and that
vehicles in an accident they are
eligible to be covered by the
risk management division tort
claims liability coverage that
they have
and so there are caps set on the
amounts that can be awarded if
the if they are found
Have been the cause of of some
type of an injury under a tort
claim.
They're also exam from the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act so the
Civil Rights Act that was passed
a couple years ago land grants
are exempt from that the cannot
be sued under that act this is
primarily because land grants
don't have up this police
functions in the sense of being
able to have like a police force
what law enforcement agency they
do have sort of policing powers
over the common lands in terms
of being able to determine uses
and and sort of prevent folks
from trespass and that type of
stuff but they don't have law
enforcement and in the same way
that it municipality or county
does.
In addition the common lands are
now protected from adverse
possession in two thousand seven
the legislature past of a law
that no longer provides for the
adverse possession of the common
lands of the land grant so if
there are any claims that did
not vast potential adverse
possession claims that did not
vest prior to that period land
grants can no longer have their
common lands adversely possessed
and as I mentioned before this
is one of the major causes of
land loss for Committee Land
Grant so on this kind of will
protect and preserve their
common plans for the community
for into the future.
So I know that
The the other thing that land
grants kind of do is they serve
oftentimes they are the only
local government entity within
the region twenty Representative
so in in some of these rural
counties where we have counties
that are under resource and
strapped for you know providing
services to communities
oftentimes is land grants are it
so they will be the only sort
of.
Entity that can service a fiscal
agent on to receive capital
dollars as I mentioned before
the often times are the ones who
own the community centers there
used for community functions and
that can include anything from
graduations funeral receptions
wedding receptions to just
general community use community
meetings are typically held in
there their communities we do
have some land grants that
actually provide senior meal
services out of their sites we
have some land grants that have
museums for that open to the
general public for the community
and so these are all some of the
modern functions immigrants have
more trustees also engage in
policy discussions and
conversations with federal
agencies as it relates to the
former common lands for example
a lot of the former common lands
as a as a result of the judicata
process are now managed by the
federal government
either by the B. L. M. by the
Forest Service is some of the
National Forest and so land
grants will engage in policy
discussions with them regarding
use many land grants
participated in the forest plan
management plan revisions that
just currently wrapped up it was
a process to begin in two
thousand ten and just finished
now in two thousand twenty two
on the land grants were involved
in that to ensure that their
uses of those resources are
protected in those plans.
Now I know there's a question
that came up the last hearing
that we were before this
committee on house bill twenty
that related to sort of federal
jurisdiction verses state
jurisdiction over land grants
were said this I wanted to kind
of walk through some of those
potential issues and and make
sure that the committee was can
kind understood those.
So when we talk about federal
jurisdiction and this is one of
the questions that was raised.
By some of the opposition to
house bill twenty at the last
meeting
the brought up that the state
passing any legislation relating
to land grants and recognizing
land grants would actually be a
constitutional violation so the
root of that claim as I
understood the day that they
mentioned it comes from the
supremacy clause of the U. S.
constitution so it's article six
and the supremacy clause
essentially is that the
constitution and the laws of the
United States which will be made
pursuant there of and all
treaties made or which shall be
made under the thirty ninth seed
shall be the supreme land
supreme law of the land and then
the state should be bound
thereby on and the.
Anything in the constitution or
laws of any state to the
contrary notwithstanding so
essentially what that
establishes that of federal law
and treaty law over the
constitution actually and
Treaties are sort of on par with
each other when it comes to sort
of jurisdiction for for of
federal jurisdiction and so
that's kind of the the impetus
for why I think the claim is
that under the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo there was a a
process for recognition a land
grants and so when I walk
through that now because the the
treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo what
applies to land grants is the
property provisions
you know it's a treaty of
sessions so it was the United
States at the close of the
Mexican American war in eighteen
forty eight the Mexican Republic
ceded nearly half of its
territory to the United States
government and at that time this
there was a tree that was
established sort of for that
transfer of property and
included in that treaty were a
couple of articles that dealt
with with the property so land
grants there was a specific
article in the treaty article
ten that specifically mention
land grants and the the
importance of recognizing them
however the United States Senate
when it ratified the treaty
struck that article so the the
article that mentioned land
grants was stricken from the
treaty and it no longer is part
it was not part of the ratified
treaty what did remain in the
tree that was released property
rights were article eight and
article nine article eight
provided that any Mexican
citizens who lived in the
territories could remain in the
territories or they could elect
to keep the Mexican citizenship
and leave the territory if they
decided to stay in the territory
a year after the signing of the
treaty became U. S. citizens and
those that remain retain the
property which they possess in
the state territory so the
property was to be respected in
the same way as any other
individuals property would be
protected under the United
States constitution.
Article nine
Also said again it stated that
those
Mexican citizens remain in the
territories could preserve their
citizenship and if they chose to
if they owned property they were
not in in the United States they
could maintain the property but
they also those that remain of
the property they would have the
state eventually be admitted as
citizens of the United States
and at in that year's time and
they would maintain the
protection for enjoyment and
liberty of the liberty and the
property as well as the secured
in the free exercise of the
religion without restriction so
this was applying some of those
constitutional protections to
them through the treaty and so
these are the only sort of
mentions of property in this in
the statutes and so when a land
grant is.
Protected under the treaty
because article ten was stricken
they're protected under the
treaty as a property owner the
same is an individual might be
protected under the tree so the
obligations for the United
States under the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo we're to
recognize those private property
rights that were held by
citizens within the seated
territories and why this is
important is because when under
the the law of nations when he
territory is seeded by a foreign
by sovereign to another
sovereign so when Mexico ceded
to the United States they only
have the authority to give the
property that that sovereign
owns so the public domain so you
think about today the United
States all the BLM land on the
for service land if if the
United States were to see the
southwest let's see to Mexico
today the only thing that they
could give title to the next
government would be all the
public plants.
They don't own the.
The private lands because those
have already been defeated
through a ballot title by a
prior sovereign in this case
either Spain or Mexico and so
those properties can be seated
by the government then those
properties are then respected by
the new sovereign and there's a
process where they have to
recognize what is private and
what is actually public domain
right so.
that was the treaty obligation
for land grants under the treaty
was to have their properties
recognized now the treated by
blue dog was not self executing
meaning it didn't have specific
provisions in the treaty that
spelled out how the United
States was to go about
recognizing private property
claims within this territory
ceded so in order to do to
accomplish this task Congress
was required to actually pass
legislation spelling out exactly
how of the property rights were
to be recognized and they did
this through to specific acts in
eighteen fifty four Congress
passed the organic act which
established the surveyor
general's of New Mexico and one
of the tasks of the surveyor
general of New Mexico was two in
addition to what every other
surveyor general the west had to
do was establish the township in
ranges and serve the lands for
disposal of public domain for
disposal to homesteads they also
had the duty of.
Investigating and recommending
which private planes in New
Mexico we're had valid title
under other under mix under the
Mexican government either to
spend a little time to spare
Mexico and then recommend to
Congress to confirm those those
claims and so that process
lasted from eighteen fifty four
to eighteen eighty one it was
under resourced the surveyor
general original service in New
Mexico the first one on his way
to New Mexico was trying to
learn how to read Spanish it was
a big task obviously they will
they don't have the numbers and
Spanish or Mexican laws they
didn't understand how to read
and write Spanish most of these
deeds or an old Spanish scripts
some of them is as mentioned go
back as far as sixteen ninety
two so the records were often
times incomplete and under that
act the surveyor general had the
authority to recognize land
grants under Spanish laws and
customs one of the things that
they did for example as they had
the authority to recognize that
the community already existed
that was likely proof that a
grant was made to that community
because that was the way grant
communities were settled
and so they had a little bit of
more broad discretion but that
open it up for land speculation
and for corruption of even the
US government Fishel we had
several surveyor generals that
became some of the largest
landowners in the in the in the
country because they were
defrauding these communities of
their comments
as a result of that Congress
passed in eighteen ninety one
the quarter private land claims
act which recognized a tribunal
that would actually oversee any
claims that had not already been
acted on by Congress so one of
the surveyor general process
since our regional could just
recommend to Congress to confirm
a grant and then Congress
actually have to pass
legislation up for that grant
recognizing them as having
private a private claim and then
the land that would be issued
later by the general land office
of the United States under the
corner private land claims any
land grant that had not been
previously adjudicated or any
private property owner not just
land grants could come before
that a tribunal and have.
Their claim heard and decided
and the court itself had the
authority to then confirm the
grant which would then be issued
upon by the United States
general land office so that
process lasted from eighteen
ninety one to nineteen oh four.
During that process
many land grants did receive.
Land plans to to their ownership
many did not many land grants
the the adjudication was taken
up by attorneys on their behalf
for the price of one third of
the common lands or up to one
half sometimes and then these
attorneys got kind of smart
about in the ended having an
interest in the lance within the
with the the created legislation
here at the territorial level to
allow for partition suits where
they could then sue it for
partition of the grant first the
sale of the grant and then get
the proceeds of that sale often
times they had individuals that
were set up to make the
purchases there was a group of
attorneys and politicians known
as the Santa Fe ring where of
all the land speculation who
sort of the front of a lot of
our communities of their common
lands sometimes plans were
issued to the wrong individuals
or to individuals that make
claims on the COVID land but
they weren't there the correct
individual although we did have
some land grants that were
recognized to the town of take a
look at for example or the town
of command that time actually
these were actually recognize to
the.
Town in the community as a whole
or they were recognized to all
the inhabitants of the town or
to that list of the individuals
who are currently residing in
the town so there was a variety
of ways this is done.
But this is the only way that
the United States government has
ever recognized land grants.
Through the treaty is by
recognizing their private
property claim hello we say
private property again with me
not public domain so even though
land grants have common lands
that are owned in common and
used by the Bennifer the benefit
the community that's the
considered a private clean in
the eyes of the United States
because it's not public domain
it's not public lands the
federal public land.
So once the education process
was complete the United States
government wipe their hands of
the issue of up property
obligations under the treaty so
the United States did not take
up any more issues as it related
to property education it has not
formally recognized any Land
Grant in statute specifically to
say we are recognizing this land
grant or that this community
exists they're picking up
legislation to help land grants
for example in the nineteen
thirties during some of the and
and actually during the forties
to the New Mexico programs
some of the land grants that
lost a property the delinquent
taxes there was a federal Act
that allowed for the purchase of
those properties by back then
they were called the cruel
development corporations I think
and they would they would buy
these delinquent tax properties
and then allow the communities
to continue to use them when
those programs one await some of
those lands were transferred to
the for service with the
obligation to continue to the
manager for the beneficial use
of the community agencies have
sort of forgotten that but those
public laws are still good laws
and that was a way that the Feds
recognize that these communities
had use of these lands but again
they didn't technically
recognize the land grants
authority or any kind of
governing statute they just
recognize that they had a
property interest as a
community.
so the treaty itself as a as I
mentioned at property prisons
but there was no provisions for
the specific recognition or
establishment of land grants as
government entities the only
recognition it can receive was
that they were valid fee simple
property owners
Within the new chair the ceded
territory now.
How do we get to legislative
jurisdiction for land grants and
the fact that there's a long
history of statutes created by
the territorial state
legislature who New Mexico.
The relating to the management
of these requests well under the
tenth amendment of the
constitution all the powers not
delegated to the United States
by the constitution nor
prohibited by the states are
reserved to the states
respectively or to the people
there are no provisions in the
constitution that allow the
federal government to create
local units of government
underneath the sorry state right
they have the authority to
create states as sovereign
entities that are so sovereign
apart from the federal
government
but once that state is
established there is no
authority that Congress has to
say all right New Mexico we're
going to create a local
government and they're going to
you're going to be in charge of
this local government they're
going to be a subdivision of you
they're going to be a of the
under your jurisdiction as a
sovereign entity of the state
the only one that has that
authority he's the state
themselves because that's a that
was not the right that was in
the constitution reserve for the
federal government so is a right
that exists solely for states
under the tenth amendment of the
of the constitution.
So.
The United States or the state
of New Mexico has beginning as a
territory actually begin
recognizing land grants as
government entities
so.
Under Spain Mexico as I
mentioned before land grants
functioned the communities had
town councils that sort of
oversaw the management of the
COVID they were some of the
first democratic institutions in
the United States right the
people the United States but
they're some of the first
democratic institutions local
town councils the real that were
locally elected to sort of
manage the common lands right
well when the United States took
them in there was no process for
recognition of what they were
and and so the the legislature
to sort of create that in the
early court struggled with sort
of recognizing what they were as
well
so in order so you have all
these land grants the receiving
physical title to their lands
but they have no recognition as
any kind of entity or thirty to
manage those those lands in
common rate and so that's where
the territorial legislature in
beginning in eighteen seventy
four begins passing legislation
first for individual land grants
and then for groupings of land
grants after statehood in
nineteen twelve all the statutes
pertaining to land grants were
adopted in the can for qualified
under the under state law as per
article twelve section for the
constitution New Mexico which
says pretty much any law that
was created in the territorial
period that is not adverse to
the constitution it remains in
effect until it is either
repealed or amended by the state
legislature and the state
legislature has and then did
Land Grant legislation over the
years but most of the activity
in terms of establishing or
creating recognizing land grants
happened during the Czecho
period although we have had some
instances happened
understated in nineteen twenty
one they recognize the Japanese
the land grant and have their
own special separate statute
spells out how they're managed
and then again in two thousand
thirteen there was recognition
of a of a community as a land
grant up in questa.
Sir.
So.
The New Mexico Supreme Court is
taking up the issue of the
authority of the state to pass
legislation for land grants this
came about partly because of a.
The Springer Act which apply to
the territory territories and
then also to the Mexican
situation has a provision that
says no the legislature some not
pass any special acts for local
precincts and I can't remember
exactly what word it but there
was a question as to whether or
not that meant the legislature
could not pass laws specific for
land grants and so the Supreme
Court took that up and the
Supreme Court in small wrist
decisions and opinions has held
that
land grants are creatures of the
legislature the the management
of land grants and board of
trustees which is what the
legislature created for the
management language that's a
governing board outreach was a
legislature and into the this
was for sort of announced in
nineteen thirty seven in a case
called medical B. Buckner it was
affirmed and that will sort of
be adopted in nineteen eighty
seven in a case involving the so
we have the land grant and then
as recent as two thousand for
fourteen it was reaffirmed in
the case another case involving
the subway at the land grant any
recognize that the Mexico
legislature's has the authority
to adopt legislation providing
for the administration of land
grants so that's good not only
do we have statutory authority
for that we also have.
Common law case law under this
New Mexico Supreme Court that
recognizes and establishes that
authority for this body to be
able to pass and recognize land
grants.
So in terms of property law you
know we talked about property
laws related to the recognition
but there's sort general well
established principles of law is
that states once established
have jurisdiction over the the
laws governing real property so
all the land within the state
for example except for federal
land so that includes two
national forests national parks
duty lands on tribal lands
because tribes or your separate
sovereign any other item in the
state of New Mexico if there's
ever a dispute relating to that
property whether it's adverse
possession it's an encroachment
it's somebody claiming
ownership.
All that get settled under the
laws in that are adopted by this
body by the laws of the state of
New Mexico even if we're going
to be in federal court so for
example if.
An owner from Texas had a claim
in New Mexico and they had a
claim against the New Mexico
citizen for some property and
they took it in student federal
court under judge diversity
jurisdiction the federal court
would hear that case but they
would apply New Mexico law
because that's the law that
governs for property as it
relates to property owners
today.
So land grants are just be
simple property owners in New
Mexico are subject to the
property laws of the state and
that includes for example the
fact the legislature exempted
them from adverse possession and
protected them from adverse
position that's a property law
issue that the state of New
Mexico passed.
So you know is there a federal
versus state conflict when it
relates to New Mexico's and and
and this body's ability to
recognize land grants today and
to provide for legislation that
recognizes them and and
determines how they manage their
the land grants
My answer that is no and it's
evidenced by the fact that the
territorial legislature was
enacted legislation pertaining
to the governance and management
of land grants at the exact same
time the federal government was
recognizing a land grants
property ownership under the
tree but without these rapid
simultaneously right we had left
axe being passed as early as
eighteen seventy four.
In the eighteen nineties
nineteen oh seven all that time
was the United States either
Congress was recognizing private
land claims up until eighteen
ninety one or the quarter by the
land claims was adjudicating
those claims and so there's
several things happening but are
separate and distinct.
A recognition that you own
property and the recognition
that you have some authority to
point two managing government
property.
There's a hundred forty nine
history of the territorial and
state laws being passed
pertaining to land grants
without any constitutional or
jurisdictional challenges being
raised in two thousand thirteen
on challenge by the federal
government this body passed and
the governor signed a law
recognizing this on a twenty
with the real Collett a land
grant as a unity government
under the general provisions
even though all the some of
twenty the real cold on and
grant did not receive a federal
patent.
That land grant went through the
process.
It never cook it the surveyor
general recommended that they
receive the payment Congress
failed to act on it and then
Congress passed district the
corps private land claims act
and the claim was never taken up
before the private or private
land claims but that community
still existed still has a second
still has the issues that they
felt the need to recognition as
a unity government in order to
sort of help with some of the
the work that they need to do
and so this body recognize them
as a land grants to the governor
by the land grant even though
the statutes even as a
management government entity
even though they never received
a federal funds lands that they
only have acquired they have the
same authority that other land
grant has that may be received
it through a parent but they
just have the authority to
manage those lands of the owner
as a as a governing entity.
And then also the state
constitution incorporated
treated well look without going
to the constitution and so we
relieve you any time this body
takes up legislation in support
of land grants you're actually
upholding the obligations of the
treaty because you're enhancing
the ability for land grants to
maintain and protect the
properties that were guaranteed
to them under the treaty.
And so with that Mr chairman
members of the committee on
stand for any questions you may
have.
Thank you.
So I just.
Thank you I'm actually looking
over some articles from a friend
of mine who did it a
presentation in regards to the
the treaty and you know.
One thing that it's and we were
giving us this is incredible
background information on this
to one of the things that we can
a credit to this treaty is the
Economic Development in New
Mexico due to it so I just
wanted to just add a little bit
of that and what that meant to
cross our state through the
other states because of the
the work that was done and then
we'll do this come together
really
built that out as well so I just
wanted to add to that but thank
you for the presentation and
it's something that's been
taught
in the schools I've got I've
I've attended here the
Representative here in Santa Fe
native Santa Fe New so to speak
and understanding the history
and historical value of of of
what you just gave us was a lot
as well it was wonderful to hear
but
like I said we need to we don't
have we don't have a lot of the
faces of understanding of how
the laws are work in our.
Given priority and you giving
this an overview of that is
really wonderful even
understanding federal with state
and and then all these other
overlays with trees and
everything so thank you so much
for the information and we all
continue to learn so appreciate
it.
You go to
page at the construction site.
Of
was a great presentation I come
from southeastern New Mexico so
we made we all know about land
grants and and recognize the.
You know the.
Recognize them and I've always
thought of you know less often
property to these I thought of a
more probably is the same as a.
The.
Land that the like the
reservations or something you
know that were federally.
Given but the going back to that
of one problem ahead you know
you referred several times to
that bill we heard.
twenty we'll get right here
another one so.
My problem that that was and I
don't know that was several
different.
Entities within this land
grants.
Parts of rural wanted us to do
what they were asking and part
so should that be a problem I
should all get together and
decide what they want to do
before they come ask us or have
our with our with the court of
law in this through.
Mr Chairman representative Mason
so oftentimes the communities we
we we do have disputes even
among communities members
themselves as to what the right
path through the right sort of
policy is ultimately it is this
money's of forty two to make
determinations
For what so in that case
what was being asked is that
this body recognize communities
within the land grant that have
the simple ownership apart from
the land grant that was actually
given to them and partition from
the grants to and recognized by
the courts give them up the same
status the other land grants
that are that that most land
grants have with all in requests
for anyone have is the ability
to manage their common lands as
units of government and with the
dispute that was happening there
is that you had these
communities that are historic
communities that were some of
them actually even older than
that establishment of the
community Los Vegas that
property separate that managing
just like a land grant the the
elected board of trustees the
they have to pay the taxes The
the manager for the benefit they
they do everything very similar
in the operate as of the land
grants to but for
because they weren't they didn't
receive the federal plan and
they want to separate grant
issued by sweeter Mexico they're
just they don't exist in any way
right and so the the what was
building assets committees to
recognize them of having their
sole authority in governance
that is to oversee and manage
the comment that they own with
the right kind of came is that
in that instance the Las Vegas
land grant which was the mother
grant that quit its claim that
that divested itself of its
property interest
Still has a relationship in the
sense that they have a future
reversion if that land grant if
those communities ever try to
sell the land or stop using it
for the purposes of common land
then there was a of a reversion
to the Las Vegas Grant what's
interesting is that the Las
Vegas Grant when it was existed
was divested itself of property
originally they have is their
statutes Pacific grant they're
managed by the dispatches of
this recording Mexico so the for
judicial District Court actually
appoints the members of that
board of trustees and the there
if you look at their statute
originally what's intention of
that statute was to provide for
the funding for the local
schools if you guys are familiar
with with the old with the old
way that schools are funded it
was the state lands that were
given as grants you know on the
the the little parcels that our
State Land now they're managing
trust will cause land grants
were private land if you look at
a map of New Mexico the
townships and ranges do not
exist inside the boundaries of a
language that was planted
because it was not public domain
so those checker boards didn't
appear and those communities
didn't get the little sections
of state land that was supposed
to fund local public schools so
if you look at the Las Vegas
statute what this the
legislature set as well your
private land owner you have to
provide for the public schools
so the first initial district
appointed part of trustees and
their sole job responsibility
was to lease the common lands or
sell the comments and generate
revenue for the local public
schools when the formula for
funding public schools changes
in New Mexico and everybody in
the fall of the students that
need went away and so the the
last thing I think I started
investing itself of its property
and these poor communities that
we're establishing that relied
on the comments for their
dependents and and subsistence
realize that the speaker was
selling their land out from
under them and so they petition
the court and said we we we have
to use this land and the courts
okay what we'll do is we'll give
you three thousand acres you
Madam for the beneficial use of
the community like a.
And grant and you take care of
it on your own and that's what
happened and so that's what
these land grants for trying to
get recognizes they were land
grants that manage property on
their own it was interesting is
that those collectively those
land grants now manage about a
little over twelve thousand
acres of land and the Las Vegas
Land Grant board of trustees
only has authority over about
two hundred acres king stadium
and a couple of I think some of
the properties that are left for
highlands is located so you have
a I Land Grant that really
doesn't have any.
Property or management already
and they're appointed by the
District Court and they're now
against these communities that
have to manage it have to do
with the everyday of
requirements of managing
property right like dealing with
paying taxes dealing with the
fencing issues dealing with
making sure that that that the
past is not being overgrazed now
with the fire they have to deal
with being able to recoup from
the fire cutting all the trees
that burned making sure that the
receipt all the other own
expense without any kind of
support from the state because
their private entity and the
state's eyes they are not units
a government they are private
entities that are that the anti
donation clause of our
constitution bars this body from
giving the money to fix those
comments even though they are
important to the watersheds
downstream of Las Vegas those
the sloping and things that
happen on those properties are
going to affect story lake as
well as all the executives in
the irrigators downstream but
there's no relief that they can
get from the state because they
are not considered public
entities and that was the reason
we were trying to get that
legislation passed to get them
recognizes a state unity
government so that they could
then be entitled to get funding
for the legislature to get money
for restoration and to then be
able to manage though the lands
in the same way that every other
land grant it's under forty nine
one can do.
In should.
Get their go to court to get
somebody I don't like the in the
a jury on who's rights.
Superstate whose rights you know
I don't know if you will would
be really nice to me if that get
out of the alley down there
somewhere and settle this thing
and go back and talk to this
think that working on that.
I was afraid it was going to
happen here.
That it will be part of the.
But I think you you've been that
you've been a lot of help.
Just thank you Mr chairman I
have.
I did Mr chair I just want to
thank you really I I don't want
to keep this the people here any
longer but this this helps me
understand a lot better
you know we are of.
We'll have our strengths and we
all have our things that we
understand proficiently and on
the things that we need to
always learn as the New Mexico
has a lot of different this is a
huge huge
of.
Educational alright any to the
body that's in this capacity of
up to the legislature
has to read and understand a lot
of different things and although
we may have our strengths and
something's we also have to.
Then for the next order I
appreciate that that helped me a
lot.
If I could speak to closing
comments one so we are at the
New Mexico a great council which
this money a created is a five
member council that's appointed
by the governor in order to
serve on the council you have to
be on a board of trustees of a
land grants that's the short
list and I work for the council
we provide technical assistance
to land grants we serve as a
liaison between land grants and
local and other government
entities including the
legislature so if you ever have
questions or need additional
information about land grants
you always feel free to reach
out I the committee staff has my
information I can pass out cards
I think I have some to folks
feel free to and reach out if
there's ever a question or
anything we can do to help you
in in in your capacity as a
legislator the other thing I did
want to mention is that today is
is February second which is the
anniversary commemoration of the
signing the treaty whether
people go with actually a
hundred seventy fifth
anniversary we are having events
here at the return to beginning
at twelve o'clock we're gonna
have some guests that are going
to be recognized on the rostrum
when the state floor session
starts and then we're having
entertainment the noon hour you
are all welcome to come join our
activities if you if you do come
down and you'd like to speak we
will be more than happy to give
you some time on the microphone
to be able to speak with all the
folks on the land grants and
second communities that are here
helping us commemorate the
state.
Thank you very much.
The.
For.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Committee I wanted to introduce
Mike Timmons here who is the
deputy director of the Mexico
bureau of geology and mineral
resources at New Mexico tech
that's housed in New Mexico tech
and my sister in the audience
Lynn major who's here for school
board and for moral support.
House Bill to a four Mr chairman
as the title reads
that we'd like to there there's
no state mineral.
Of specific to New Mexico that's
named we have a state bird we
have a state gem we have a lot
of other a state flag lizard
offered to everything else so we
don't have a state mineral.
So in many states have state
minerals rocks and gemstones to
date New Mexico only ratified a
state gemstone which is
turquoise a fitting choice of
course and
Along with state flags State
models individual states within
the US of often designated an
official gemstone mineral.
And or rock this official we're
recognition and designation
often promotes the state's
history to natural resources
tourist sites and more.
One of the things that of
Smithson night was
known for and found
Was in the mat in Magdalena New
Mexico where I actually live in
the Kelly mines.
And it was instrumental in
bringing back
There is a huge turned out
turned down and crash in silver
prices in eighteen ninety four.
And
starting with Mr night board
mantling the distant District
revitalize mining in New Mexico
ACB Fitch.
Discovered Smithson I for.
Our formation as a calcium
carbonate I want to get too
geeky on you guys but
replacement for the first time
in the in Magdalena and so it's
brought lots of industry back to
New Mexico one of the things
that it is known for part
companies here which have been a
huge economic drivers and more
for more than a century
including sure when Williams who
used lead and then seeing as
well
Lightning weather resistant
agents and paint and New Jersey
zinc A. K. A. empire sink one of
the first companies to operate
the mines in the Magdalene the
district.
What makes Smith a night so I
mean we have a lot of minerals
here in New Mexico that provide
economic development for the
state
and.
I mean the richest of any state
in the in the United States
petroleum natural graft gas
uranium potassium salts coal
copper gold silver zinc lead and
one I can't pronounce all
contribute to having to have a
Lee thank all contribute heavily
to income in the state
and with that I'd like to turn
it over to Mister Timmons if he
has anything to add.
Thanks Representative
Mr chair and members of the
committee thanks for accepting
this will presentation here and
I like to think about you why do
we consider looking at our state
symbols and as the
representative so rightly noted
it's an opportunity that think
about our history our culture
our biology are our mineral
resources in this case and so I
think these are important
opportunities to inspire our
citizens right and part of the
uniqueness about the mineral
that we're proposing is this
particular mineral is very
unique to New Mexico you can
look at a number of other
minerals
that we use for economic
development in the state they're
fairly common minerals coppers
of as a as a big one here in New
Mexico
but they're also very common in
other states are also developed
in other states other states
have adopted some of these other
minerals as their own state
minerals so.
We opted to identify something
that's maybe uniquely New Mexico
and again to the administration
point how can we inspire New
Mexicans in the sciences and
mineral resources in particular
and some missile night as a zinc
carbonate is is one of the
critical minerals that we're
looking at nationally I think in
particular so when we think
about critical minerals that our
our our you know compose our
phones and everything else all
of our modern technologies he's
critical minerals including zinc
are really essential to our
modern
Act economy and so we thought
this would this is just a great
opportunity to just kind of
highlight something uniquely new
Mexican and something that is
important vitally important to
our to our state in our nation.
And I think I can just leave it
at that okay and and I have that
there's a lot of different
colors of Smith's tonight I did
print out some copies but the
the one that's that's most known
in the Kelly mines is the aqua
marine light blue this swatch
box I'm not anywhere which
happens to be the state
necklace.
Is made with Smith's and I as
well.
Receive that as a gift from my
husband for thirtieth
anniversary this year.
Not a pretty old anyway with
without Mr chairman will stand
for questions.
Additional.
For the bills.
Of.
Right.
The bigger they have the.
Anybody on zoom that's in favor
of the bill please raise your
hands of.
No.
Okay comments somebody in favor
no comments.
For the vote of any comments in
favor any comments on zoom in
favor please.
No anybody against the bill and
the audience.
Anybody guess avail on soon.
So I think there's no discussion
any discussion from the members
now.
It's going to tell us thank you
Mr.
Bring this over a.
and side step away with
thank you for reading this off
of is here for each of the
states this is a thanks for.
So on thank you for reading this
of the.
as one of the.
Either of those.
Is you will have that that
usual.
there is.
I.
Go on I was.
All.
The.
The state.
And so I just want to the
friendliness.
Thank you reserves also as next
will be a Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair
and thank you for bringing this
forward I I always kind of nerd
out myself to like to get some
important facts I just if you
would allow me a of fun fact
about
Smith's and I origin of name
emit at there's mythology to it
of course the but they'll be
just very sure that the covenant
calamine was renamed Spence and
I in eighteen thirty two by
France while supplies been done
in honor of James Smithson.
Edition chemist mineralogist and
benefactor to the Smithsonian
institution so I just think
that's a fun fact it's been
around obviously for a while and
then it has some healing
properties as we know we like to
talk about those crystals and
properties here in Santa Fe but
is most useful for letting go of
deep emotional pain particularly
for adults who were abuse or
felt unloved as children so
those are just some fun facts
and some interesting things
about our our.
I'm in role today so thank you
for bringing this forward I
think it's a beautiful necklace
at questions that you're wearing
today and it it it shows all the
different colors that this this
mineral can have thank you.
Thank you the lan and Mr Mr
chairman what we would we would
just really basically be
amending the the whole act and
just adding Smith the ninetieth
opted as the mineral for New
Mexico so just adding that on to
all the other great things I I
really didn't know Mr chairman
that the transfer law hawk wasp
was the insect so I really don't
like those very much.
I don't think a lot of those do.
Have a discussion with
Representative mission.
That okay.
We have a motion we have a due
pass motion per second by
Representative allows us to have
the role.
Hello please Representative
Lujan yes.
Representative Mason this.
Representative Terrazas.
And vice chair consume yes.
We have a sponsor you have a do
pass on house bill tool for
thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee thank you.
Next on the agenda is.
House bill one sixty this
Representative Chandler good
morning.
I'm a little nervous today
because it's my first time
Cherry one of these committees.
Well Mister chair I'm a little
nervous today because this is
the first time in front of your
committee.
The the what we never together
alright we please explain your
bill absolutely so this I am
presenting to you a.
House rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee substitute.
It was presented to the
committee I think in a timely
fashion and what the substitute
does it and frankly it's a very
minor change from the original
fail what the substitute does is
allow the department of
transportation to waive fees.
If
A provider comes and applies to
use their rights of way
to put in internet service to
rural and disadvantaged
communities so there would have
to be a showing that it is
intended to serve rural and
disadvantaged communities okay.
This is an extension of the work
we've been doing the last few
years to try to expand broadband
in the state and you know there
was a great push a couple years
ago we created an office of
broadband in the directors here
Mr chair and the department
chant transportation
representatives are here as well
we worked with both of those
offices to come up with language
that they felt would assist each
of them in expanding broadband
in the state we know it's a big
problem we know we need to
improve lives right reliability
we know we need to be supporting
rural communities that don't
have easy access to broadband.
one of the issues that has come
up in terms of expanding is.
It's not economical for the
companies to to put in the fiber
when the houses are so spread
out you know there's just a wide
so it doesn't pencil out very
well so this is one way to
assist those providers and
encourage those providers to
work with the department of
transportation and broadband
office to accommodate some of
their expenses thereby allowing
it to you know be more
profitable and and pencil out
for them so that's what this
bill does.
Mr chair move this substance the
committee substitution our
motion to move the committee
substations are second.
Second by Representative in in
Mr chairman I read the two oh
two number just in case make
sure we all have the same one
it's two two four three four
eight point two you all have
that very good thank you Mr
chair.
That way the bill Representative
again
so that's the essence of it and
with that I'm happy to entertain
questions or I'm here at your
pleasure.
is anybody out there that it's
in favor of the bill.
Anybody out there want to have
would like to yes I for the
bill.
In favor of I'm kind of stuck
here.
Thank you.
Members of the committee others
on behalf of eighteen anti we
believe that.
Also I was Chavis.
We got ninety seconds and.
Is this all right Mr chairman
okay.
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee such as sure
Rikki Lee Chavez on behalf of
eighteen T. we stand and strong
support of this bill we believe
that H. B. one sixty represents
one of the best ways the
legislature has to set policy
that will significantly move New
Mexico forward in extent
extending broadband out to more
places and we encourage you to
support thank you thank you.
Next who else other hands go
head.
The state your name Mr chair of
committee members.
I'm about my name is Margaret
gray and I'm a volunteer
advocate with a a RP New Mexico.
On behalf of the two hundred and
forty thousand A. A. R. P. New
Mexico members statewide we
support strongly house bill one
sixty expanding the availability
of high speed internet access is
one of A. A. R. P.'s highest
priorities here in the state and
nationally the essential
services unavailable in much of
New Mexico particularly in rural
areas where many of New Mexicos
fifty plus.
Citizens and their families
reside access to rights of way
for facility construction is a
major barrier to installing
needed facilities this bill
improves this by granting
additional access for broadband
infrastructure we respectfully
ask that the committee voted in
favor of this reserve of
legislation thank you thank you.
But it's come up to the room
you've got sixty seconds thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Melissa
Pickett and I'm here today
speaking in favor of house bill
one sixty on behalf of the
alliance for local economic
prosperity a New Mexico based
non profit organization the
world has come to a place where
it is no longer optional to have
access to broadband and the
internet broadband
infrastructure is an important
equalizer for rural communities
simple tasks of daily life has
become difficult for those who
don't have access to the
internet this is an issue of not
only equitable access it is also
important support for small
businesses I need to be able to
do online ordering and make
online sales for example in
Silver City there's an
incredible makers market but the
businesses can't make sales
because there's no ability to
use card readers are crafted
Kanemi our farmers and our small
businesses will benefit from
this most needed utility we
encourage your support thank you
thank you.
Find for.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Robert Romero on
behalf of Kit Carson electric
coop okay person also has a
broadband service and currently
they serve twelve thousand
customers they serve all major
schools hospitals and major
businesses the server the server
over fifty cell towers for for
eighteen T. of COVID and
Verizon.
They have ties Public Picuris
pueblo totally wired right now.
Of.
The question is also moving into
helping other communities
they've helped of their working
with Pojoaque in the working
with advocates and they worked
with the.
With Connell divide Mexico up so
they think that this is a very
good bill for New Mexico and
stand in support thank you Mr
Morrow.
And then we'll get you some
sorry.
Welcome thank you thank you Mr
chair and committee members for
having to be heard in for
Christine Chandler
Representative
I'm I'm here on behalf of the
office of broadband access and
expansion my name is Kelly Sliq
online that the rector appointed
in mid July by the governor I'm
also here on behalf of the one
in five New Mexicans that are
either unserved or underserved
and I appreciate the department
of transportation who has worked
with Representative Chandler and
worked with the office of
broadband access and expanded to
remove barriers to be able to
put broadband especially for the
small providers who can't afford
some of the the large fees and
those are you know barriers to
entrants into the market so I
just thank you for considering
this would really like to
encourage you this can help
smooth the way for the rights of
way permits employment
catchments out there that need
to be a free all figured out
this is our first step and
you'll probably see legislation
coming in the following years
for the other for the other
items thank you very much.
But Sir.
Mr chair happen soon way Stewart
deputy commissioner of
operations at the State Land
Office I just wanted to say we
stand in strong support of the
substitute amendment and really
want to thank the sponsor for
the objective of the bill but
also for working with us on a
previous version to address all
of our concerns and we think
it's a good bill and we hope the
committee will support thank
you.
Go ahead Sir.
Good morning members the
committee Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for the
southwest cable communications
association Comcast is our
largest
number but Peavey T. and a
number of other smaller
companies from around the state
of New Mexico are also members
and the the cable providers are
the number one broadband
providers in the state of New
Mexico we appreciate very much
Representative Chandler in the
substitute we've been working
with her for Jeez over here
on the specific piece of
legislation and all these issues
in general and so we very much
support this bill and we urge
your support thank you.
A number.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we applaud
the sponsors for bringing
forward this legislation aimed
to further reduce financial
regulatory and other barriers to
facilitate the deployment of
broadband and infrastructure
needed to support connectivity
as Representative Chandler
mentioned that is often not
economically possible for
builders to build out
infrastructure in rural areas of
our state this bill would help
reduce costs streamline and
Expedia the process on public
lands we have a once in a
lifetime opportunity with all
the federal funding coming into
the state to expand our
broadband connectivity
infrastructure such as broadband
is essential to grow and
diversify New Mexico's economy
expanded broadband will unlock
access to telehealth education
Interstate Commerce and economic
development especially in a
rural and frontier communities
we urge you to support H. B. one
sixty thank you.
Anybody else in the audience
for.
Madam.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Thomas
Wyman and deputy general counsel
for the department of
transportation we are happy to
report we've been working very
closely with Representative
Chandler and appreciate her
efforts as well as the by office
so we're in full support of this
to his department and we have a
lot of jurisdiction ground that
we are going to make available
to right away as well as Patrol
yards and in some known right
away property so that we're in
full support of this bill thank
you for.
No one else in the audience and
support and I will go to anybody
against it your hand.
All hold on let me go back to
the anyone at anybody on zoom in
support that want to have a
discussion on.
Okay
Okay guys economy got sixty
seconds.
we got a kind of fit in in the
okay
are you there.
Okay.
Economy there.
The.
Support which supported the
patch support a patient either.
And I think these are in favor
of this bill but we can't hear.
Was an excellent they're all
needed on there you guys need on
mute if you guys wanna.
Speak on behalf of the bill
please.
You can meet in the center
fitzgerald.
So for Gerald.
Okay.
I don't know.
I think we're having some
technical difficulties.
We apologize to those on June
that are for.
Thirty but we will write your
name down on that note you guys
and support okay so we're going
to go now to the audience raise
your hand again so I think we
had one person he please come
up.
Good morning Chairman
representative a committee
members my name is bouncing
going on with the New Mexico
cattle growers and I've got a
few questions that would like to
be answered before we get into
support with this which I really
hope that we can
I have been talk and I've talked
to senator today and I've talked
with Kelly's I can't pronounce
her last name is legal there we
go
anyways.
On the lease and the lease the
side of it the the ranchers not
going to get any of the damages
is going to go to the state land
office which isn't fair because
we pay for our leases up to
three years in advance another
thing that we have a problem
with is is in section on for a
fairly very clearly states that
it.
Any private organization does
not have to be in compliance
next there doesn't have to be
and necessarily in compliance
but generally compatible for
land use guidelines any any real
Ag Lee C. has to go through a
very very rigorous
archaeological surveys to do any
sort of improvement and I think
that it should be they should be
held to the same standard that
and actually see should be I'm
very glad that well I I assume
that the the amendment pulls out
the waived fees if that's what
the amendment is that's what was
discussed but I haven't seen it
and so I can't I can't say that
for sure but okay that is also
your okay thank you.
Thank you
anybody on zoom against but I
can't hear you.
No no.
Okay would you like to.
Those are on the bill
Mr chair and members the
committee of the committee come
okay questions any committee
member questions to Mr hunt
thank you.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward I know that there's been
a lot of work done on this Mr
chair for a very long time we're
talking about these fees and
about these roadways and
something that I've been
questioning myself for well so.
One thing that I caught in the
FIR which I think was the FIR
previous to the substitution was
it fixed
On the portion of regarding the
kit the land commission to
completely wave leasing costs
that was what was substituted
out here Madam chair Mister
chair and member yes in
conversations with the State
Land Office we we're educated on
their needs to ensure that they
have adequate income for their
beneficiaries under the land so
that they are going to try to
address the issue in their own
way through their own rulemaking
I think that's a fair way to
characterize it great so on that
on that note to end just maybe
with some of the questions here
that just come up
regarding damages and so forth
So we with the right away waving
of the graduate.
And bringing in revenues.
From the sources into the state.
How does this affect and I guess
all different types of
landowners does it affect how
does that this waiver these the
right ways in what you're doing
with this bill affect those
landowners were those the waving
of the set costs I guess other
other than the the public lands
searching Mr chair and
representative what it would do
is allow the state
transportation department to
waive fees for easements over
which they have control and.
I assume that could include some
private plans is that correct no
okay this is a good thing so
your interest your point is well
taken and I'm told by the could
general counsel from the
transportation out it will not
affect private lands only public
lands.
Appreciate this this legislation
would it brings forward with
access and and moving in or
moving us into the twenty first
century so to speak thank you Mr
chair thanks for the
Representative Lujan
Representative losses.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative that was one of
my big questions right there how
does affect our landowners the
you know ranches and stuff like
that our cattle rose that was
something that could possibly
affect them and so you tell me
Adam really Mr chair
representative or that it will
not affect any private
landowner.
Mr Chairman representative yes I
believe that's the case and I
have an attorney here from the
transportation department who is
nodding vigorously.
Mr chair representative the
other the other questions what
happens if they have
how would it let me rephrase how
would it affect
This is a a
a
a rancher had lease would there
be any problems with with with
it anyway respective issues with
with any of this I don't think
so I don't I don't think so I'm
just trying to last but what he
was trying to work with you I'm.
Mr chair representative what I'm
trying to use grant where he was
coming from and I think that's I
think it was a lot more the
private property but they have
leases also and I didn't know if
that would have to be in effect
when they have a land lease
If there's any issue with that.
Mr Mr chairman I asked the
council for the transportation
department to speak to that
thank you.
Mr chair and committee so of
this substitution eliminates the
State Land Office concerns that
part of the the bill is gone so
the party remains to we're all
in strong support of only
affects department
transportation right of way so
there's no property there's
there's no leases the department
does not have lease holdings by
anybody of our rights of way so
so the the bills with the
substitution this substitute
bill completely eliminates any
concerns for private landowners
or leases thank you Mr chair
representative that's that's
what happens when we start
reading one bill and then you
substitute and and also in in
you re twenty bills is it
sometimes gets a little fuzzy so
Mr chair representative.
Waiving fees
and annual fees.
explain how that is done now and
what the fees are and what the
be waving and how that would
benefit our state.
Chair representative
Mr chair and representative
prior to this bill if it's
enacted the the transportation
department
believed in and I think they had
some basis to believe that they
had to charge I guess almost
something that along the lines
of market value
and and that's because of you
know of the anti donation clause
what we amended the anti
donation clause you remember
last year well actually the
voters amended it and we were
happy about that because this is
exactly what we wanted to do to
give the transportation
department and the office of
broadband more flexibility in
working with providers to ensure
that they could install things
in a economic way so that it
could otherwise it's cost
prohibitive and so on so this is
rectifying what we thought was a
problem through the anti
donation clause it will allow
easier access to the providers
thereby helping rural New Mexico
I mean really we want to wire
rural New Mexico and it's very
very important that we do so and
this is one components are the
only component but it certainly
part of it and it's important
one.
Thank.
Mr thank you Representative
Mister Mason yes
Mr chair and the.
Of.
Representative Chandler that we
haven't really gotten to know
one another there and it wasn't
just and I'm I'm going over old
ground here I guess just to make
sure I'm clear on it there will
be no new right of ways granted
on state land so they can use
displays on existing that that
whether standing if if the
Attorney may answer Mr chair but
I think that's what he said but
I won't get it clear my mind Mr
chair and representative yes
that's correct there's no new
additional right of ways being
granted or or altered in any way
this is simply to allow them to
allow broadband providers into
the right of way and gives the
department the option of waiving
permissive Lee to waive those
fees with an administrative fee
or an annual fee as we as as
we're directed from the enabling
legislation that we receive so
yeah that this doesn't creating
new rights waited only involves
existing public rights of way
thank you that the is being I
actually have a state police
myself and you know and the
statutes as leaseholders we used
to get damages when.
And then but other statutes real
quick given us.
Any any of the money that they
receive for right wise so it I
understand category concern over
turned up a property without
compensation.
But one other question
Mr chair I have a little
trouble.
And it comes through the.
May abandon their may declare
may offer my you know I'm just
not a big fan of the work
Monday.
Though it is a it yeah I'd
rather say will all for or will
not all for good just kind of a
vague terminology as far as on.
Mr chair and Representative
Representative I understand your
concern however we want this
bill to be flexible enough so
that the department has the
ability to they'll be issuing
rules under this under this
provision and the in those rules
will dictate when the you know
when they will waive and when
they won't I I in a way I I'm
gonna gently disagree with you
Mr chair and representative
flexibility when you're.
Creating legislation you know
that's very hard to change I
think is important but in this
case there will be rulemaking
through the usual process and
there's public participation Mr
chair and representative and
that will be that that will be
the structure of the program.
Thank you very much
Representative and Mr chair
It the I guess.
Will.
A lot I.
Through.
Thank you very much thank you
thank you a version on had a
follow up question actually it's
been answered thank you Mr chair
thank you thank you all well I
really want to thank for
bringing this forward as well
representative I think you hit
the nail on the head when you
said rural New Mexico I know
there's a lot of rural New
Mexico out there that doesn't
have rock band and I think
people need to understand that
this going to be on the state
right away from the deal T. it's
we're not going to private lands
whatever the state right away is
from fence line to fence line
that's where this is going to be
done and I want to thank a Kelly
for reading as well I know she's
worked diligently to get this
broadband going and I just want
to thank you all for being here
so Mr dresses.
But to make a motion for a do
not pass on H. B. one sixty but
a new path for committee
substitute for house bill one
sixteen motion second by
positive image that also second
by miss Representative Lujan.
No will have a roll call will
please.
Representative yes.
Representative makes.
Yes.
Representative Terrazas yes.
And vice chair state yes.
The motion
you do I would do pass on years
of committee substitute thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
committee members thank you guys
this will conclude a committee
meeting thank you guys for being
here.
Hello the death.
She's.
Three of six.
Only.
All right.
Senate.
As far as.
She.
In.
More more.
Yeah I.
This call.
Understand.
Yes yes.
These are not.
For
Mention.
We're.
This.
Two years.
And.
Full.
Yeah.
Okay.
She's used can.
Okay.
Just just okay you have a car
and we're going.
This
listen.
Yeah I think.
To.
Just.
Fund.
