So as well.
Representative in order.
Representative don't get.
Yes Representative that is.
Representative here
Representative Lundstrom.
I
think that's what.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Marty your.
Representative basically there.
Sept you representative that
he's.
Question here madam chair thank
you madam chair you have a
quorum thank you I just want to
say congratulations to
Representative Martinez for
passing his first bill today.
Back in the good old days you
haven't had.
Almost.
I mean is that.
Already so house bill one sixty
eight Representative K. V. eight
we get.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam chair representatives I'm
Representative Kate's and I'm
here to present house bill one
sixty eight are currently the
state of New Mexico a past the
I'm so sorry.
My the the D. Johnson clean air
act.
And in that was of back in.
Two thousand seven but it gave
exemptions to some places where
indoor smoking were
allow that and one was Senator
work is seen as an rat racinos
race tracks
what is occurred in the last
several years a change is in the
twenty twenty we had COVID and
so all the casinos shut down.
When they came back up again
they had strict
social distancing mask wearing
and no smoking.
So in twenty twenty two you can
see we've given you a lot of
hand out so I'm gonna show you
on this hand out here.
This one will show.
Of five different this is just a
sample of five different tribal
casinos that stopped voluntarily
stop smoking.
And their casinos and you can.
You can compare the full year of
the non smoking environment and
twenty twenty two to a full year
of so smoking environment and
twenty eighteen and you can see
there is a little change to
actually increased.
They call net wins which is the.
Profit after the cost of running
your casino machines.
So we are asking H. berry B.
Sixtyeight as we can see that we
don't believe that there will be
a financial hardship to the
businesses and we do see that
there is a very serious
liability especially in some of
the race tracks that are in
rural areas when the majority of
the employment being offered is
at the race tracks and
waitresses and people taking
your budget or having to work in
an environment that no other New
Mexico and has to work into
this bill clearly allows for
smoking sections to be outside
or in separate buildings but not
in the same building I will tell
you that I've run many programs
for people with disabilities at
many who enjoy going to this
kind of an entertainment I will
tell you that there is of many
of them are carrying oxygen with
them and the smoke filled rooms
but not the waitresses not the
people taking your bets not the
roulette player they are a
leading themselves very
vulnerable to the second hand
smoke I'd like to take a moment
for a presentation for my
expert witness and he'll
introduce himself thank you.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee I'm
sorry that's cool pardon me
my name is Marie see the I'm
with the American heart
association
I think as you know like you
know racetrack casinos.
Of the only you know publicly.
The places where we still close.
And most of the people who work
in this.
You know on the on the floor I
mean the gaming floors are
people of color.
And what.
There is all of welcoming
scientific evidence that smoking
causes serious illnesses and you
know heart disease stroke forty
one thousand you know.
People die in US non smokers
exposed to secondhand smoke.
Another seven thousand stroke.
And so the also we submitted to
you.
This study conducted by you know
the racing you know explores Las
Vegas and they looked at the
post pandemic non smoking trends
US casinos and and they came to
the conclusion that banning
smoking had no impact on
revenues and in fact the phone
like some of the non smoking.
See those are making more money
than the.
Hello small and also they look
at you know they surveyed people
and they ask what is the main
reason you choose to see.
Item location was number one in
smoking is not allowed twenty
six percent of those that you
know where they will go to the
casino where smoking is.
And only four percent.
Say you know where smoking is
allowed so it says the pandemic
you know people's perceptions
and have changed and they want
more cleaner environment even
the customers and I think you
know as a customer of the people
have a choice to go to a small
folks you know it's their choice
but the employees you know don't
have a choice and it also on
these racetrack casinos of the
biggest employers in their
communities and so what we you
know we also submitted it on the
the net revenues this is from
the gaming control and as you
can see you know that.
No impact on the revenues and
some of the quarters you know
they made more money
so you know for those reasons I
think it's it's time we you know
one of those exceptions.
Maybe it was.
You know still not provide
twenty years ago but we had it I
think you know.
Lows pandemic you know we're
we're still getting sick you
know people that Mexico which is
now in this building.
And what we're asking these
employees to be not only exposed
to secondhand smoke dangers of
secondhand smoke but they're
working in close quarters with
their patrons and and you know
and New Mexico it is still among
us for those reasons.
You know we we appreciate the
help desk this bill thank.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and
representative as we now stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative if we
go down yes the audience's
anybody in favor can we see but
show of hands of this bill.
Okay.
Anybody propose the NC counts
okay I will decide in favor.
Madam chair members of the
committee Linda Siegel for the
American cancer society cancer
action network and we support
this bill I was involved in the
passage of the clean indoor air
act where we had to sort of
incrementally get some of the
facilities and businesses with
clean indoor air including
finally bars and I think that
well I know that our main focus
was on ensuring that employees
that don't necessarily have a
choice of course yes they can go
get another job but that import
fees are protected and and that
is one of the reasons that we
support this bill thank you.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Charles good
marker speaking on behalf of and
M. D. C. action fund and I can't
light up a cigarette in here I
can't light one up in the thank
or the corner grocery store
all of those prohibitions are
there because of as Linda Siegel
said there's a concern not just
about.
My health in the media person
next to me but especially about
employees who.
Our stocks of speak at workplace
for long time.
Ricinus currently enjoy it an
exception that most other
businesses in New Mexico don't.
I don't see any great public
policy rationale other than
receipt owners may be fearful of
loss of revenue and this Mr Sita
Addressed that hasn't been
proved out in other states and
other places are we expect or
hope that you will vote for this
bill thank you.
Sir.
literature.
Committee on Dr drive are.
Stop.
Very much we were.
Sixty eight.
Are you.
One to our
our our.
Related to the family.
Rescue missions.
Architectural.
I'm here to the mission.
That
Where she.
For a couple of years.
Las Vegas Nevada basically
living in the tissues that
interview.
hundreds in the use of the yeah.
As for the for workers and the
supervisors in the morning on to
shop the factions ones where
she.
Programmers.
The technicians.
The
supervisors there have after all
this research to all.
I was on which is very well.
As she established that
show this user programs.
The action or the person's
lawyers.
is to person
sure recalls this so they're
sort of transaction
or will be alive of their
family.
Job
location into the so we're up
there again she also shared and
you got one with issues.
This.
The
staff to thank you Sir.
We're we're not debating
gambling at this point we're
debating if that smoking should
be allowed in casinos.
The other.
Other than you in addition to
important is that we should.
You've got about thirty seconds
going okay
This this is a.
Connectivity which.
For example.
You will receive what we can
break it up and this year rescue
workers.
Yeah I would.
This bill would ensure that
would happen
the yeah we would have to go out
of yeah we're ready to.
To show so this bill would help
to satisfy
a couple of.
Rolled into one or
researchers.
Yeah we're we're serving as well
this.
Some people for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
They would describe thank you
and you may also favor.
Google.
Thank.
If you are in favor of this bill
please raise your hands.
Funds you.
Joe and stronger if you are on.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is to just further I am the
director of advocacy for the
American lung association the
Johnson clean indoor air act has
provided most New Mexicans with
protection to breathe clean air
where they work or frequent
unfortunately we're joined here
today because those protections
are not afforded to all New
Mexican workers well death and
disease caused by COVID nineteen
has entirely been negative one
unexpected positive trends that
it reduced the growing number of
casinos and gaming
establishments that no longer
allow smoking indoors according
to a list maintained by the
American nonsmokers rate
sensation over two hundred
tribal and non tribal casinos
have re opened smoke free and
that's in addition to eight
hundred who are already smoke
free prior to COVID nineteen the
American Association is
encouraged by this trend
developing which is an important
step forward for protection from
secondhand smoke and lung health
second so because a serious
health hazard causing or making
worse many diseases and
conditions including lung cancer
and asthma.
The scene is another gaming
establishments remain one of the
few public places where
employees and patrons are likely
to encounter secondhand smoke
indoors at high levels recently
the American lung association
released are twenty first annual
state of tobacco control report
which gives New Mexico a B.
grade for smoke free air
policies we certainly have an
opportunity to improve our great
by creating look more smoke free
environments everyone has the
right to resume Mokri every card
list of where they work or
frequent this is a public health
issue and ask you to give still
one sixty eight and to pass
thank you.
You.
That is all in favor okay
anybody propose.
Representative.
Thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is marketer I
am the general manager of some
of our racetrack casino.
one of the the study that's
being referenced and there's a
lot of comments about this will
not have a detrimental economic
impact on this and it's based on
the study this was not a study
that is a political hit piece
written for Indian gaming
magazine the the article itself
says that it is it is anti
gaming L. read a quote from the
article for you which is
the article says that readers
what shall not use information
in this report as the basis for
any decision making process and
further says that the authors
have a may have a financial
interest might be financially
benefit from this subject matter
discussed there in it is not a
scientific study it's just not
it doesn't really control group
does not use multi very analysis
it's not just that it's a
political get these.
Next there is a study that has
been conducted I'm biased by the
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis
two thousand nine it is a
scientific study and it
the affects of smoking versus
non smoking on an economic basis
it concludes in that study which
is a multi very analysis uses
control groups use of the state
of Illinois and three other
states that share a common
standard metropolitan
statistical area market.
And it concludes that the that
the differences maybe
economically to a casino is the
same as the population that is
smoking in any given area so
when the populations will be
population which runs around
twenty percent it hasn't
economic the list Montoya is
economic impact of twenty
percent you can expect that from
the economic impact for this
bill at these casinos and at
twenty percent that's real it's
real to the employees of these
casinos it's it will it will
absolutely take that leg up from
the chair it will absolutely
cause loss of employment
absolutely because of a loss of
the revenues the support for the
support force racing and all of
the other aspects of the jockeys
and that the other beneficiaries
of the success of the casinos
which is someone part is The New
Mexico State University.
The employees
are are to the promise of the
primary constituents it's also
been testified previously that
there's no competition to sell
part within a hundred fifty
miles that was testified at the
Senate committee which is untrue
we have a competitor sixteen
miles away and speaking rock
that is three times our size and
allow smoking.
so apart is the fact a huge
economic engine engine some part
racetrack and casino for some
part and this will absolutely
have a negative negative impact
on these employees.
And unlike at one of these is
mentioned is that that that
everybody there is no other
place in New Mexico where people
are allowed to public smoke.
We're being targeted the casinos
are absolutely targeted here the
tobacco stores still allow
smoking in public as to the
cigar bars as to the facilities
for tobacco manufacturing as to
the state license came
facilities which would be that
the charitable gaming bingo
parlors private club still
allow it hotel rooms are total
rooms can still our cultural
ceremonial activities can still
allowing we're absolutely be a
target on this bill it will
absolutely have it eight we
expect based on the actual
scientific statistical analysis
a twenty percent reduction
revenues that will absolutely
hurt our three hundred ploys of
someone for.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee management
Heinrich come from some of our
perspective she knows well I
just wanted a couple of things
to what what Mr hedger just that
when the mask mandate was lifted
at someone park after COVID we
opened mask mandate was still in
place the Act SB that was
ultimately lifted and what was
left that we saw eighteen
percent of the gaming side is
fully consistent with what mark
just reported about the US
Federal Reserve Bank reports the
other thing I'd like to mention
to you as someone park has been
listening we are listening we
care about our employees very
much and we have.
Very recently instituted a
policy we have purchased and
ninety five masks we're giving
in to our employees for free the
CDC has shown that there are a
lot of things including the
effects of secondhand smoke and
you play who wants one they can
have one they can wear it we buy
it they would have to pay for it
and they go on with their work
and so thank you madam chair
members of the committee much
appreciated we we would request
about do not pass.
Madam chair members the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for the all American
Ruidoso downs we also stand in
opposition today for many of the
reasons stated we've spent a lot
of our resources since we well
in prior to being shut down for
one year
as they were seen as as you know
were shut down about a year
doing COVID wall the tribal
casinos that we're allowed to
voluntarily close which they did
about six months after we were
required to and so I think some
of these comparisons are a
little and share I mean right
before COVID hit the tribal
casinos were allowed to
institute what is called sports
betting there are number of
reasons why we may see these
trends that are being talked
about about the tribal casinos
not separate any repercussions
we're not really sure too soon
to know why those trends are
still going up it's likely and
not to do with the non smoking
but at that we can also we need
we need the ability and the
freedom to make those decisions
based on our clientele and our
employees we have very
Phil committed to the designated
smoking and nonsmoking areas in
our because in our State now and
so for all of those reasons in
the ones you heard previously we
stand in opposition thank you
thank you anybody else in
opposition.
Anybody economy yes.
Ismael trail.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee is my
upright ho executive director of
the New Mexico racing Commission
on behalf of the New Mexico
racing Commission
our agency the ones that
regulate this over five hundred
million dollars a year economic
impact industry in which these
gaming machines generate
good handful of a purse money
and to the tune of approximately
fifty five million dollars a
year to drive this industry of
hope for a do not pass on H. B.
one sixty eight because we feel
that is one a little unfair to
treat that similar businesses
differently and at two we feel
that it does that.
And approach to
Decrease in the amount of purse
money and money generated at the
race tracks for our participants
are licensees that feed their
families and depend on
horseracing purse money to make
a living and that twenty percent
net take in which the
Representative as a someone part
mentioned that would that
perhaps declined approximately
twenty percent and that's what's
been pretty standard when
smoking venues go to non smoking
venues across the country and
that having experience out of my
when my previous place of
employment Delaware it is real
the.
should be able to.
To do what they want that at a
casino as far as anything that's
legal such as smoking it is an
adult business people do have
the opportunity to choose to go
there or not go there or worked
there or not work staff so it
based on those facts that we
felt the.
We do not agree with HB one
sixty eight thank you very much
for your time thank you.
Already.
Comments from the committee.
Madam chair just a second I have
closing remarks.
We usually discuss.
Have Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair let's have
a couple of questions and remote
mostly focused from page to.
Lines fourteen to seventeen.
So statewide this these are the
ones that are set to.
Licensed gaming facility seeing
all the order except for
racetrack licensed by the state
of race race information.
Gaming op operator's license
issued by the game console for
white white.
What from holding.
Madam chair representative so
the reason why this bill only
identifies receive knows is
because our seniors are
regulated under a specific.
Commission that obviously I
can't have a bill that regulates
tribal casinos I would have a
different bill if it was private
clubs because they're not
regulated by the gaming so that
is why it separate is because
that were seen as themselves are
regulated through certain
commissions and so they would
need to be in a standalone Phil.
Okay Madam chair representative
what this is amending existing.
Stature correct.
Yes yes madam chair yes
Representative.
So madam chair representative
it's it's an existing.
Statute and you're adding.
Three lines that exams and
industry.
One of the reporters.
I mean I understand Madam chair
representative that.
All the Indian casinos have
their own.
Each compact but.
It seems to me that this is a
very targeted.
exemption on.
Just one.
I don't.
I haven't worked on.
Representative my head around
why are we.
Punishing one industry so madam
chair representative thank you
for your comments I believe that
being bingo games or private
clubs or cigar bars they have
the are regulated and overseen
by a different.
Commission a different
government regulations that
we're seeing those also receive
those.
Our employee.
Norma's amount of people.
Many of them are in rural areas.
They're not customer based like
a cigar bar would be were
private club they have an
employment pool that is
regulated by the government and
so that's why it their separate.
Madam chair representative how
many receivers or other things
I.
Madam chair representative for
these five racinos located.
I'll go to my experts witness
but I know I can name some of
the.
Madam chair.
Fourteen.
created in Farmington.
Ops right those of Sunland park
help.
Madam chair representative if I
may.
You know thank the.
The bingo parlors and nonprofits
members only.
I think the bingo parlors are
like mostly the I think I know
one day here in Santa Fe.
A lady of Guadalupe church we
make that
in their basement.
and.
Other facilities are these are
you know Applebee's we have to
use and these are members only.
And you know they're restricted
to only fifteen to fifteen slot
machines in a maximum of four
thousand dollars.
And so the these are not open to
public.
While the racinos are.
Madam chair.
Representative.
Like.
Most of these are for next to.
the proximity of New York City
Senator pops.
Is that correct.
Madam chair think of someone
part.
you know.
I don't know which one is closed
in Texas Texas doesn't allow
them I mean
right so is the Mescalero
Apache.
Albuquerque you know you have a
you know the American tribes we.
Senator.
And Hobbs.
There is nothing close by knobs
someone parked I mean sorry
Sunray in Farmington
the closest one is
the non owners the reservation
but to that's a smaller.
and and and just you know what
more fact I just want to mention
the.
The Navajo Nation in last
February the past a clean indoor
air act which restricted indoor
smoking in all their facilities
including the three tribal
casinos.
You madam chair.
We change to more questions.
Why don't we just allow the
racinos to make that choice on
their own if they want to I
mean.
This study from of consulting
company.
US reviews.
says you know the ban smoking
then everybody makes more money.
But we're not banning smoking.
Except in racinos.
Why don't we allow them to do it
voluntarily like everybody else.
Thank you madam chair
representatives we do been
smoking we're not allowed to
smoke in this room and we've
already have a state law that
the D. Johnson clean air act
that is banned indoor smoking
because we've already proven the
risks to secondhand smoke and
the violations to employee
rights we have a list of
exemptions giving the personal
choice to private clubs and I
believe that casinos and rest
seen as had stated that there
would be a loss of revenue and
tax revenue so they were
approved as an exemption but
given COVID we now have new data
this is not a study.
This is numbers that are
publicly posted that are the net
wins of these tribal casinos not
from fourteen years ago which
was the St Louis study that was
just mentioned but this year and
it gives you full years
comparisons from twenty eighteen
to twenty twenty two which I
understand the twenty twenty
twenty one so that data is money
because you don't know how you
know how much they were open or
anything but twenty eighteen is
clearly a smoking facility and
twenty twenty two is clearly
not.
Madam chair representative up.
I'm not gonna get into the back
and forth between you and the
racinos of whether this is real
point of consulting company that
means nothing to me.
My questions or directed at.
Why.
Is this targeted to simply
racinos.
Madam chair representative I I
will defer to my expert witness
because I feel I've already
answered that but let me see
what my expert has to say.
Madam chair representative to
dissect I think.
As I mentioned before we the
exemptions are.
An indoor air.
Alright targeted mostly two
towards private clubs they have
a choice of small.
in the wake of COVID.
I think that national if there's
just all the proofs.
You know instructed the.
Local clubs to.
Banned smoking well as I
mentioned racinos is the only
place where as a public you can
hello.
That will be.
And.
As I mentioned it's it's
customer has a choice.
But employees still I think the
argument you know the.
The industry is like employees
at options.
you know update to some of these
racinos people work there
mostly.
Minorities and women.
And just looking at that age
group they're not young
there like forty five to sixty
in about so this is a.
So the the reason is.
Racinos the last.
Public places where you know
still allow smoking and and rest
of the exemptions in the clean
indoor air act are for private
clubs if we're not in it you
know SO peas and and other other
groups that are not open to the
public and.
The racinos are still open to
the public and so that that's
the reason why we chose duration
us we're not targeting them I
think there's ample evidence you
know they can still make money
without putting their employees
through it all danger in their
employees.
The second answer.
Madam chair representative on my
last question why don't we just
benefit from all of them.
Madam chair representative
I would entertain any amendment
you'd like to bring to this bill
if you would like to and at to
include all of them I wanted to
separate what was distinctly
government government is
involved with gambling.
Government regulates gambling
facilities camp that we're both
government regulates gaming
facilities also with animals so
the other exemptions although I
would most certainly entertain
any amendment you would like to
bring to their private clubs and
I would understand that that
would be a private choice.
Madam chair representative
right.
All.
All all all was the Russian
debate.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
little.
Thank you madam chair.
I have occasion to the Act
his senior travel or at.
for base you know types.
And correct me if I'm wrong but
well let me preface this by
saying that my observation
actually has been that I see
that there are areas establish
for smokers generally up to
decide somewhere.
And I have seen Cathrynn
taking a break to go smoke or
staff or we have to do to to
smoke.
And then return to their seats.
Well.
What the what you're describing
and it may be a stretch but I'm
it are you will this bill do
away completely.
With that the designated smoking
areas for the world those
continue to be part at.
This that much more thank you
madam chair and representative
this bill that is in front of
you will allow racinos to have
outdoor smoking areas for the
would have separate buildings
the the current
The current.
Cool lay out is they will have a
smoking round and we know that
smoke is still escaping to a non
smoking rooms I know that the I
know approved the you have to
walk through the smoking room to
get to a certain amount of the
machines on the other side so
this bill says that there will
be no room that allow smoking
with in the same building as the
racinos alright.
That thank you representative
madam chair and thank yous one
last observation because I do
that.
At these casinos and racino
settings.
Is that what you describe that
it we called the gauntlet you
have to hold your breath the
race through those doors at to
get to where you wanted to go.
And and the other observations
that I've made is that there are
more people sitting in those
chairs many of us who cannot
tolerate smoking.
by the neighbor sitting next to
us I have many were courteous I
will say that us sometimes
asking if they could if I would
be bothered by some of.
Many others would not and then
and that was a and challenging
at best so what my observation
was is that not just me but
others we get up and leave.
And working and to escape that
so with that.
Article with the information
that I've heard to date it
sounds as though and my
observation has been that there
are.
Others who are patrons.
Actually extend their stay
well.
Or at.
As they go and so
I will let my.
Sessions with that statement
that for observation rather.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
After
chairman days
A committee this morning hi
I realize well like perhaps
maybe the most important person
in this room because I don't
right I don't smoke and I don't
gamble.
and I'm grateful for all of that
by the way I'm self employed so
simple everyday of my life.
So let me tell you some up to
date statistics artists you know
went smoke free twenty twenty.
They lost money they are now in
the process of going back to
allow smoking in the casino for
the very reason so those
statistics or I've been texting
him all day on this subject
they're they're real we get
sixty million dollars a year
from Racine dollars.
Our general fund or whatever
whatever bank that goes to
And so.
You could take all three of
those way that would.
But hi eight we develop private
business management of private
venture business man or woman.
What they can and cannot do.
I I text in that that I and I
asking the question to do most
of the people who work at your
casino are they women and.
People of color which is like no
they are not.
I don't know how we're painting
this but I hate it when
government steps in and tells
people out of the business.
The.
Yeah I actually have to so with
that I I'm gonna vote the way
Mike is a no once we table.
So thank you madam chair and I
will go back to being my boards
which.
At Representative Lundstrom.
Right thank you
here Senator Hughes we were
talking madam chair from the.
That.
That this bill would allow for
such things are not always in
the seven million.
Madam chair representative
that's an excellent question I
asked to as well.
I don't know I don't know how
they're going to set that up I
mean it could be a separate
building it's just strictly a
smoking lounge
months and so I I don't know how
they would set up.
Service and after the some
of the other questions and then
chair is a resale to private
and.
Madam chair and representatives
no I don't believe it is there
is private owners in it but it
is very much regulated by the
government.
in which proceeds and and and
taxed as well so is it it's a
private of.
A private.
There's certainly private
ownership with and it but it's a
private public venture.
Share this that is very much of
I the.
St option I.
Same thing signs like your shoes
service.
And I have that ability to do
that in those kind of businesses
is not one of those things and
is a utility wrangling walk in
at any time ambassador service
yeah the downturn of the state
of Florida they don't want
people walking with their feet.
Well in my I would I would say
that Richard is very much a
private industry are regulated
like every other industry the
state of New Mexico as.
Also madam chair looking at our
house committee announces the
need a little more.
The state for the rest and at a
disadvantage.
Out of
state taxes.
Right the reason that.
A portion of that process.
Madam chair of lightning and
those many businesses and
private enterprises are now
trying to do the on the ground.
I would
so it was probably a long time.
Add additional restrictions here
and certainly I'm not.
Thank you Representative
Representative let.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative have a question
for you or experts.
When you talk about we decided
we we we decide is the right
time we decide it's gonna be a
recent as we.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'll defer to my
expert witness.
You
chair representative Lente I I'm
sorry can you repeat the
question what what questions
were asked if you you had
mentioned that we felt this is
the right time we felt that
receipt was where the right
target who's the we discussion
yes.
Madam chair at the we we as a
coalition like this this is the
American heart association
American lung association
American cancer society New
Mexico chronic disease
prevention council and during
the interim we work with the
tobacco settlement committee you
know which was endorsed by the
tobacco oversight committee.
On these bills so it was a
decision made by by the
coalition.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so in regards to
the we and it was our decision
to reform of our way to the
racinos that ever involved in
the he part of the week.
The madam chair Representative
Lente I mean we we did try to
reach out you know we were not
able to.
and so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative friends
in those questions for me at you
giving me this last week and
that questions under the
presented again referencing that
we continue to grow after tribal
casinos in New Mexico go smoke
free SO your your basis of this
is that.
Tribal casinos and and use
Google to see those compares to
the racinos that made mentioned
earlier that they're actually
losing money after trying to go
smoke free
but but you just have to see
those.
Question do you really think
this is a notion of them going
smoke free or is it because
everyone was cooped up in the
house for the better part of a
year and a half now there are
money see hours that's when the
government and other places
that.
I want to spend the casinos is a
great place to go do you think
there's any truth to that
that Matt madam chair
representative Lente like you
know maybe maybe there is some
of that I think we we we based
this report on you know as
you're aware like you know the
state negotiated the compact and
twenty fifteen so that the
tribe's report on you know slot
machines electronic machines so
that hasn't changed from twenty
fifteen to and now what has
changed is they have gone smoke
free in a sense they're open so
we we try to get the numbers and
and and the point on on racinos
we we try to get information
from there are things
and and they are protected.
And they report to the state
collectively they don't report
individually so when they say
you know they're losing twenty
percent.
And they're losing money so we
haven't seen any numbers from
them and they will not share the
members with us and if they're
really losing money I mean they
they can show the numbers but
they they haven't.
So that to this this discussion
of of the your hand that and
then I think I'm most familiar
with that be a problem and you
meant made mention that.
After the COVID we're back where
we were back in business right
and and very budget is because
it's smoke free knows is why the
numbers are back to that point
to get and so my question is
that.
Many CEOs including said the put
in new filtration systems and I
don't think it was because of us
I think you is is that it's
gonna stop one hundred years we.
And maybe not mask or maybe just
be even allowed to a building
that we haven't had this access
to before the past year and so
so do you think that that.
It just goes back to two at the
money my question on my point of
whether or not this was done
with the smoke free money is not
to diminish or demean your your
your reasoning behind this bill
but I'm I'm questioning
regarding the.
Intent behind them say okay
we're gonna put new petitions
that it's going to help with the
provision of the potential COVID
and other things are going on
during that time of the year or
even still now we're still COVID
obviously but also when I think
of send the updates done a huge
remodeled hotel rooms the casino
During the COVID that we're back
out of the show in the office so
I think there's a lot of
variables and I think you
suicide is because they would
smoke free is a huge stated to
make that is.
Misli in my opinion but I
appreciate your your your your
head up thank you madam chair
thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative maybe more
respond
thank you you're absolutely
right representative Lente these
are just numbers they're not a
study and and you're right there
are other variables besides the
fact that the casinos have gone
smoke free I most certainly
would concede to that I guess
what I ask here today as I'm
asking you to consider to
approve H. B. one sixty eight is
are you approving it because you
believe that we will maintain
our revenues or you improving it
because you know that the
employees that work there under
secondhand smoke
are being physically in jeopardy
I just like we did back in two
thousand seven when we stopped
allowing smoking in bars and
nightclubs thank you.
Representative Mason that.
Okay.
This is a no all there.
And
chair representative that that's
my understanding I I I too was
and boring is representative
Duncan so I believe the yes it's
a combination of racetracks and
casinos.
Then the other driver.
The last.
Madam chair representative in
the race tracks that are outside
they can have outside smoking
areas according to this bill.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you nineteen eighty five
maybe I have gone to to seniors
but not not having the duration
for a long time.
There are ways to lower the
rate.
That is the orders I live.
Providing relief allow
Will apply anything to the store
at.
Right.
So the last.
Well that.
Is.
In those.
Madam chair representative thank
you so much I think that that
that that is an excellent
question the way the bill reads
is that there can be an outdoor
designated smoking section I'm
not I'm not sure and and I'm
glad to referred to my expert
witness but I don't believe is
is that you can't just because
you're outside you can't smoke
if you are in the facility
there's a designated outdoor
smoking section is where I
believe the bills state and I'll
defer to my experts witness.
But.
or.
That.
They are.
Hi all right.
Madam chair representative Mason
I think the this doesn't apply
to.
Hello yeah Madam chair
representative mace this doesn't
apply to any outdoor facilities
at the racetrack it applies to
only the indoor facilities.
And for racino wants to
establish a non smoking area
they can let people go outside
and smoke.
Or they can establish a separate
smoking areas that doesn't share
the same information system as a
receipt.
Zero
Earlier this.
Is that what.
Madam chair representative it is
that the tribal casinos in the
state of New Mexico have
voluntarily since COVID have
gone the ones that you see
listed here have gone smoke
free.
There is five of them here.
And then the Navajo Nation also
just pass that all their casinos
as well have gone smoke free.
I.
The state that are.
The collective.
Yes thank you madam chair
representative you are correct
Representative we we cannot
legislate tribal.
I regulations within the casinos
so I would not be bringing that
they're part of sovereign
nation.
At the end of all this is that
is you.
The other all.
All there are always
the.
Licenses are the I was the.
The thank you very much madam
chair and representative we do
have a letter from sorry.
This.
They're the American society
heating refrigeration and air
conditioning engineers.
This you know the clearly
stating that is the best
ventilation system is not
clearing all the second hand
smoke.
I.
All these years that are.
I have
What.
Or.
They.
Right in the US.
The.
More.
It will allow the.
All of.
Right wing.
Well All.
The date is.
Mexico is all.
That was part of the state of
the right.
The.
Our
workers and by the
The.
Thank you Representative any
other questions from the
committee.
If you have any questions and I
guess it was a little confused
about.
And.
In casinos and.
Legislative.
If they would be making more
money if that was the case and I
I'm getting Texas from different
committee members in my area
saying that the dispute that and
so
I guess I'm my do that to you
would be if they thought they
were going to make more money I
think they would want to spend
so I guess I'm a little confused
by that thank you very much
madam chair representative so
when I've been speaking I've put
that so the the side and I am
just focusing on the numbers
that are public because they
were seen as numbers are not
public.
At for the tribal casinos that
we know who have stopped smoking
as a representative Lente so
eloquently put it's not a study
it's just numbers but it does
show that the numbers are
increasing.
Thank you and you also mentioned
in the bill that is.
Yeah this bill was passed police
are going back and if this bill
were to pass when we take
effect.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I I believe that
it and we have a date on it for
is it's a lot.
Legislature's.
What
the date is always when bills
pass the the are going
effectively June fifteenth.
And so based on that date with
your bill it says that
if.
The the racing as wanted to
can't have a smoking area they
can have a separate bill.
That.
Yes madam chair representative
in the it could have an outdoor
area or a separate building that
does not share the same
violations system as the
building with machines.
Would they need a separate
license for that building.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure about the licensure or
building permits this year did
you witness they would need a
separate license.
Madam chair.
I don't believe the require
separate license I think you
know the they they already have
a gaming license to operate the
gaming machines I think you know
that they can either have their
employees which are the workers
go means our customers go
outside and smoke or they can
designate a separate you know.
Area or structure you know for
just specs specifically for
smoking which doesn't share the
same installations.
Given my questions or was it the
if it is going to entail since
there's a separate building it
would take a separate license
for that
he taking of heads behind you
that is what the fire.
Representative we would we up I
would assume if there's no
machines food being provided in
that building it's a structure
with on the.
The ability the licensure comes
from food service or gambling or
alcohol that's what your life
looks licensure comes from
correct.
Right I guess I'm I was confused
as to
in the bill I I thought you were
designating there to be another
separate areas for there to be
gauging and food for for
customers to go to for them to
continue to participate in in
gaming the reason that they're
there so I guess I'm not so you
would want them to go stand in
an empty building is is that I
think is a computer yes I'm I
As thank you very much madam
chair and representative the
bills is that says that a
separate outdoor or separate
structure that does not share
the same ventilation system.
Would be eligible to allow
smoking what you do with that
separates the drop chair would
depend on how what kind of
licensure you would need.
So.
I am concerned because someone
park is adjacent to my district
and I know several of my
constituents work there it is
the tenth highest economic
driver in are very
I I I areas struggling.
And so I get where I I went away
healthy budget versus economic
benefits I have been out to
tourism marketing been there if
you times and I have seen that
the ventilation system they put
in it seems to be state of the
art I don't believe that could
be it it would make a hundred
percent but I think it is
definitely
it's a step in the right
direction
and I I'm concerned that by
putting this in place it would
hurt the economy in my area
which is so already so depressed
and trying to get back on its
feet so those are my concerns
and and if you have a response
to that.
Thank you very much and I
absolutely here you response as
a as a follow Representative I
know that that we're always
balancing
safety with
stability I will just say that
in response private restaurants
are private but we don't let
them handle meet without washing
their hands that that we have a
government agency that tells
them how they need to prepare
their food because it's open to
the public and it's a regulated
through the government and it
was for health concerns and this
is how we view the wrist seniors
that they it is regulated by the
government we are concerned
about the health of our citizens
but I moves I I most certainly
under specifically understand
your point of view and and thank
you very much for your time you
have anybody else.
K.
to.
We have a motion.
Rep Jane.
Did anyone second.
The motion to table and this.
And in order yes.
Representative docket.
yes on the table.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative let yes the.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Martinez yes to
table Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews what was
that was a question regarding
what to table the motion was or
was it another question.
Just a table as.
Okay.
I thought that that's the case
by fetches let's go back to
basically.
But thank you.
Representative Matthews.
madam vice chair.
No to table.
Madam chair yes to table.
Representative that in order to
table.
The final tally is seven votes
yes three votes.
Your bill's been tabled thank
you for your presentation today
thank you madam chair.
That.
That.
Right now.
Just get back to.
I feel so much also local here
sitting on the ground the cost.
All right HB three seventy seven
Representative finance thank you
madam chair
HB three seventy seven so.
The state of New Mexico
currently lacks centralized
marketing strategy bureau which
leads individual agencies with
the task of planning executing
and measuring the success of
necessary marketing initiatives
without the expertise or
infrastructure to make them
successful of what we're seeing
is most departments are relying
on grant writers for assistance
to
please work to contract out with
a with an agency to.
K. marketing
Campaigns for whatever they may
need
this often results in the in a
number of issues redundancy of
programs and efficiency and
effectiveness
They don't know what they're
looking for so it out.
Lacks the outcome
that the initiatives and doesn't
meet their goals or standards I
lived in this I'm I'm a
marketing director of
for agency and here in New
Mexico and we here we we
recently actually heard a story
about a guy.
Another agency here in New
Mexico that got a seven million
dollar contract in eighty
percent of that went to creative
strategy planning and only
twenty percent of that actually
was used in the.
Actual marketing finds digital
TV whatever that that happened
to be as.
As marketing becomes more.
Complicated
I'm hoping that this bill that
creates a marketing excellence
bureau house within the tourism
tourism department will serve as
a centralized location for
marketing focused expertise
acknowledge your resource for
the other departments to sit so
that we can be more effective
and efficient as we go along
with the marketing campaigns
that we as a state push out
tourism has done a great job
of being effective and efficient
and hiring people that know what
they're talking about
but especially digital marketing
is becoming more effective but
also a lot more complicated as
we go along
So.
Three seventy seven I do want to
be completely transparent
because a giant appropriation on
it which I know is not in the
budget but I really want to have
this conversation to get this
started
So that although it may not pass
this year may you know this is
something that we can continue
to work on as the years go along
so I would like to introduce my
expert witness or let him
introduce himself madam chair
members of the committee Jason
Espinoza that reserve this with
the New Mexico broadcasters
Association I would think that
Representative for bringing this
forward.
This pearly is come up I think
in multiple discussions this
last dinner on the came up with
the New Mexico broadcasters
Association when we're working
with our rural radio stations in
particular trying to work with
the states in the governor's
office on you know how can we
more effectively partner with
the state's on on working with
roll radio as sort of a
advertising placements to get
messages out to the state one of
the things that we found out in
our conversations is that the
current system is currently
fragmented we had offered to do
training with the PO's across
the state and one of things that
we found out in our
conversations is I'll use
Department of Health as an
example there's you know the
grant manager for tobacco and
there's a grant manager for do
you why that grant managers
actually the one that's handily
and sort of the marketing for
that they're doing that so it's
really fragmented and we don't
necessarily get the talent or
expertise that we could of
having a more streamlined our
system like the the marketing
excellence bureau that's
proposed within this bill and
really it's about just you know
creating a centralized top for
state marketing and strategy so
that we can look at key
performance indicators across
the states I think the
legislature's done a great job
you know with the LFC looking at
Legisla- that and really looking
at how do we measure our
effectiveness and right now
because the system is fragmented
we're not able to do that but if
we could create a sort of
centralized needs
euro that give support and
strategy and expertise to other
agencies we can build that in as
well to make sure that they're
doing that research based best
practices specific to get the
outcomes desired needs they have
and and what we hope is that
this can translate into more
effective campaigns no matter
what it is whether it's public
health campaigns or initiatives
like behavioral health outreach
opioid addiction education
diabetes prevention or even
recruitment efforts we've seen
this last year that the tourism
department to partner with
workforce solutions on some
recruitment campaigns so we just
think there's.
Some good conversation around
this area about looking at
efficiencies in the state
improving outcomes related to
marketing thank you.
With that madam chair were ready
to take your questions.
Do we have anybody and support
of this bill.
Anybody in opposition.
Let's start in support the
streets from the starting thank
you madam chair members of the
Houston needs it's okay.
This is the.
He was speaking notes.
Yes we do.
Right before
madam chair.
Definitely workers.
Madam chair representative
committee which register of this
for the New Mexico hospitality
association stands for this
legislation
tourism marketing these players
really important all the growth
of jurors in the state of New
Mexico with at that
interbrand in the proliferation
of it into this administration
releasing tourism numbers
increased investment comment
came after.
a good example of that tourism
department's ability that.
Secretary Lee wanted to do was
during.
They did the vaccine
registration outreach and
marketing for that platform it
was we had one of the highest
taxed registration rates in the
entire country and that tool
continues to exist today we
really feel like this is a very
good move in terms of
centralizing marketing efforts
at the entity that does this for
a living essentially if you're
in the market where working for
your marketing for you the help
for is that marketing
thoroughness to one individual
companies needs are but they
have the expertise the media by
devils relationships in essence
that's doing the same thing with
marketing in the state of New
Mexico centralizing it in an
entity that has a capacity and
expertise to handle the
marketing dollars effectively
with input from the individual
departments so for those
reasons.
Thank you.
Anybody else that they were.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico restaurant association
restaurant association supports
this legislation I would feel
that this legislation would
allow to Mexico to amplifier we
supported our messaging
marketing operate states the
outside world as well as to
allow state government deporting
messaging to the general public
within our state thank you very
much and support thank you
anybody else.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I
apologize I don't use very
often.
My name is for sure the CEO of
real time solutions were a local
software and advertising
agencies
Mexico order the Albuquerque we
were the company that was
privileged to work with the
department of health not only on
the software side of also
marketing site for the COVID
registration system we had over
ninety percent participation in
terms of Mexico is getting there
for shopping and continue to
work to make our communities
safer by promoting that message
to get vaccinated we stand in
support of this bill because we
have a privilege of working with
the state agencies and marketing
their efforts we are by
socializing is under orders and
bring their expertise we'll see
the cost efficiencies as well as
a great oversized.
The message it is promoting the
services that are vital to
Mexicans everything health
education two of licenses and
everything.
We we strongly support this will
ask you to do.
Thank you.
Anybody else is part
of the secretary share the truth
department we support this bill
in concept we do think that the
marketing center of excellence
of some sort would be very
beneficial state insurance
department on a regular basis
just getting pulled in two
different initiatives when
there's a crisis for example.
Or in part we can help those
with early childhood development
and there was for will shortage
and so this is been happening
even since last ministration
there was an initiatives that
support economic development as
well as the need to recruit
teachers at so the mechanism
that would be very helpful to
have supported centralized
marketing.
Points to the necessarily need
tourism now that we understand
the logic we do have a division
of marketing that it would be
very helpful for a lot of
programs across the state to
communicate with available to
our residents thank you anybody
else.
The video system they'll madam
chair already have stood in the
committee.
Representative Serrato I thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for report the
spill I'm kind of curious if you
could give us some examples of
how what this would look like
and the reason why I ask is that
obviously would targeting.
Data is related to a lot of all
the rhythms out there you know
how you target the small
community you know outreach for
vaccination is very different
than how you promote communities
committed our resources on you
know to help communities.
How you all.
Thank you madam chair
representative
in my perfect world the way that
it would work is you have this
marketing excellence bureau
under tourism and they would be
there is the resource to that
contract out with local agencies
who do
to have specific.
Or no had a target to specific
audiences so
let's say.
There's an agency in town or in
Albuquerque that is good at
hitting as targeting hard to
reach populations of native
American communities
places with low or no broadband
then you would go to another one
Also now pre I want to specific
names but they do health care
there's another one that does
tourism there's one that does
like public policy
and so you would take this
marketing actions bureau who
knows what data they're looking
at who they're trying to target
and would help the the
Secretaries in the department's.
Figure out what that is so that
it was accurate at the end of
the issue and and then it would
they would either run it in
house if they could or they
would partner with the agencies
here within the state that can
ship those individual questions
as needed did you want to add
anything to the yeah Madam chair
representative surrounded to I I
think you know this to look at.
You know I'm looking on the
spectrum in terms of what the
marketing bureau or gate
marketing center of excellence
bureau to do I depending on the
expertise that exists within
certain agencies all this bureau
may be doing is providing
support in terms of messaging
contracting you know having
those contacts and I I go back
to sort of our rural radio the
broadcast association you know
those have a lot of turnover if
there's people within this beer
that we can keep contact with
but it's hard to keep you know
fifty people across the
government but there can be one
point of contact that's helpful
so there's I think the support
of the expertise and just Lente
some knowledge in resources
there to that really helping
with sort of complete strategy
alignment and so looking at
you know economic developments
yet to Mexico partnership you
have again the public safety
campaigns D. W. and I others
were those by no means need to
be New Mexico true campaigns but
there's a lot of assets that are
created that can probably be
used across different campaign
so there might be efficiencies
there too and that sure sure
assets digital assets and other
things as well.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and expect that
one last question again I
believe you mentioned earlier
grant writing as well with this
agency also assist with that
aspect as well.
Madam chair representative Radha
they they would just really
happy to help with grant writing
what we found that in our
conversations is sometimes the
grant writer so the great
managers within the state
government so tobacco cessation
look at that they're writing the
grants they that are actually
the ones turning around and
doing the marketing so working
with the marketing agencies and
so within the department of
health is our understanding
you're having multiple grant
managers as well as the PO also
in separate marketing campaigns
which probably could be they're
probably to be efficiencies
found thank you madam chair
thank you.
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you madam chair I have no
ideas on this beyond just
conversation yes yes that insure
it we were.
This bill.
And of the New Mexico state.
Seven thousand secretaries in
agreement it would be take
online would need the one.
Right right now.
Representative.
The
last fifteen changes to act.
One twenty five.
That will
does that
I love the look at it the
general weather on one funding.
So if you're interested in that
and and I would move that
amendment of the constitution.
Then you have a waiting as we
appropriations.
And chair and representative I
would be amenable to that if you
would allow us to do that in our
commission.
I like the idea that.
Yeah right making appropriation
on.
Line fourteen.
Okay.
Right now all right one
million dollars.
Date two years out.
We waited.
I will choose structure because
of provisions yeah.
And families this yes
ma'am.
Is down.
Seven.
To do that.
What we find that as a friendly
amendment eight so any
opposition to the amendment.
Okay then you've got it and if
you don't.
Then I guess we should take it
at any other company anything
else question and always
questions and Representative I
just wanted to say that changes.
Only because I know years one
Russian and marketing right now
and it would be best if we had
way.
Where are different.
Stages of Bill best practice.
Wasted times of times.
I.
All kinds of
things like get out the vote.
I wasn't five percent you go out
and this is twenty years ago for
trying to do things like that.
Really understand how to use
marketing.
I hope we get through this
through for maintenance or the
Senate side and kind of the this
money into it thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative Representative
Martinez.
Just amazing.
Sh March of people can be to do
that on the fly.
The president.
Chair representative
couple questions in in light of
this ammendment.
You were asking for fifty
million dollars.
And now you're going to do it
for nothing for two years.
Right.
In that Madam chair
representative so the way that
it was now amended is the
effective date would not be
until twenty twenty five I was
part of the amendment
Representative Lundstrom so we
would have two years to concept
it out and to get it funded
before it took before it was
effective.
Yes this is this is now my job
went from of Madam chair for
about fifty million dollars
appropriation to know you're
going to do with the loss.
I mean are we going to madam
chair I we've all.
Are we going to use this service
legislators.
Madam chair.
That's always.
Thank you Representative
decking.
Thank you madam chair I actually
have a couple of questions here
my first question madam chair.
Our.
I I I read one dollar.
This is.
Madam chair representative
Duncan
It in the state actually we have
all all executive branch
agencies which would fall under
this so that we have alignment
across all of them.
Okay thank you for that I was
just curious how many of those.
Using after using I.
Our struggles trying to get
everybody in the state.
Madam chair representative
Duncan.
I don't expect to I mean I look
at this as an additional
resource for the agencies that
currently don't have the
capacity or the or the expertise
to do this I I think they're
gonna welcome additional support
is what I would have.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair.
Of these are under attack Getty
it this
it can help
I hope these are not these
questions are not two and eight
this is I understand this
process then chair presenters
this.
You're you're providing
something that's going to help
the state agencies but you're
changing the definition isn't
going to apply to you just to
state government in my.
Expanding it correctly.
Madam chair of the masses are
ease talking specifically to
the.
Change under the with the New
Mexico partnership is that what
you're referring to.
Madam chairman to creating
building no.
We.
Representative Madam chair
representative Matt.
Which one
House Bill three seventy seven.
That is a totally different.
So
When I heard my hand right.
Right.
Sh.
Okay now the conversation makes
a lot more sense.
I think I do have just one
question what happened to the
crime the.
We get the best.
I thank you all.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair they would
due to.
Legislative.
That's right.
Please.
Representative and in order.
Representative yes.
Senator Fernandes yes
Representative let.
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative makes it yes
Representative Matthews.
I'm not going to send it back.
That this tier yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair
final tallies yes both eleven
zero votes for them.
This is.
What it.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
All right.
Because.
Our next bill is house bill one
seventy
Representative.
Or.
Can.
It is.
We are calling it the Sanchez.
So give me just a couple minutes
ago okay eighty one seventies
next.
Yes okay.
She's.
The the you know all those
things have.
Hi Planning
Hundreds of.
I
had just.
Madam is.
Yeah stand we are okay with
three.
Thank you my feet were sleep
from my last committee so.
It got here is critically that
they could.
All right Representative house
bill one seventy you were on
thank you madam chair house bill
one seventy is basically up at
least a cleanup language bill
from of a best practice across
the fifty states were the last
state that does not allow
basically group building on your
cell phone bill so what this
does is allow for the
clarification for what every
other state in the union does
which is allow for something
like if you are have a Verizon
plan to be able to get a Disney
plus plan added to your plan and
see all of that delineated on
your bill you get access to
special programs that can
connect with your current
program and basically that's
what this slamming and cramming
that is so we've been trying to
do this we passes through the
house I think for the past six
years we just haven't made it
through the Senate side so
apologies for all of those
hearing it again but basically
with me is doing your work with
Verizon wireless
Will stand for questions madam
chair thank you is there anybody
here in favor of this.
Anyone here in opposition.
You
Yes Sir.
Okay so let's start with.
Those who are.
Madam chair.
Rating one of the more work and
more.
Three ninety five ladder
University.
Yeah.
Hello.
In a world where comments about
the overall video phone and
other services helpful one.
Representative resolving eighty
four.
Engine
one.
Thank you anybody else in favor
of this bill.
Well at least about top.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Lisa Medicaid and I'm here on
behalf of CTIA the trade
association for the wireless
communications industry in
strong support of house bill one
seventy which updates New
Mexico's nineteen ninety nine
telephone billing statute this
bill seeks to modernize the
statute to take account of the
major changes in telephone
technology over the past twenty
four years while continuing to
protect consumers.
This bill amends New Mexico New
Mexico statute to allow
consumers to put charges on
their telephone bills for
services such as streaming video
consumers have the choice to do
this in the other line fit the
other forty nine states in the
country.
Today consumers expect and want
the option to use telephone
loans for services they can
receive using their devices.
The amended statute will
continue to protect consumers
from the building up on
authorized charges known as
cramming a practice that the
wireless industry continues to
work against.
The legislative finance
committees fiscal impact report
notes that the Attorney General
stated that it is common for
telecommunications providers to
offer subscriptions to non
telecommunication services and
that house bill one seventy just
clarifies that this practice is
not contrary to the cramming and
slamming Act.
Also in fiscal impact report the
public regulation commission
described the statute's
prohibition of charges before
party services as automatic in
states that H. B. one seventy
provides a needed correction the
wireless industry supports
passage of HB one seventy and
commend New Mexico's efforts to
updated statutes to allow
consumers to make choices
regarding charges on their
wireless bills thank you.
Share this chart.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chair this on
behalf T. mobile we support this
bill for reasons previously
stated.
Bob the sale.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee says Bob Ignacio
director of external affairs for
eighteen T. for New Mexico
eighteen T. supports house bill
one seventy it represents a
needed change to be able to give
our customers more options and
it goes a line New Mexico with
all other states in this regard
we very much thank the sponsor
we thank you for considering
considering you to be one
seventy thank you madam chair
and members.
But just as all thank you
anybody in opposition.
The committee.
Any questions that
Representative.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one question.
This is good for the consumer I
wanted this week I coached by
carriers I would like to and
that's it.
Madam chair representative so
all that to lead talk about that
a high level essentially if you
wanted anything added to your
current billing system you'll be
able to opt into that or if
there is a special program or
some deal like that that you
wanted to add to that billing
cycle you would be able to do
that right now you can opt into
those programs whatsoever.
Madam chair representative
That's right that yes.
you go to Verizon website would
like to sign up for Verizon
service for some of our service
plans
you get Disney for free you'll
get a free for six months and
then charge after that hi and
then through the ordering
process of rises it'll step you
through or you actually can work
through Disney's systems but you
go to Verizon systems to get
there.
Okay thank you madam chair
madam chair the so then the next
question we just got really into
it for six months in the
nineties that is joining more
how do.
Madam chair representative has
with any standard billing and
transparency you can opt out of
any program at any time and of
course it being a digital world
you should be able to do that
right in your profile and those
are consistent with the laws
that we currently have on the
books this doesn't touch that.
That's what I needed thank you
thank you any other questions
from the committee.
Representative Matthews.
Yes and actually had a question.
And that just.
My question is is pretty much
like the other one is an **** I
find that.
Trying to have not actually
trying to keep track of things
bordering.
You push a button in case it was
more in the next you know
something's coming or something
happening in your is what is the
consumer protection process
sentences.
Estate agency is there.
Agencies okay.
Give.
That internet to.
Actually it was.
yeah it isn't going issues.
Madam chair representative
I heard a couple things so let
me try to deal with those so if
you are consumer is ordering
service there are regulations on
the books today that protect the
consumer at the point of sale is
under New Mexico law there's got
to be disclosure of material
terms prices.
And then under PRC regulations
The customer's got a authorized
the purchase.
And there's the process either
writing or can be oral this
world County reported we're
there's full disclosure the cost
what the charges or what
services are that they're
getting.
and then
Faster than says yeah that's
that's what I want on the bill
itself the service is got to be
described the charges have to be
fully disclosed.
And again with the services that
we're talking about here
if you were to get and so and I
don't want to
what was on authorized you go to
the PRC for the complaint
and also you can cancel the
service.
Here is here.
Senator.
Yes a little.
Yes.
it's nice.
My
question is and I find the so
many things that happened
at all is that things pop up.
Telling you.
hi fi Avenue.
Kind of a service years and and
I keep getting pop ups telling
me that.
On a date interview at and I
don't know if that's.
That's really from them.
Else and and I realize I'm on
extending person in the world
but I think that opening pop ups
and.
Those things
would.
Processes you describe that we
go to PRC and state I guess my
question is how do you protect
yourself.
Following it down to the kinds
of things that are on the
internet to do not with these.
Madam chair representative so
that we don't contemplate that
and this bill per se but
generally you can go to the AG's
office for any predatory
activity when we look at some of
the protections regulatory
relief the PRC is
Mr doing Mr works as stated you
can basically make complaints
about that as far as internet
jurisdiction generally that's
pretty much of federal
jurisdiction right so we're
doing our best that we can hear
New Mexico to keep billing
transparent that's what this
bill is about and also providing
the opportunity for folks to opt
into things that they provide to
be beneficial to them and that's
what this bill does but as far
as sort of wrangling in internet
pop ups and some of those other
things I think that's something
every state is trying to figure
out how to be better about you
know making sure that behavior
is a predatory.
Representative thank you and
salaries that allow.
Madam chair representative the
internet yes is the wild world
out there I will agree with
that.
Any other questions.
Yes.
Hello.
Representative and in order yes.
Is that it that it yes
Representative Hernandez.
It just Representative will yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Martinez yes Representative
Mason
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam vice chair yes
madam chair yes Senator the S.
eight or ten no votes are still
that about.
