Representative Johnson.
Let me letter and.
Representative Johnson.
Here thank you.
President.
Culbert here.
Toronto.
Your.
To get on.
I am here in this.
Here thank you we have a quorum
and welcome everyone.
If you could let in
Representative Madrid to sit
behind us on the virtual Dyess.
And then Mr mark Roper as well
let him in as a panelist we
welcome everyone thank you with
this is involving a local
Economic Development Act or Lida
Lida some pretty much we all
support we managed to maintain I
think even increase lead a tiny
bit during the tough years of a
fifteen and sixteen and now we
want to a utilized in a much
better fashion so I'll turn it
over to you Representative
Chandler what are you taken away
introduce your guests however
you wish and then and then what
a public comment thank you for
bringing this forward and
welcome madam secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman it's nice
to see you all again Committee
members this is House Bill
eleven and join.
Representative you are muted.
Hello everyone good to see you
again.
I think we're going to get to
know each other pretty well
these next couple weeks but
again it's nice to see you all
this is I'm introducing house
bill eleven which is a bill that
the economic development
department is sponsoring and and
the in the governor is very much
behind it is a bill that
addresses Lida and provide some
creative I think very creative
and of funding mechanisms for
lead us so that's kind of the
backdrop I'll start with a few
opening remarks and then I'll
turn it over to our our
distinguished panelists.
I am pleased to be here today is
for house bill eleven a bill
that will provide immediate
economic assistance to New
Mexico companies and also create
a long term more sustainable way
to bring large companies to New
Mexico that will have a major in
canonic impact and create
significant amount of jobs.
Over the past year between
federal and state assistance New
Mexico businesses have received
over three point two billion
dollars in economic assistance
however more than two thousand
business locations closed
permanently and twenty twenty
and many more are still
struggling trying to keep up
upon up on rent payments and
re hire employees.
This bill
House Bill eleven provides two
hundred million dollars to
support New Mexico businesses
that need need it the most and
encourage those businesses to
hire workers and create new jobs
something that we need
desperately the money will come
from unused dollars originally
settled set aside from the New
Mexico finance authority small
business recovery loan fund.
Research shows that the hardest
hit types of businesses are not
necessarily traditional economic
based businesses what
restaurants and small retail
shops like closing the
legislation amend certain
definitions in the local
economic development act such as
language restricting the kinds
of businesses eligible for grant
relief and at this point I'd
like to turn it over to
secretary Alicia keys to expand
on what the legislation does Mr
chair if that's okay with you
absolutely madam secretary
welcome thank you thank you
Representative Chandler and Mr
chair members of the committee
with me I have R. W. John Clark
and also our director of the EDD
mark Roper so basically the bill
has two sections of the first
provides immediate economic
sense the way of requests for
thousands of businesses use for
rent early statement that they
can re hire workers are new
employees in speaking with
businesses recently this was
their number one concern that
that that they had incurred on
their wrists as all of you know
lead is a job creation fund and
so the businesses that accept
this money have to commit to
hiring are bringing back the
specific number of workers and
EDD will monitor these
benchmarks as we do for all of
our other the investments we
would utilize the NMFA
application process now in place
and the money would be paid out
through EDD's the to fund which
permits assistance for buildings
including rent and lease
payments.
The second part of the bill
provides a tool to be able to
incentivize larger companies
like big pharmaceutical
companies or manufacturers to
come to New Mexico by providing
partial sharing of G. R. T.
revenue during construction at
the approval of the county and
municipality so this additional
funding will make our state more
competitive for big job creators
and we've had to come in the
past few months it will also
ensure funds are available with
great opportunity the rise of
the recapture of G. R. T. is
limited the construction phase
project and the seventy five
percent for projects over three
hundred million dollars
as you know projects like not
come around very often New
Mexico and they do bring long
term economic gains to the
community mark Roper is going to
give you a few examples of that
first I'm gonna pass it over to
our deputy John Clark just to
expand a little bit more on the
constitutionality of this bill
and why we're using lead a as a
mechanism and also to talk a
little bit more about the
process for using G. R. T. and
how counties and municipalities
will have the ultimate decision
about whether to participate
one difficult welcome to be
part.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee good afternoon so
the bill addresses two key
questions that might be raised
about issues of
constitutionality the first is
the anti donation clause leaders
granted an exception to the anti
donation clause of the
constitution as long as job
creation is involved so that's
why we're going through the
legal process in this bill but
that's also why the bill
requires job creation for
typically the bill leader deals
EDD will provide a portion of
the money up front the companies
have to meet certain milestones
that the contract to receive
additional tranches of money
this continues that seem
framework by providing one of
the four quarterly payments up
front and then requiring
companies to meet hiring
requirements receive all or a
portion of the additional
quarterly payments.
We the constitution requires
leader funds to be used for land
building and infrastructure and
this can include rental lease
payments which we know is a
significant concern for
businesses across the state.
The second possible question is
whether this qualifies as an
investment from severance tax
permanent fund.
Article eight section in the
constitution reads money in the
severance tax permanent fund
should be invested as provided
by law this gives the
legislature considerable
flexibility to determine what
constitutes an investment this
bill explicitly labels this
project is investment in points
to that section there's also
further statutory clarification
in an amendment that I believe
you should have in front of the.
But in addition to meeting this
technical qualification this is
also a prudent investment on
behalf of the state the bill
requires companies to
demonstrate by providing tax
return information that they're
paying more in net new tax
revenues to the state that is
being provided to them through
these requests as a result of
this comment relief grant
project this is an unprecedented
interpretation of the term
investments by the state but
this is also a critical in
unprecedented economic crisis.
Finally let's talk about the G.
R. T. sharing portion of the
bill this allows us to decide
together EDD the county and
municipality if we need to use
this mechanism to attract really
big deals that we couldn't land
otherwise all three have to
agree there's no deal it's
completely optional for local
governments and this is a little
more than half of the New Jersey
revenues generated during the
construction that allows that to
flow back to the project through
the normal legal process in
addition a little bit extra from
the state portion only for a
total of seventy five percent in
total for the state portion will
remain in the lead to fund using
some of that new revenue that's
generated by this company to
attract other projects for help
local expansions this still
allows a quarter of the new
revenues generated to flow to
the state's general fund in
early half of the new local
revenues to stay with those
local governments so this is a
win in terms of jobs and
investment it's also when in
terms of revenues this is really
just for very occasional really
big projects that we can't land
otherwise and just as a quick
example look at the jobs
investment and economic activity
that lost blue is seen because
of Facebook what if we didn't
have enough on committed leader
dollars to compete for that
project if we couldn't land that
deal any other way we could have
all agreed to use this it's just
a way to make sure the big deals
on passes.
Mr chair I believe Mr Roper we
had some comments he wanted to
then is that right Secretary
keys.
Welcome Mr Roper.
What do you have to add.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative
Chandler thank you thank you for
this opportunity as W. secretary
Clark pointed out the poster
child of this of this idea up on
the G. R. T. share is the
Facebook project in the village
of those lotus in the in that
particular agreement that was
agreed to in twenty sixteen.
Because the village of Los Lunas
wasn't in a position for a
leader dollars from their
general fund because of lack of
funds they are part of this
unique idea a gross receipts tax
year of the construction portion
of the project to the tune of
seventy five percent and that
was there a portion of the
leader of the agreement so the
state of New Mexico put in ten
million dollars of traditional
Lida general fund monies in the
village of Los Lunas offered up
a gross receipts tax relief of
seventy five percent of the
revenues generated from the
construction of this project so
that's kind of the but the basis
of the poster child behind this
agreement it really expands that
idea to allow for a G. R. T.
share the state portion and the
county portions of the G. R. T.
to be part of the project and as
a W. secretary Clark wanted to
it's only if and when and all
three entities agree that this
project would not happen we're
in not for this agreement.
And gives us the flexibility to
gather together all three
opportunity all three
governmental entities the city
the county of the state and when
we are competing for brought
large scale projects to be able
to easily calculate and
understand what could be
available through Lita to a
potential project based on what
they are committing to on a
construction agreement.
Additionally what makes is
really really nice is this is
really postproduction.
Lot of our leader agreements
that we put the money out we
provide we get security we all
for clawbacks based on future
performance in this particular
mechanism they're actually
building.
Making the construction
investment and we're actually
receiving the revenue before we
ever put any money into the
project and yet we can still
hold for future job creation of
components to stay within the
compliance of of the lead actor
so it really is a poster child
is born out of an idea that came
from a local municipality and it
makes good sense to make it
available to only large scale
projects we don't want to do
this with every little project
comes along large scale projects
especially when we're in a
competitive nature with our
neighboring states and other
states across the country gives
us the opportunity to be.
Thank you Mr chair I'm more than
happy to stand for any
questions.
Thank you and Representative
before we go to public comment
Because I sure have a motion.
Do you have a member correct we
yes I do Mr Mr chair we
submitted a copy of the
amendment earlier a few days ago
it's two oh two number two one
nine three nine five point two
and it's it's three pages and it
it to me as I look at it is kind
of a clean up amendment but I
think probably on one of the
panelists could speak with.
I would like to move the
amendment for discussion and and
all second that motion so we
have a member prescription of
someone can explain it before we
go to public comment.
Mr chair committee members I I'd
be happy to explain it so as
Representative Chandler
mentioned a lot of what this
amendment does is clean we
really went through this line
item by line item was council
service and with the taxation
and revenue department and
others to make sure that
everything was right and so a
lot of what you see here is
technical claim specifically
items one through six and nine
through thirteen our technical
clean up and don't change the
intent of the bill.
Another there is one significant
technical cleanup item and then
the others are are all very
minor the significant technical
cleanup item addresses an issue
that we previously had aware of
the original version of the bill
did not specifically address
section seven twenty five five
of and insert this is item.
This is item thirteen on the
amendment that is sorry section
seven twenty seven I that is how
the state directs the investment
of the severance tax permanent
fund we did not go into this
section in the original bill and
specifically add in that this
wasn't allowed form of
investment it was it was implied
but we decided after a lot of
discussion that implied may not
be sufficient so now we're
adding a new subparagraph to
seven twenty seven I that
specifically identifies these
investments as an allowable form
under statutes so we've taken
care of the constitutional issue
for investment and this takes
care of the statutory issue.
Of the remaining items that are
on this amendment there are only
two that are substantive item
number seven change is the
latest possible application
deadline from December thirty
one twenty twenty one to instead
June thirtieth twenty twenty
two.
We did that to address concerns
that we received from some
businesses that there remains a
possibility that COVID nineteen
might still be enough of a
concern by the end of the year
that they may not be able to
fully reopen and rehire and we
wanted to make sure that we were
still allowing access to this
program to those businesses that
were in on that have these
concerns so by extending it
another six months we should be
in the clear for all businesses
to be able to access this as
long as they meet the other
qualifications the other
substantive item is item number
eight on the line and that
changes the job creation
requirements essentially it
gives us the flexibility to
ensure that all of this money
actually gets use because the
point of this program is to get
two hundred million dollars into
the hands of minute businesses
that need the most and can use
it the most and we wanted to
make sure that we have the
flexibility to set job creation
requirements in a way that
allows all of that money to
actually go out the door so this
allows us the opportunity to
create a rule after working a
lot with business associations
NMFA and others determine what
specific requirements and
requirements make sense in terms
of a return to the state but
also in terms of making sure
that the money actually gets
used and doesn't just sit there
it does provide a little bit of
guidance to us as well
previously the bill didn't
provide specific guidance on
that this says that we are to
provide priority in this job
creation requirements to
businesses based on how severely
they were impacted by COVID
nineteen as well as the wages
that they paid to their
employees but beyond that the
special the specifics we would
have to take care of it will and
with that Mr chairman that's
what this amendment us and happy
to stand for any questions.
Thank you very thorough
explanation Representative
Chandler anything else.
No Mr chair thank you thank you
before we take action on any
amendments are obviously the
bill let's go to a public
comment so everyone in the as an
attendee for the.
For the folks that tend is in
the webcast can see the attendee
list but there's eleven
attendees.
One person as is hand up please
click raise hand feature on your
zoom to address the committee I
welcome Mr atomic silver.
Then you yourself.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee on
behalf of the independent
community bankers association we
operate and all thirty three
counties around the state and we
wholeheartedly support any
efforts by the state to.
Create economic development as
its key we have.
Creates many jobs employees
around the state so we support
the bill.
Thank you Mr so anyone else was
to address the committee.
Anyone else was to address the
committee in favor or in
opposition if if that changes
please raise your hand.
Members of the committee.
Give us a time give us a chance
to Mull it over.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
naturally I would have a lot of
issues with this and I'm just
kind of curious as to.
If the representative could tell
us why we did not.
If they gave her any ideas we
did not get a response from
NMFA.
Mr chair I I cannot answer that
perhaps one of the panelists
who's been talking with NMFA can
can speak to that question at
your pleasure Mr chair.
Mr chair committee members soon
the.
We did have discussions with
NMFA I'm not sure why there was
no response by MFA to this bill
and in time for posting FIR but
we've been in discussions with
NMFA about this for some time
the reason why NMFA was brought
into this in the first place was
because they already have the
framework set up to be able to
take applications for a grant
program from thousands of
businesses and make payments so
rather than reinvent the wheel
we thought it made sense to use
that framework that NMFA already
has in place they would be
administering the application
system in the payment system but
the actual oversight new rules
that would be promulgated would
be body.
Would you repeat what you said
about oversight.
Mr chair representative.
NMFA would only be administering
the system that the system that
accepts the applications and
provides the payments all the
oversight and any rules to be
promulgated to provide
clarification for how this is
going to work would come from
EDD.
As I understand that this part
of money's coming out of the
four hundred million that we
voted on in June and my correct.
Mr chair
I will let Mr Clark incident
posted.
Service representatives Mr chair
and representative.
The bill in its original form it
is unclear it does not directly
address that with this amendment
it does directly address that
and it says that this is a
separate part of funds.
Separate how Mr chairman.
Mr chair representative.
Within the severance tax
permanent fund legislation that
seven dash twenty seven dash
five this is how this yes I see
is to invest those funds it is
actually says there are two
classes of funds and there are
market rate returns than what
we've deemed economically
targeted investments.
The original loan program was
coming out of the pot of funds
that was essentially set aside
for these economically targeted
investments but this is putting
in a new sub paragraph in that
section saying.
Leave those systems in place
don't touch those in addition to
the instructions you already
have for how to invest those two
classes of funds here is a third
class of funds.
Okay well that this I see as I
read it and understand it you
this would go into to a bank
now.
Through twenty twenty three so
it looks like unless I'm
misunderstanding.
That
We're in a sense with this piece
of legislation us as I see to to
support.
Recommendations down the fear
that in the future as to the
right.
Spent and we see or am I
misunderstanding that.
Mr chair and representative so
we we very carefully crafted
this additional subparagraph so
that it does not in any way
affect any future investment
decisions by us I see it just
points to this act and says S.
I. C. in addition to how you
normally investor funds also
provide this two hundred million
dollars to the Economic
Development Department for this
is the purposes of this act so
it doesn't interfere with their
ability to do anything else in
the future doesn't in any way
affect any interest bearing
decisions that they make in the
future okay Mister chairman I'm
not not I'm talking about this
in particular because unless on
Miss understanding on.
I think it looks like it's page.
Three I think you are the kind
of the numbers clearly but it
looks like they're saying that
we're asking them to project the
return on the funds that they're
investing I'm I just
misunderstanding.
Mr chair representative are you
talking to page three of the
amendments or page three of the
original thank you very.
the bill I think.
But anyway I have some concerns
about that the other question
that I have Mr chairman is
What this is that that's getting
these dollars what happens if
they don't succeed.
Are we discussing that in the
winter there's no.
You know return to the state or
the taxpayers dollars or
whatever I'm just I'm just
curious Mr chair representative
that's a really good question
and we're addressing that by
making this post performance
after the initial quarterly
payment they can't receive
additional quarterly payments
unless they need but the job
creation requirements in the tax
generate tax revenue generation
requirements of the bill so this
way it ensures that we get the
job creation component that we
both need for constitutionality
under Rita but also job creation
component that the state is so
desperate for but also would
ensure is that the state is
getting more back in terms of
new tax revenues beyond what
those companies produced in
taxable year twenty twenty back
to the state so we're getting
more money back then were
putting out in terms of these
requests.
Okay Mr chairman that's still
good that's my question my
question is let's say they've
got uses quarterly payments that
they're going receipt well
quarter you know they get that
first amount of money but they
don't meet the requirements
because they couldn't.
because they could meet the
requirements what happens with
the money that they've already
received is there any work in
that they're going back out of
this is how the state get those
dollars that.
Mr chair and representative this
doesn't provided for any way to
get the the money back
essentially if the company has
has gone out of business after
meeting those initial
requirements if they're just not
able to succeed and if they go
out of business there likely
would be no opportunity for us
to claw back those funds in any
case
but the hope is that the benefit
the state receives because they
have to show that they're
providing more money to us in
terms of net new tax dollars and
we're giving them the hope is
that the benefit that we
received outweighed what we gave
them in the first place so in a
way we already got that money
back without direct clawback
provisions.
I just have a lot thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
You Mr chair and thank you
receive gender for bringing this
bill forward I I'm kind of in
the same boat is is
representative cultural Culbert
I I I do have quite a few
questions and some things are
just not.
quite connecting for me
so I'm Mr chair and
representative in and Mr Clarke
so you're saying we're creating
a third bucket within the
severance severance tax
permanent fund or you're
creating a subsection within one
of those two buckets.
Mr chair and Representative it
is essentially a third market
there are the two existing
buckets of market rate returns
economically targeted
investments.
Use the legislature actually
decreased a third bucket last
year it was the fifty million
dollars that was set aside for
local governments local
governments didn't end up using
that but there is that their
budget and created that
temporarily existed.
Now that their book is no longer
in existence this is creating a
new third bucket into exactly
the same manner the you created
that their budget for local
governments.
Mr chair representative Mr
Clarke is is is is new bucket
temporary or as a permanent.
Mr chair it is temporary any
funds that we don't use in this
program that are still there by
the end of fiscal year twenty
three revert back to the seven
sex from.
Thank you Mr Clark and Mr chair
representative
in terms of the intended
beneficiaries of this of this
program are you targeting
specific businesses participate
but a pandemic how are you
making that decision.
Yes it Mr chairman of the bill
directs us to direct the funds
to companies as long as they
need a couple of qualifications
R. T. Mong them are they have to
have seventy five or fewer
employees per location.
They have to sure they had
a revenue loss going from
taxable year twenty nineteen to
taxable year twenty twenty of at
least twenty five percent as
long as they meet those
requirements they generally
qualify the bill then further
directions to prioritize funding
towards those businesses that
were hardest hit now when the
companies provide us with the
information that's required for
documentation we'll be able to
see what that revenue loss was
and we can do an automated
system to determine you know
what they're percent reduction
was and prioritize that funding
according.
Thank you Mr Clark and Mr chair
representative I know that with
the loan recovery fund we we
also had that revenue loss
requirement and it seems like
you was presents the.
Requirement to meet our twenty
five percent in lost revenues
between twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty how how did you
come up with that figure and how
confident you are that in the we
will be able to to qualify as
many businesses possibly can.
Mr chair representative of that
figure was actually recommended
to us by businesses that we were
discussion about what that
percent cut off should be and it
was upon business recommendation
that we went with the twenty
five percent essentially there
are some other programs in place
federal and state that provide
other help for businesses that
want to severely impacted but
this is for companies that are
essentially teetering on the
edge St still have a chance to
survive and grow and rebuild
what do you need some real help
in Canterville themselves of
additional that in order to do
so.
Thank you Mr Clark and
Representative and and
Mr chair I'm sorry to to my
colleagues previous question
How do you
well let let me backtrack you
mentioned in your opening that
this is
models a little bit after after
Lida.
do you have the job creation
requirement is that what I heard
you saying in this bill as well.
Yes Mr chair and representative.
Job creation is an essential
part of leader and we have to
keep that in the bill to meet
the constitutional requirement
so yes there is a requirement it
says that essentially each
business can qualify for up to a
hundred thousand dollars that
would be split into four
quarterly payments but in order
to get that maximum quarterly
amount they have to meet these
job creation requirements and we
will set out in rule exactly
what those look like but each
job is hired will result in a
specific dollar amount.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Mr Clarke so you.
In order to make use of this of
this fund businesses will not
only have to keep jobs will have
to create new jobs mmhm.
Mr chair representative that's
correct because the leader act
of and the staff at the
constitutional provision of
required job creation.
Thank you
Mr Clark and Mr Mr chair
yeah that that's that's
complicated
I mean I understand why we kind
of have to but I also feel a.
you know the.
I I don't see how many of these
businesses or any place need
jobs in
is much is ages need to keep the
ones that they have
how long is the clawback so if
you make use of the one hundred
thousand dollars over the
calendar year.
how long you have to keep those
jobs to be created and if you
don't keep on do you have to
send money back.
Mr chair representative there
are no clawback provisions
because this is done as opposed
performance measures so they do
have to show that they've
created the jobs and then also
have paid the state back more
tax revenues not for nearly with
regularly to projects we do have
clawback provisions where they
have to keep the jobs for period
of time in this case with new
businesses teetering on the edge
we don't want to have if they
have if they end up winning off
one person and just barely
missed that that target we don't
want to have to go and take
money back from a company that's
teetering on the edge and
potentially push them over the
edge into bankruptcy so in this
case they all and they did you
know in in good faith create
those jobs in the give us more
money back in New net new tax
revenues then we were giving
them through this grant so the
state already got something from
it's into the deal very very
unfortunate if the business went
under had to lay off employees
but we don't want to go and
climb that money back to each
individual business for that
might be necessary.
Thank you for that answer Mr
Clark in New Representative Mr
chair let me ask you this are
you know given the the small
business recovery loan program
and then the grants program that
we created in these in November
what what is the need for that
is what why can't we just keep
operating from that loan
recovery fund instead of
creating something you.
Mr chair representative and
we're targeting a little bit
different entities but there are
a lot of businesses out there
that really aren't able to take
on any additional that there are
quite a few that there are and
with changes to that recovery
loan program might be able to
make use of those funds but
there are a lot of businesses
out there that just can't take
on additional debt right now.
That's that's understandable now
that particular program was four
hundred million more or less out
of the severance I find and this
is two hundred million this is
this is separate money.
Mr chair representative
extracted separate money.
And and benefiting from one
doesn't keep you from qualifying
for the other Mr chair.
Mr chair representative now.
okay.
Terms of its appropriate use it
uses you mentioned that you know
back to back wins these payments
Could this be applied to
mortgages.
Mr chair representative at the
present no as written this just
applies to rent and lease
payments
although I I've heard discussion
about a desire to add that in
but right now there's just a
provide a place to rent and
lease payments that was.
Part of the original discussion
that we had about the idea for
this bill as well as getting
feedback about how we can best
make this work with
Within existing statutory
restrictions.
Are there any restrictions to
allowing this to be used in the
back mortgage.
Payments.
Mr chair and representative we
haven't looked into that
particular issue for paying back
mortgage or background this
these have to be a prospective
costs this can't be money that
they've paid and that we're
reimbursing them for they have
to decide to be expenditures
that they're making after they
signed the contract so just as
an example you know they if they
made a payment three four years
ago they can't submit that and
and make that payment plan they
have to have crude rent and
lease obligations that exceed
the dollar amount of the grant
that we're getting.
I understand Mr chairman Mr
Clarke and and that that's what
I mean so it if I have if I have
six months of back rent that I I
can use this money to pay for
that I just can't reimburse
myself for six months of rent
but I've already made and so the
same would apply to the tune to
the previous question if I have
six months worth of mortgage
payments that I have made I can
make use of this money and catch
up with my mortgage is not is
that right.
Mr chair representative you are
in the first instance yes you're
you're absolutely correct and
that's how that would work
in the second instance in terms
of mortgages again that's not
how this bill was structured
what we were hearing was
predominantly a lot of issues
with businesses that we're
concerned about the potential
for getting evicted by their
landlord for not being able to
make rent and lease payments we
have we're also aware of issues
with companies being able to pay
their mortgage this doesn't
address that specific.
Would you be open Mr chair
Mister Clark.
Representative for this bill to
address that particular point.
Mr chair representative I think
that would be a very worthwhile
does it and discussion to have I
I personally would not be
opposed to that.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Chandler and is
required so that just to just to
be clear that there are no all
of legal or constitutional
implications with us expanding
this to cover mortgage payments.
Mr chair representative not my
opinion.
Okay
well thank you Mr chairman Mr
Clark thank you with the answers
and and Representative childhood
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I know that you know
should this committee past this
bill along moving along it's
going to go to the tax
committees all
you know I I again all all I'll
defer to this committee and into
its wisdom with what they want
to do but should this move
forward in its current form I I
think that there's some things
that we want to make sure we
look at.
you know I I I don't want to
create a third program when one
of those first two programs I
think clearly had some some
technical issues to it when we
created it and so I want to make
sure that those two other
programs are are sounding
working before we create a third
one and if we don't create a
third one I want to make sure
that we're making it as
accessible as we possibly can to
as many people as we possibly
can thank you for your answers
thank you for all the as usual
the the great thought that you
put into your bills
Representative Chandler and
Mister Clark and and and
Jerry good see you as well and
all I'll pass on the Mike thanks
for the opportunity asking
questions.
Thank you representative will go
to a.
Representative Serrato.
Thank you Mr chairman I am thank
you Representative ring for this
bill as well I wanted to check
in to see how this would handle
places that primarily has a
higher ten ninety nine employees
are contracted employees if they
would be included that job
growth.
Mr chair representative in this
case because we would be
handling thousands of
applications and and payments to
thousands of companies the only
way we really have to
realistically provided check
that the company has hired these
people would be that they're
submitting quarterly
unemployment insurance forms to
us so in that case to ninety
nine employees are going to show
up you would have to be
employees that show up on those
you more filings
and Mr chairman I was also
curious is I I didn't see it
likely wrong is there a
reporting mechanism to follow
with this program that you'd be
creating as well.
Mr chair representative yes we
put in significant reporting
requirements into the bill and
I'm looking for the exact
provision but we have to.
We're we're essentially
requiring that the Economic
Development Department and NMFA
reports on the dollar amount
that's that was actually used by
companies the dollar more
committed jobs created tax
dollars generated types of
industries that benefited so yes
were required to report annually
to the legislature in
legislative committees on all
that information thank you so
much and I'm Mr chair I I do
want to say that I I I
appreciate this is going to
NMFA's program I I think they
had a lot of wonderful things
that they're able to get to in a
very quick
set in need that they that they
really feel quite well and my
hope is that they'll continue to
do that the maintenance
accessible when I appreciate it
and businesses in my district
really appreciate is that you
know that was multi lingual the
available in those pieces really
work with beneficial you know I
I appreciate the answer this and
I and this would probably be a
Harley separate issue but I I do
hope that you know this
legislature this committee can
you know consider how we can
support businesses that were
hard hit by the by the the
corona virus including things
like gems which are primarily
run on ten ninety nine business.
You know I'm gonna contractors
and things like that I
understand that it's a tricky
that it's hard to track I do
understand that but it is my
hope in the long run we can find
ways to support those businesses
as well but thank you so much Mr
chairman and and that in the
witnesses for granting my
question today.
Representative just to follow up
really quickly just to direct
you to where the bill you can
find the reporting requirements
on the original bill if you look
at the top of page thirty one in
page thirty two you see there
eight different items that we
have to report annually to the
legislature.
Thank you.
And that's a good catch thank
you Representative down.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler for the
committee should just give you a
little spot.
Eight require security
investments that is equal to the
accrued amounts does that apply
to these requests.
Mr chair.
The bill.
Mr chair representative so this
is a new section of leader
that's completely separate do
this comment relief grant
section it doesn't have all the
requirements that or processes
the rest of lead has this is it
is actually one separate thing
and no there's no security
requirements here we are
required to have sickened told
security for traditional we to
projects and with very good
reason we do we provide money in
tranches over time as the
companies meet milestones but we
do also have to have in place
clawback provisions because we
tend to give the money more on
an up front schedule and if the
company doesn't hold up to their
terms we do have to call the
money back and we insist that
they hold security for that
purpose in this case this is
purely post performance we're
essentially telling them hire
people back yes more in
additional tax revenue that
you're generating by getting
your business back on your feet
and you'll get these funds as
soon as they've done that
they've met the terms of the
deal and there's no need for
security or cost provisions.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Chandler John for that I guess
maybe it's the same question
other people are asking and that
is going to act what
in general dollars our New
Mexico wind what is going to
all.
Mr chair representative because
we are giving something to the
company because this is still a
grant even though it's in return
for something it it has to flow
through leader because Lisa is
the way that we get money out to
private entities and it has that
job creation requirements.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative thank you John
and so two hundred million
dollars if I understand
correctly a hundred thousand at
a time.
These at rent only but in order
to remain eligible the entity
has to be current on rent and
current lease obligations so I
was the program is helping
people that are not.
Mr chair representative they
don't have to be current on that
rental lease obligations when
the first apply and when they
get the first tranche of funds
it is a requirement to receive
additional charges of funds.
That again was a suggestion by
businesses that we talked to the
primary reason being that has to
be what they're spending this
money on under leader they have
to spend it on things relating
to land building infrastructure
and businesses that are
teetering on the edge need that
helping hand aren't likely to
need help with wind and
infrastructure they need help
with the rent and lease payments
so this requires that they're
spending that money on the
rental lease payments and they
should be getting of getting
caught all those payments as
they are able to use these funds
for that purpose and as they're
able to re hiring tobacco
perfect.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler Johnson
that if someone gets if you have
to do prior to the quarter but
before you read your paid
receipt or payment and the
clients and then does that does
not disqualify you from
receiving the grant returning
CTE in the last quarter what
happens if you miss the second
quarter are you.
Over the third in the fourth
quarter.
Mr chair representative that's
something we'll have to work on
in rural in terms of how to
handle the employees that may
come on during the quarter and
leave during that quarter but
certainly there is no
requirement that you have to
be eligible each quarter forces
to become eligible for ever
after the program continues
through the end of FY twenty
three and if for some reason the
business isn't able to meet the
requirements for a quarter they
can come back the following
quarter and say Hey we it took
us a little bit longer than we
expected but we met the
requirements now we'd like to
get back in the queue and it
actually doesn't even forced him
to miss that that quarter
payment it just delays it until
they're able to meet those
requirements.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler job so
so could be eligible by
definition one quarter and
receive funding for all four
quarters.
The others were.
It helps a little.
Mr chair representative you
would come in and out as you're
eligible serve if you are
eligible for the first two
quarters and then there is a
heck up with your business and
you have to a couple people off
and you didn't qualify for that
third quarter at the time you
would expect to file for the
third quarter you could wait a
quarter and then file for that
their quarterly payment at that
point in time.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Chandler Senator.
This could be our public health
orders
status which can change weekly.
So.
What happens is the public
health order is still in place
and sentences are closed you
can.
Is that clubs mediators gems the
ones that remain closed.
Appropriations how do their only
political for lease or rent so
they've all new property this is
helpful for the hall.
Mr chair representative if they
own their property no this this
doesn't help them this is for
those businesses that pay you
rent or lease.
Thank you I'm sorry.
Also be sure to come from the
previous members who have
questions as well but I think.
What we're I believe there needs
to be amendments for this to
really move forward in past
years start on page twenty
three.
Yes my question is why three
hundred and fifty million why
would we want to be able to use
the similar tool in rural parts
of the state I can't imagine
capital investment in my area of
the state that would be three
hundred fifty million dollars
and so when you're talking about
is larger companies that want to
try to attract it's really not
the state you're saying existing
is about setting aside money
you're getting an incentive the
new projects coming in so is
that correct so we're not a huge
portion of this
is out of state rather than
getting immediate needs.
Mr chair representative I think
there's something because this
all of those two distinct things
that their age your teacher in
component that then falls under
the regular provisions of Leda
and and mark Roper could answer
any questions about that
completely separate from that is
this comment relief grant
mechanism and the funding
allocated for those are creating
completely separate within the
bill and we cannot use the funds
from one for the other.
Mr Gruber was answer something
about that but
we we sat why are you setting a
limit of three hundred fifty
billion where that number comes
from.
Mr chair representative dial up
that was that was based on some
past experiences and is wholly
and solely geared towards large
projects that we wouldn't
traditionally have enough money
in the lead a fund as
appropriated by the legislature
on an annual basis in order to
be competitive with those
projects smaller projects that
would happen in the more rural
areas we typically have enough
money within the fund to assist
either an expanding or growing
businesses there locally or even
a business that was looking to
relocate into that area or
expand in that area this is
designed only for those
companies that we do in a
situation of not having
sufficient weeded dollars in the
fund to be able to pledge to a
project especially we are when
we are in a competitive
situation competing against
neighboring states and other
states in the in the in the
United States so that's why we
did set a very high limit
because those would be the only
projects that would preclude the
typical process and having
legislative oversight.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Chandler thank
you for that we be able to
extend these funds if there
wasn't some large companies are
trying to attract can you
expended on their.
Is
only for these are if we don't
use in this way we won't.
A hundred million dollars for
small businesses sixty five
thousand small businesses in New
Mexico and many are less than
seven thousand to receive the
funds and I'm concerned that
we're setting a large project to
your to attracting new business
in getting that help to our
existing businesses are
struggling every day more
businesses are closing our door
I've heard a saying this is true
but I heard this is like for.
Work.
Project is coming and one that
doesn't help our small
businesses into that doesn't
usually regional Medical Center.
Raul so I just I'm just trying
to clarify here if this is
attracting someone what you're
going on or if these dollars
don't go to in your out of state
company or expansion of a
massive company that's already
here candies dollars be used as
well as the little guys are
hurting so desperately.
Mr chair representative job
thank you.
Thank you for the question.
We are not setting aside any
funds.
We are only saying that if if
the project were to happen of
this magnitude we would enter
into an agreement with the truck
with them with the money is that
they would generate through
construction through gross
receipts tax collections we
would then have an opportunity
to share those collections back
to the company through the legal
process both locally and on the
statewide level we're not
setting aside any funds the
general fund monies for this
particular project the to go to
continue to answer the question
is this set up for a specific
project answers now.
As I previously testified that
the the brainchild behind this
was faced.
It was the project that has
happened in Los Lunas and we can
definitely point to that we can
show examples of what has
happened because of that project
and it gives us the ability to
compete for those types of
projects but we are not setting
aside any funds at all we are
only sharing in future funds
that could be had from that
project on construction only.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler thank
you are on page twenty four
inception be.
About local governments
I.
They replace we're departments
with the word local government
why would the state have the
determination of eligible
expenses on local government
revenue decision I think the
amendment would keep those
determinations of the local
government entity participating
in the project so.
The work department instead of
local government.
On page twenty four.
Mr chair representative the
reason why says and as
determined by the department is
because this applies equally to
the tax revenue that's generated
for that would be for the state
in addition to the local
governments and we just need to
make sure that we're we're
looking at the exact same
taxable expenses in both
instances so in this case the
EDD would work with the local
governments but there has to be
one entity in the end that makes
that determination on those
construction related expenses
because otherwise we can have a
mismatch between what the
department is paying qualifies
what the local government is
saying qualifies and then we
turn in our documentation to
tear do and they give it back to
us saying this doesn't work if
there's a conflict.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
Representative Chandler I I'm
not an expert in this but it
sounds like local governments
would be educating the reporting
to determine the quality
introduce research receipts for
construction related expenses.
How are local governments
regained power the retaining
control of the larger G. R. T.
they're getting up thank it's
all to be decided by the
departments and.
One local person G. R. T.
present to the jury distribution
section.
Mr chair representative so.
I'm not sure with that last part
exactly what part of language
you're you're looking at but do
the local government Hey this is
optional for them in the first
place they have to agree to it
in in the project participation
agreement they can set limits
are.
So we can have everything set up
up front but then also we would
work very closely with the local
governments in there's another
section on I'm looking for here
in the bill we're the local
government does have to sign off
on this documentation we sign
off on the docking station and
then we provided to tear do so
the local governments do have to
say yes we believe this is
accurate before we submitted to
tiered thing.
Thank you Mr chair
representative so how do the
local governments tracking
accounts of their local dollars
to ensure their obligations are
not.
Mr Mr chair representative
To provide a little background
under the under the one deal
that we currently have with the
chair to chair again I'll point
to fifty plus what happens is on
a monthly basis it's as a
requirement of the agreement
Facebook itself has to instruct
all of its contractors to report
to the municipality exactly what
they are submitting on their C.
R. S. one as far as your so much
we're we're setting and here's
how big the check ins then they
then the committee knows two
months down the road when they
get their distribution from TRD
exactly how much.
They're getting from that
project and then they can set
aside into their special fund
seventy five percent they were
great to.
What we're doing with this piece
of legislation is taking that
same form and in that same
requirement of us that the
entity involved require the
contractors to provide that
information to us we're
collecting it on a quarterly
basis in conjunction with the
local governments.
City and county so that we can
make sure that on a quarterly
distributions spot from DRT that
we're all in agreement that
that's how much we anticipate
going into the fund and how much
we anticipate coming back to us
and distribution us meaning the
state of New Mexico going into
the general fund us meaning the
local government at the local
municipality going into their
distribution for and the county
and their their distribution so
that's the mechanism in place
and we find that we found that
it works and it really holds the
company also deeply into the
requirement because they can
access the money are special
fund and they still get proper
reporting out of the contract.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler welcome
the speaker Egolf.
So is already doing.
Reinterment.
Your Mr chair representative del
yes so under under the Facebook.
As a as age planned earlier
because the village of Los Lunas
wasn't in a position they didn't
have a cash balance to be able
to provide leader how we
traditionally do it out of
general fund monies so their way
of participating was saying they
would pledge future revenues
they came in due to the
construction to the project and
that was their their agreement
was they would pledge seventy
five percent of those revenues
and retain twenty five percent
of those revenues for additional
costs associated within the
community we're just expanding
that to allow the state to do
that same type of G. R. T. share
because of the Facebook deal we
were in a situation like we were
we had sufficient revenues at
the time to pledge ten million
dollars in general fund monies
to the spaceport project but
there may be larger projects out
there that it would require a
larger sledge and there's G. R.
T. sure would would allow us to
do do those larger pledges.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler thank
you speaker
enough and so on page twenty
four one fourteen.
This is on it on page twenty two
the statute allows for state
question to dedicate.
Percent of tax.
We.
It is currently locked in local
governments and the six point
two five.
Flexibility it doesn't seem like
actually getting up to.
Just saying seven Bucks and
fifty six point two five percent
thanks local governments are
getting the flexibility that the
state.
Flexibility in the legislation
so I'm just wondering Mr chair
representative Chandler speaker
enough if you guys have
considered flexibility for local
governments there.
Mr chair representative to to
address that issue the idea of
from their local share the
beginning was that the state and
local governments all have skin
in the game partly so that we're
answering the but for test
because the local governments if
they're not sure any revenue
wouldn't have any direct reason
not to want to share state
revenue for a project that's
coming to their community so
they might have they might be
perfectly fine signing off on
the project that was going to
come anyway because it doesn't
affect your budget all in this
case this answers the but for
test because the local
governments would not sign off
on it once this really was a new
project that wasn't coming and
without this structure in place
in order for that to work all
three entities the county the
municipality in the in the state
have to be in to the same degree
so it has to be the same percent
what what we are able to do
because it says on the
qualifying entities receipts for
construction would expenses as
determined by the department
what we're able to do up front
with those communities is work
out any deal that is less than
that they want to do and it
would work equally for all of us
so it would still be fifty six
and a quarter percent of a fixed
amount this last then we project
that the company spending so for
example if the company is
planning to spend a hundred
million dollars well the minimum
is three fifty say they're going
to spend a billion dollars if
the local governments don't feel
like they need to share that
much if the state feels like we
don't need to share that much in
order to win the deal we can say
okay only five hundred million
of those one billion will count
as qualifying construction
related expenses we would put
that up front into the project
participation agreement that we
sign within the company so.
That way everyone is clear up
front exactly what the deal is
going to be.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler thank
you speaker thank you for that
mark just understand why the
state get flexibility up to
seventy.
Local municipalities are locked
in that.
Definitely want to get in the
game.
Always be able I'm some okay on
page twenty five one twenty one
instead of the word in.
It seems like the word should
be.
We are asking taxation and
revenue department to review of
the accuracy and all the
computation and the amounts that
are needed for the streaming or
having us TRD repeating we asked
to review accuracy competition
if I may never mind that is new
material.
Mr chair and representative that
later that freezing came from
the taxation and revenue
department they asked that we
insert that in our original
drafted said the taxation
revenue department children
beauty estimated amounts for
accuracy they asked that we had
in that and computation freezing
to make sure to make it clear
that they are just to look and
make sure that the tax returns
are accurate and that our
calculations are accurate
they're not doing anything else
they're just doing that.
If I may R. W. Clark
Representative dolled up on and
and statutory construction is
kind of an and slash and or I
think it I think it captures it.
Our thank you very much for that
thank you Mr chairman.
On page thirty six.
New material distribution line
twelve through nineteen
It's the exact.
Just went to the arrangements
within the project participation
in economic development you're
saying everyone has to have
people scan and came here
it seems like we're in a very
thanks I might percentages and
there could be thanks for the
same sort of.
With this original site where we
make it so narrowly defined that
people have to just walk away
and you want to spend these
dollars and just seems like
there needs to be some more
flexibility.
Someone could you explain to me
why to be so exact.
Mr chair and representative
again the idea here was that if
it
if it allowed complete
flexibility the local
governments could be in for the
dollar for dollar in the state.
Holding back for the entire cost
of the project we just we
couldn't find a way to provide
flexibility in that percentage
language so that we were
providing that flexibility again
Mr that earlier as determined by
the department language when it
relates to the construction
related expenses and again that
way we're able to work with
local governments up front so
that they can decide exactly
what percent they want to do and
we can just reverse engineer
what that dollar amount cap
should be the need to be put in
place on what those construction
expenses would be on an annual
report or quarterly basis so it
I know it seems very fixed in
the bill it's not in actuality
because of that freezing as
determined by the department for
the construction related
expenses the just of the fixed
percentages in the requiring the
state isn't up for the same
proportional amount is the local
governments.
Mr chair representative thank
you speaker and thank you for
that it sounds like you know
those guys but prior to me make
sure someone's and concerns and
maybe there needs to be some of
it.
Sanchez will be open to the act
so that we can get these dollars
for their intended as it makes
its way to taxation thank you so
much.
Thank you Representative Dow and
a co sponsor speaker got has
joined us he's a member of a
house Judiciary so we were happy
you panned over to us said Mr
speaker you have any just quick
up.
Madam stood to tout the bill.
Thank you yeah thank you Mr
chairman I yup thank you in a in
good afternoon all members of
the committee sorry I'm a bit
late I was grandmother
Committee.
But
co sponsor of primary sponsor
and.
Representative Chandler needs no
help and that the team of
experts to help flexibility
you're doing a great job I'm I'm
glad that the committee is
considering one is a very
important and substantial piece
of our COVID relief package now
we're hoping that this bill is
going to get up to the
governor's office quickly along
with some changes to the small
business recovery act they're
coming to the Senate yeah these
are too many complementary
measures that will one way that.
Hello these.
Troubling businesses especially
in on their target hospitality
tourism industry I get some
support.
To whether the what I hope for
the final months of the pandemic
I to come out on the other end
of stronger than when they
entered it so I appreciate the
committee's consideration and
I'm happy to answer any
questions and I I did speak to a
chair Martinez briefly before
joining the committee I think
we're open I think.
It will be open to and amendment
dealing with mortgage payments
as an amendment in the tax
committee I think it's a little
too substantial to do on the fly
right now but we can certainly
get that taken care of in the
next committee for those U. S.
concerns about that.
Thank you Mr speaker
And before we are taking action
I doubt there's anyone want to
chime in about means raise your
hand but I just have a couple
couple comments and questions
the
You know our our constitution
was is almost identical to
Arizona's.
They actually treat their
permanent school fund
differently they but then then
we do that was just the way the
federal government treated us
back in the day but but they
also take a much more modern
approach to their and a donation
Clause portion of the the
constitution so.
I think you know we are you know
the courts could handcuff us you
know someone else can encompass
but the governor could encompass
directly but I don't think the
legislature should handcuff
itself.
And I chair Martinez I think up
articulate this best that we
just have to do a everything in
our power given our
constitutional structure in our.
economic means to to build our
economy and and and to help
businesses grow and maintain and
drive help ours you know
graduating students remain in
New Mexico so this committee in
particular
Thank you know has a little bit
of more flexibility with with
the anti donation clause than
than than other committees but I
definitely think that the entire
legislature should.
Should take that approach to
take a Gumby approach to that
provision and and and because
desk that desperate times call
for desperate measures are the
the cares Act the federal
government can just print money
write checks you know we have to
be much more creative and I
think I using the lead up
statute an upgrade in the
statutory scheme is to
distribute your leadership madam
secretary and others and we
appreciate the speaker and
Representative generating it
board understand this is a
priority hi but I just want to
kind of look at the statutory
construction a little better
Representative gender W. Clark
so you talked about the third
bucket so essentially a portion
of this bill.
I mean you change definitions to
change over to lead act but the
meat of the bill is towards the
end and then
And then you say.
To be used by January one twenty
twenty three so we go to page
twenty six.
Excuse me line seven new
material so essentially the
grants to reimburse certain
businesses ends January one so
the program kind of the program
that you're proposing
This essentially a two year
program correct with this go on
in perpetuity.
Mr chair yes you're you're
correct that this is essentially
to your program but.
This is also structures that the
legislature will have a couple
bites of the apple in the next
couple of sessions to see how
the programs going and if there
is a need and desire to continue
with at that point.
No fantastic thank you and and
then also let's just go through
the definitions you know the
lead act as a you know as we
know it is a chapter five
sections no section ten.
And like all like many statutes
they're just up there's they
just need to be re compiled at
some point in the near future
but we have the definitions.
And so definition ET on page two
line twenty five so you have the
current definition of economic
development project.
Excuse me or project to do we
race that.
You go to page four line
fourteen.
If there's any future amendments
represent gender which I believe
there will be I think we need
the word means you know that the
economic development project or
project means project of
qualified entity but you take
that language madam chair of.
Representative Chandler you take
that language.
From economic development
project and you inserted in a
new definition of public
support.
It support but it is slightly
different what's the difference
between the definition of public
support in the bill and the
definition of economic
development project in statute.
So Mr chair this was a
determination by Legislative
Council Service essentially a
lot of the league leaders act is
really old and some changes were
made over time but frankly they
weren't implemented in the best
manner any it's it's a bit of a
Hodge podge in there really
wasn't well defined terms for
how EDD gets involved in
projects we made some progress
with the building of twenty
twenty regular session we made
some progress in defining terms
for the state's involvement but
there wasn't public support
really wasn't identified do you
all of the definitions really
are kept identical except just
change to allow the freezing for
public support of the project
verses just project.
Mr chair I know it looks like
means dropped off it's it's
still there it's the only
language that Watson struck on
page three so it's page three
line one so we could keep that
in place but yeah that nothing
effectively changes here it's
just Council Service trying to.
Mission structure work.
No thank you for that
appreciated the means is key but
no thank you and then also
because we change this
definition of then sections for
seven eight nine eleven twelve
are just essentially cleanup
language essentially because of
the change of the definition so
so that's good stuff there
but then kind of more
substantive stuff is on page
thirteen.
Page thirteen Representative
Chandler and this deals with
the.
You know such a program for of
the statute you you have
compensating and compensating
taxes what ways that necessary
to.
It to put in the bill.
So Mr chair and that really
should have been in there from
the beginning but if you look
back a lot of older references
to Georgene compensating taxes
they often fail to mention
compensating taxes they often
just referenced your TV even if
they should include both to
begin with this really should
have included both to begin with
but there won't be any.
Any significant effect of that
because with the legislation
that was passed in twenty
nineteen Amanda last year and
going into effect in July one of
this year almost everything will
qualify under gross receipts
taxes will be very little left
to qualify under compensating
taxes so there's there's little
meaningful difference this was
really viewed by council service
as cleanup.
No thank you thank you
Representative Chandler then
also.
A deputy clerk on page twenty
one.
Which is a subsection fourteen
of the statute on page twenty
one of section nine in the bill
You know talk about the the
leader fund the leader fund is
created in the state treasury
that it defines the legal fund.
and I was wanting why you took
out that language but I think I
know why on page thirty six line
for.
Kind of you kind of put some
good language Jan on on on
section fourteen.
With regards to the the lead a
fund
You know you're okay with that
but you want to.
Senator I need a question would
you want to just explain that
sure Sir Mr chair of this wasn't
to change that we're rich we're
very different only requested
this was also a
the best of the Legislative
Council Service has to date in
reviewing statutory language
regarding funds they're trying
to make them consistent across
statutes the determines that
this language wasn't necessary
are you can then confirmed with
DFA general counsel that it
wasn't necessary it doesn't have
any effect taking it out of the
council service just once it is
clean up to try to make the
language associated with this
funded match the language of the
funds no fantastic and just
start our new member folks folks
keeping score at home.
One of one of bill changes one
word the entire section is in
the bill before us and it gives
us an opportunity to clean up
that section an adult let's
council does a fantastic job
cleaning up various sections
Well you know before we just
compile the whole darn thing and
then lastly of.
Representative Chandler speaker
on page twenty two.
Seems like this is kind of a the
crux of the.
Of the bill outside of the new
language.
Medic on the bottom of page
twenty one the following may be
used to provide public support
for economic development
projects qualifying entities.
Could you explain those two
paragraphs those two new
paragraphs to me W. Clark.
Certainly Mr chair and the
amendment you have in front of
you fixes something here I see.
So with the result after if
you're determined to adopt the
amendment of the result will be
that fifty six and a quarter
percent of the state receives in
the local receipts will go into
the leader fund and then flow
out to the project and again
that's the receipts from
construction related expenses as
determined by the departments of
the EDD and the local
governments jointly determine we
can win this project with less
than that we can set cap still
the same percentage amount but
it effectively creates a lower
percentage by setting a dollar
cap.
What is this as good fifty six
and a quarter percent of the
state receives and the local
receipts flowing to the leader
fund and then out to the project
we're not allowed to keep any of
the local revenues in the lead a
fund we are keeping a small
portion of the state dollars
that are generated of the
difference between fifty six and
a quarter percent and seventy
five percent which is a little
under twenty percent stays in
the leader fund and that's
essentially making this this
company this big deal that we
just want hopeless with other
projects providing us a little
bit of money in the lead a fund
to help with local expansions or
help with on the record details
all right more was not on I I
noticed that the you address
that in the middle strengthen
the language as well I think
The
so three of us in this committee
madam chair of their gender
speaker to serve on the tax
committee
and this year privy to this
conversation I I thought there
was going to be changes to
to the league Act in terms of
who qualifies but I think this
broader language may capture
that I'll take a second look.
to ensure like you said in an
opening comment that the
hospitality tourism.
Budget from this and then
obviously you know as
appropriators we want to
determine where money goes up
this kind of puts a lot of a lot
of.
Austin rulemaking but I think
given the economic crisis given
the creativity of the bill and
the comments we have in this
department and the honorable
governor you know desperate
times call for desperate
measures this is a message yes
but this is fantastic and so.
I hope you keep an open mind
amending it through the various
committees.
But I we appreciate the
presentation and then next
committee if it does go to the
next with the of fire Mr Clark
of fire behind you maybe maybe
put you over the age of the
oldest tight.
Members of the committee
Representative second time
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman I just.
You know I know.
The reference keeps going back
to how created Facebook was
represented Mr chairman.
But having spent.
An entire day down Facebook and
going on a tour.
I noted that there were many of
the companies that with their
would Facebook.
We're out of state companies.
And.
I don't know maybe I'm missing
something in this because I'm
not convinced it is going to do
what it's saying that's going to
do because so often we have all
of these out of state companies
to come in with these larger.
Companies like Facebook or
corporations like Facebook.
And our local small businesses
gets the tail end.
And so that really concerns me
the other thing that that I'm
having.
You know some heartburn with is
the fact that it seems like.
This legislation.
Has so many open ends that a
company and we thought this real
hard both sides of the aisle
over the years and trying to put
legislation in place so that it
would not be so easy for
company.
To walk away and I'm just
feeling having read through this
and you all know I see things a
little differently sometimes but
that there are so many
loopholes.
That.
Are there.
For company well I gave it my
best try I got this number
million hundred thousand
whatever the amount of money is
and I just couldn't do it so I
can walk away and and there's
there's no consequence.
There's no real consequences
there's no real way to get some
of those dollars back we're I
feel that that.
I don't know some of the
borrowers of some of the
requests that they've given this
is came down because they were
there.
You know at this point you know
just keep send all this
desperate times the on the
desperate measures.
This sounds like a giveaway and
I'm really having problems.
Having some problems with that
that also sounds like that it is
set up for larger companies.
That would come into our state
and not take care of some of our
mid size and smaller companies
that are are really.
Really trying so I'm just
having.
You know some
issues with that the other
recommendations that I would
make.
That it seems like every time
something a bill comes up.
That.
Do with lead
Is that the bill works to change
leave those requirements to fit
the bill maybe it's time that we
go back and look at.
Review.
Lida totally some also having
some problems with that and so
Mr chair two thousand major
concerns and I'm trying to
understand.
If the two hundred million
dollars.
That is being utilized.
Is a new program this separated
from the original program.
That.
We approved as a legislature
back in June how is that a new
program when you use in the same
dollars so this is some
questions that I'm really having
heartburn in reference to Mr
Chair representative.
Thank you I'm just having some
problems with this no thank you
Representative Powdrell Culbert
and Representative Chandler
speaker madam secretary that
that wasn't a specific.
Amendment suggestion but take a
look at I know there's gonna be
some good stuff in rural but
take a look at
you know some criteria some
principles criteria for number
one and then maybe some
reassurances that the.
that the little guys are gonna
gonna benefit I I believe they
will but but maybe I think it's
in statute now in the bill now
but take a look at that if you
want my don't mind members of
the committee we have an
amendment on the table.
I move option and the amendment
Mr chair.
We have a motion to adopt.
by Representative Figueroa a
second by Representative
Martínez Jenny up.
By by a show of a physical
handout or virtual and is there
any of objection to adopting the
amendment.
Adopting the amendment of three
nine five point two.
Let me see if I can see
everyone's.
The
Representative Dow are you yeah
are you okay with the amendment.
Yes Sir okay and I the only
person I can see thank you then
the of the amendment has been
adopted.
now we have an amended bill of
members of the committee.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chair I I will do
passes Amanda.
We have a motion for a due pass
as amended second.
We have a second by
Representative guy goes
Representative Powdrell Culbert
discussion.
To motion I moved to table
substitute motion to table
thank you discussion is a.
Discussion is as over a.
Madam about is if you could call
the roll on the table in motion.
But.
Yes yes the table.
Representative Dow yes the
table.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Noted table.
Representative Johnson.
Representative building is.
No.
Representative Colbert yes to
table.
All know to table.
I checked to get a.
Chair Maestas and I both know
the tabling motion as a.
It's been defeated six four
there's a motion and a second on
a do pass as amended please call
the roll.
Representative.
No.
Representative Dow no.
Hello yes.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martínez.
Yes.
Colbert.
Yes I know I'm sorry.
So.
Yes.
Madam chair if we get a lot.
Yes.
Yes yes and so Representative of
Chandler Representative us
because we got to have a due
pass as amended and madam
secretary great to see hopefully
we'll see you much more these
next month and a half and not to
be Clark thank you Mr Roper
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee committee thank
you thank you very much will now
take a breath the structure legs
we're gonna go to our house bill
one sixty three.
House bill one hundred sixty
three of.
Sponsored by up Representative
Madrid and myself so all I'll
leave the dice and sit in the
hot seat.
And madam chair if you could
allow in Mister Fred Nathan.
Are are a missile but is it a
Fred Nathan from think New
Mexico and.
I could tell us who else needs
to come in read me I'm sure I'll
turn it over to you thank you.
You Mr chairman will give madam
secretary there a moment.
Mr Nate.
Committee.
Are there other experts in the
waiting room that need to be
moved in.
Representative management or my
access or Mr nation are there
other experts in the waiting
room that need to be moved in I
forgot to turn on my mute are
turned off my mute yes there
should be I'm not exactly sure
how many we have Linda Wilson
who is a public school teacher
who teaches financial literacy
we have the credit unions the
banks the independent bankers
association possible.
Mr needs a let me clarify we are
looking for expert witnesses not
public comment at this time do
we have expert witnesses that
need to be moved and no I think
I'm I think I'm the only one.
Still in this thank you very
much and welcome to commerce and
economic development I'm
representative mentioned share
Maestas would you like to
present your bill.
Yes but first thank you madam
chair
the madam chair this is a job a
bill.
It's relating to public
education allowing financial
management to count as an
elective in the six through
eighth grades amending
graduation requirements require
one half of the financial
management prior to graduation
I'd like to start out by saying
that I was honored by my.
This team college Representative
about us is to bring this to me
as well because in our
discussions over the last couple
years you know we prod we
brought to the point that we
really understand that in the
rural parts of our state
there was things agreements in
the last couple years with other
colleagues of my indigenous
brothers and and the
representatives in which they've
seen it also work the the
exportation of of of the lack of
financial management Ms up
happening to our people as they
get older so I want to put a
scenario that makes it much more
limited number in order to watch
the previous presentation and
and I need to break it into what
I think is most of elementary
terms to the way it's affecting
the people that are most
affected and that's the rural
parts of the state as we have
other expert witnesses will give
there's their sides but I would
like to explain more in coming
from a rural areas such as
myself that I was I am a teacher
and just recently retired.
And I talked of so what is it
thank you and I have another
colleague the due date of the
consumers science class and the
point of it is is that property
isn't something that anybody
asked for but it's still
something is a gradually very
predominant within our state and
I sincerely believe that we
can't make our young people
better if we don't start in the
earlier years of their lives of
development and making relations
to to the mathematical concepts
that are applied in life so even
in the way this is a languages
it's just really cleaning itself
up to help the rest of us in the
state to uniform and given more
latitude to the schools and our
public education to be able to
address this as as as discussed
in the later part you'll hear
about the bigger picture but
let's talk about the middle
school when you have kids in the
middle school level that's like
the last point of turn that you
could really stir some young
people directions so there's a
real necessity of applying the
mathematical concepts of the
with the equation of family
consumer science we need to
double your batter to make so
many more cupcakes those mats
and everything we do in everyday
of life what we lack is everyday
of life in the way of education
so I think in our educational
process going forward we need to
have a language cleaned up as
this follows other other states
within the United States it
lands them with more particulars
as I was just addressed here by
another colleague of the other
side bipartisan and ask it more
bill works similar to mine and
his was much more extensive in
the applications but what we're
talking about young people they
have aspirations we need to
teach of those aspirations come
with a financial equity and the
equity is what we get in return
by the cost of our everyday work
effort that we go in life so.
So this is a point it in a very
simple.
On sept allows the young people
as I did in my class of typing I
spent forty might forty five
minutes typing the other forty
forty five minutes I'm projects
so I try to mix all the talk of
the the the aspects of relation
to building a calendar with
financial responsibilities of
deadlines and commitments and
responsibilities very very very
basic but it got the mind
stimulating that I always store
no matter what you do everything
is going according to the money
and when it returns to you and
your value of your life so I
think that's important when you
do a family consumer science for
many years that was where you
got the young people involved in
understanding how to do it eight
eight monthly budget if you will
for groceries and understanding
to work within your means and
live with the.
And I think that's what's
happened is that would not have
that concept in the most basic
ways of financial management
first our kids are young people
today so by the time they're in
high school their only goal is
making the money and spending
that that understand the
relations of how to save it and
get a better interest a better
credit score as we were now
later in life of the property
continues to roll down the road
what comes out of it well we
have are up in the north where
they're getting charge thirty
six fifty six three hundred
percent interest this is Robert
this is on and just and we can't
stop it all together but we can
begin the process of rebuilding
that road to a financial equity
that applies to all of our young
people all the way through a
middle school through high
school and I think this is about
for the rest of my colleagues
that are in this group now so
I'll stop there and I'll turn it
over to my colleague.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Madrid Mr Mr
Nathan.
In two thousand seven as a
rookie
Madam speaker Han helped me
sure of bill through the house
and it got to the governor's
desk and.
That's so much momentum from the
banks and from
From Education Committee that
that the governor Richards and
signed into law and it put of
financial literacy in high
schools the mandated that every
high school in the state shall
teach financial literacy courses
are granted the student didn't
have to take it but the high
school had to offer.
And then of course the the
economic crisis hit some high
schools have that financial
literacy champion and some did
and.
Fall but now here we are
you know thirteen years later
every single high school in the
state has a financial literacy
course.
But not a lot of students are
are taking the class you know
there's such a huge a
requirement twenty four credit
hours to graduate high school.
Are there was a bill about three
four years ago maybe I to tweak
the statute to allow financial
see to be qualify as a math
credit.
So right now you can take for
economic literacy it qualifies
as a math credit you're good to
go so now it's time to in in the
interim the last thirteen years
all in all half the country has
surpassed us my putting
financial management courses in
statute as a requirement to
graduate and I've had students
talk to me and and and say that
this was the most impactful
class they took in high school
it's it's what you need to know
you know how do you educate a
population you teaching what we
need to know and there's nothing
more important in my opinion
that
The folks need to know then to
manage their own finances in a
complex you know when a complex
society but their credit scores
are such that they can you know
by houses in their late twenties
early thirties as opposed to
their mid forties or or whenever
I know when the Soviet Union
fell madam chair they.
They made everybody take an
economics class
they mandated that you know we
can mandate everybody what we
can mandate high school students
and so I was so grateful that up
think New Mexico approached me
this summer they've been working
on this initiative and realize
that I I've been working on it
as well so with that of we don't
add it we don't add anything
it's not an extra additional
cost to the school district
every school has it
so with no cost to the taxpayers
we can urge every students take
financial there see at some
point in their high school
careers and really
really work on this throughout
the course that I so I think New
Mexico's with us and I'll turn
over to expert
expert witness Mister Fred
anything.
Many thanks Mr chair and madam
vice chair that was a terrific
presentation by both the Sanchez
in law school they teach you
when you're ahead you should
just sit down but since I've got
a captive audience I want to see
a few more things about why it's
so urgent that we pass this bill
so you you all received this
report from thank you Mexico
probably around October it's
really about predatory lending
which which Representative
Madrid was alluding to but in
the course of doing that
research we really came to
appreciate the importance of
financial literacy and that bill
that chairman of the that are
chairman my S. discussed through
thirteen years ago
first first thing to understand
is New Mexico is forty seven of
the fifty states and financial
literacy according to WalletHub.
now as the chair pointed out we
have a financial literacy course
since two thousand eight but
it's optional and only about
eleven percent of students last
year engaged in that course
contrast that with seventeen
states in the last decade have
made financial literacy a
requirement for high school
graduation that includes three
of our neighbors by the way
Texas Arizona and Utah.
Now teaching financial literacy
is particularly important for
students from low income
families we're research
indicates they have far less
access to financial literacy
courses then do their wealthier
peers when high school students
learn financial literacy they
often bring these lessons home
to their parents so it's really
an anti poverty strategy as
well.
when students increase their
financial literacy studies find
that they shift from high cost
to low course sources of credit
and student loans.
And again that brings us back to
this issue of predatory lending
which you'll hear more about
this session through house bill
one forty nine and Senate bill
sixty six and maybe I'll
conclude right there but I want
to make a final special shout
out to Representative Figueroa
and Representative Dow.
Because they championed
financial literacy this morning
in the house Education Committee
and I eventually I hope this
bill brought by representatives
my Estes and Madrid will be
linked up to chair Romero this
bill because it really belongs
together as one package and what
he's trying to do is to make our
curriculum a little more
flexible and increase our high
school graduation rates you know
maybe algebra two isn't
necessary for every single one
of our students but financial
literacy really yes no matter
what kind of the family or what
kind of circumstances you come
from everyone can benefit from
that course as Representative
Madrid was pointing out thank
you very much Mr chairman madam
chair one.
Thank you Mr.
And thank you sponsors for the
bill we're gonna go to the
attendees list and please raise
your hand in the attendees list
if you are here to speak in
opposition to this bill.
If you're here to speak in
opposition will start with that
raise your hand.
I see one right hand.
Madam secretary hold note that
hand has been removed all right
you are here to speak in support
of this bill raise your hand.
Madam secretary would you please
move in Mr JD Bullington.
Please.
Mr calling.
Thank you very much madam chair
can you hear me yes Sir we can
thank you it's a pleasure to be
here today this is JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce in strong support of
this legislation we want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
it forward this bill is probably
long overdue.
I think the chamber is aware
that every cent family situation
is not the same and students
some students are exposed to a
high level of financial literacy
and this life skill and others
unfortunately are not and
there's no better place to
address that system that I mean
that in equity within our public
school system and I would just
add when I was on the board of
junior achievement this is one
of the things that that
nonprofit organization dead and
I went into the grade schools
teaching financial literacy and
so glad to see this close to
being moved over into the public
school system or maybe maybe a
requisite requirements thank you
so much.
Thank you Mr Wellington.
And madam secretary at least
move and so this thank mistake
please you yourself welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm so
beefing representing eighty
jumping New Mexico we support
the financial literacy component
for graduation.
Everyone especially young women
of color frequently in lower
wage jobs need to cease to be
savvy about budgeting
negotiating loans or mortgages
and preparing for the inevitable
rainy day or retirement.
No financial literacy has been
offered only ten percent of
students in rural.
Consumer financial protection
bureau's study support section
G. cation for economic well
being.
In acting this financial
literacy and some necessary
requirement will be a lifelong
benefit to both students and our
state.
You W. New Mexico request your
endorsement for this requirement
thank you.
Thank you very much missing.
Mr Dominic Silva.
Mr Dominic.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Dominic
Silva Representative the
independent community bankers
association we have a thirty
four members of the members
across the state we represent
our members are in all thirty
three counties but we're also in
Representative eighty nine
districts school districts
around the state I think it's
maybe ninety now but you know we
service those districts another
financial needs
we believe financial literacy is
very very important not only
personally but as are used to
come small business owners they
need to understand how to manage
those types of monies and so I
really think that this is
probably a program they can
teach our use how to run a
business for instance of during
this pandemic we had.
Monies came down from the feds
but our community banks lent out
one point four billion dollars
to small build businesses across
the state.
So we are used for small
business owners.
Eight are going to be able to
utilize those monies and they
have to utilize in the right way
for per up payroll and business
expenses you to come.
So I think this is a tool for
used to.
Right more businesses in our
state so on on that point the
independent community bankers
association wholeheartedly
supports this bill thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Mr Silva.
Miss Linda Wilson.
Hi.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Linda
Wilson and I'm a public school
teacher in Albuquerque at I've
been teaching a personal finance
class for the past five years
I'm also a career technical
education teacher teach business
classes so I wholeheartedly
believe it's one of the most
important courses I have ever
taught I've had students come
back to me Act after they've
gone off to college or gone into
the work field and told me how
much it meant to them to have
learned those skills also as
someone I not quite sure who
mentioned earlier that they'd
help parents I've had students
come in and tell me that they
were helping their parents who
are navigating car loans or
things like that giving them
advice from what they have
learned in the class so I
wholeheartedly like ice
mentioned earlier believe it's
such an important course and
that it should be a required
course for high school students
and I just can't tell you enough
and I'm also involved with
junior achievement and
entrepreneurial courses so I
just I really believe this is
a is a wonderful course and
students need especially in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Mr Wilson.
And I see one more hand drive
more information.
Please.
Dr mention yes our mystery madam
chair madam chair members of the
committee I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this forth
I want to thank thank New Mexico
for all the research they've
done I am speaking on behalf of
legal rural voters of New Mexico
which strongly supports this
legislation we've had a
principles in our education
position calling for Act and
financial literacy of for many
years decades and so we're very
very happy we spoke when the
legislation first went into
effect and we expected more
students to be taking this
course and it's heartbreaking to
think of how many people could
have benefited from financial
literacy I am also speaking as
an educator for thirty eight
years and most of which were at
the higher end level.
I had college student having to
drop out of school because they
could not pay their bills and
they had accrued huge master
charging he's a bills they took
out loans they had to quit
school they never finished many
of them never finished I urge
you urge the whole committee to
support this legislation very
very important for our state and
for the individuals.
Thank you madam and thank you to
all the attendees are here to
listen to us and to help.
Contributed to the decision
making process around the bill
this afternoon it now goes to
the committee nice to a couple
hands Representative Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you for
bringing this bill forward I'm
so my so just for clarification
for me so you're you're placing
math courses is that what you're
doing in New in order.
Eleven percent of the kids are
taking the class you're
replacing certain courses to
encourage them to take this.
Is that my understanding can you
repeat that again I didn't quite
catch it thank you madam chair
of the photo no no we're not
doing that that's current law
current law if you every high
school has a financial
management class.
If the kid takes the class of
the student takes the class it
it's
it qualifies as a math credit
that's current law we want to do
is mandate this particular class
which which as you pointed out
would would qualify as a math
credit nothing would stop the
students from taking more math.
or or but it would but it would
we would change the dynamic in
terms of what you needed to take
okay so miss madam chair
Representative so so now instead
of being a more elective work
it's it's more of a mandate
correct thank you madam chair
part of a student will have to
pass this course to receive a
diploma in the state of New
Mexico that's the plan so so
thank you madam chair thank you
representative and so so just so
everybody knows so I have my my
my son my daughter about living
with me for a few days as their
houses being developed they went
out into the hallway and I
mentioned to my daughter on to
teacher have a nice to us bills
coming out just so my god.
I have never used it this is
what I need it.
You know and they're buying a
house and there's not a budget
I'm walking them through all of
these things to try and explain
interest rate in a blows my mind
that you know because I learned
how to do it when I was at when
I was a kid and I took a class
so we went away from that and
you know somebody said you know
I think one one of the attendees
said I mean this is we need this
more than any other course and
we do I think actually
Representative Madrid might have
said it that we have any kids
need to learn the basics when
they're going to buy a house if
they're going to buy a car the
need to understand the
difference between a two percent
interest rate of five percent
interest rate you know and and
thirty years and fifteen years
and.
All of these things and so I
just thank you guys so much for
for bringing this and I do you
know I'm not into mandates
because when they support.
What.
That all high school diplomatic
gaffe I know you got me on this
one so thank you.
Thank you representatives
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair.
Unlike my usual tone over the
past few meetings I love the
staff.
You know I and first of all the
question that I would have that
I do have.
Is why you did not taken down to
the third grade.
To start teaching our kids on on
how to manage.
Monday in money and the chair
understands why I'm asking this
question but I'd like for the
Representative Madrid too soon
for you guys to tell me why you
can take this down third grade.
Thank you Mr and
President of COVID I think it's
an excellent point we could take
it down but I think it given the
presence right now with the the
pre K. and and I can coming down
we are putting a lot of mandates
and there's a lot of extra stuff
I think that's also a critical
point when we talk about the
agent where the money changes
over a little bit that I think
this is a better suited age
because are under a lot of this
other development projects
building the foundation if you
will but I think this is about
the right time we can start to
make the switch over to life
application because up to that
point their their day to day is
is to do the things we ask him
to do and have fun and I don't
want that to to ever lose an
education that that concept
to tell you the truth though in
the years coming four four
citing this I think it's
applicables I think we can
always move another step down
earlier just because I think
we're seeing this is a our
expert witness a friend Megan
that we're seeing later on but
rates in the for our descent it
helps to begin the process thank
you Mr Stewart My father do my
books my daughter very early on
and it was we would negotiate
stored and it she wanted some
talk robin and my guess is by
the case so my daughter drugs
and then my daughter and you
have to understand I'm grew up
with two parents or accountants
so my DELLOSO rinses by the way
that comes with interest and
from that point on you know that
was a learning curve for my
daughter because you always ask
you better watch out or was told
but I want to element interest
does get you.
And then and to this day it's
like the second question remote
desert have interest on that.
I think the you know that's the
life skills that we have some
had and then a lot of others
have not had that I think your
point is well made and taken
that we could probably in time
to come to move a little younger
too but I think right now the
potential as is going forward
and and really addressing all
these issues in a way that leads
PED and and everybody else jump
aboard like you're suggesting so
thank you for your questions
workgroup.
Madam Majid if I maybe I'm not.
On page three the middle school
curriculum.
We up
it that's the magic word may and
we do put in the magic words
financial management so middle
school sixth grade through
eighth may offer financial
management and so what happens
there is it organically grows as
those champions in those middle
schools
You know commence the principal
the to teach that class and then
hopefully but you're right it
needs to be integrated
throughout our a our curriculum.
And madam chair and
representatives I'm you know
where this is story telling but.
For about ten years I traveled
around the country speaking
third through sixth graders
about business ownership.
And I would sponsored by various
banks around the country.
Southwest and used to be
southwest interstate bank.
And it was interesting to watch
these kids from day one it was a
three day program.
How they would come in and and
the question I would ask them.
Any business in the world what
would it be well third graders
kind of think like so we usually
end up with five or six
companies.
And I would provide the T.
shirts pencils and a briefcase.
And they had to pick appear to
be on the finance committee.
What the banks were doing is the
banks.
At.
Many booths they were taken to
the schools every Wednesday.
And the kids could deposit even
if it was just New Mexico and to
their savings account.
And so was interesting to watch
these kids change over the three
days and always stress to them
the importance of giving back to
community.
And the impact the community hat
on your business being
successful so long story but you
know what I I know first hand
that third graders do understand
money and I have parents to come
and I was doing the program in
Baltimore to come in and talk
about how now they gave their
kids chores.
So that they could earn money to
deposit in their little accounts
and so you know just the thought
that maybe we and I'm like my
college
Representative Fajardo you know
I hate mandate.
But I think teaching our kids
about money is probably the most
important thing.
We can do that it's about more
than just.
Your car though in your cell
phone bill which according to to
my family that owns restaurant
is that they will get
individuals will come in and
work to earn just enough money
to pay a cell phone bill or car
note.
May disappear and they go
someplace else because they're
paying ten or fifteen cents more
and so the importance of tax
ownership of taxing you know you
are the medical so your taxes go
up you know so are you better
off where you are or where you
go and so but the kids you know
I I touched about.
Some eight thousand kids around
the country doing that that
period so I'm I'm total support
which the chair already knows
of this piece of legislation so
Thank us that contrary to where
I've been Representative
Martinez and I are seeing eye to
eye on something that's kind of
dangerous but.
I hope he supports this as well
thank you Mr chairman.
Representative I wanted to
welcome Johnson from PED who is
here if we have questions that
we need his expertise to answer
Representative Johnston.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representatives for bringing
this bill forward I couldn't
agree more you know this is
really important especially in
my community.
For our children you know to
instill this healthy financial
habits early on and I wanted to
thank you Mr Fred Nathan for
talking about you know our our
lending programs here in
northwest northwest New Mexico
in in Gallup and farming ten and
I'm not saying it to you know
pick on.
The landing program and be so
negative but you know it is
detrimental to our community
because of that interest rates
and then we we also have gaming
you know and and not to not to
say anything bad about gaming
but I think we also need to
teach our children how to budget
for entertainment and gaming so
I think this is a really
important bill it's important
life skill that we need to be
teaching at home but more
importantly now we're going to
get help from are.
National education community so
I just want to thank you for
bringing this bill forward and I
support it thank you.
Thank you Representative I don't
see any other hand so I'm going
to ask a couple of questions.
I heard something this morning
that resonated with me then and
it is still resonating with me
now.
Education is our greatest weapon
against poverty in this this
bill stands as an example to
that in a multiplicity of way.
But I do have a couple of
specific questions one I want to
clear sign of the electives
offered.
Can be offered between six cents
right great.
If a student shows true case
that elective in middle school
would be the high school
graduation requirements.
Madam chair of Representative
Figueroa.
It would not
It would not it would be it
would just be a middle school
classroom would be geared
towards middle school students.
Thank you and that's that's how
I read the bill I just wanted to
make sure that was your intent
and.
second question.
You specifically list in the
bill what will be taught in this
course and that is is not
typical in legislation for
education courses
accounts.
Red is borrowing interest I
believe our was mentioned.
So you didn't mention budgets
paying taxes pensions.
Is there other things that could
be included so I'm I wonder if
you would talk a little bit
about what you specifically list
those things where you
specifically list anything at
all.
Thank you madam chair observing
what the Mr Nathan.
Yeah maybe I should fall on my
sword right now of we full
disclosure we we were involved
in the drafting of this and
listening to Representative
Figueroa I think we should
probably look at that before we
take it to education maybe you'd
sponsor a an amendment
expanding and giving educators
more flexibility because all the
topics that you mentioned should
be in there.
But but I I defer to the chief
to the chair and the and the co
sponsor.
One way ended you have strong
feelings about why those
specific things were listed.
I think I think there was a
figure of Mr Nate that no I
think you're correct I think
you're correct I think
We did change the words from
financial literacy to financial
management.
I think teenagers are are more
apt to take a financial
management course in a financial
literacy literacy like it's like
you can't read.
So we did that and it's it's
kind of funny the nobody
mentioned up so I guess people
are comfortable with that but
yeah you're right we should it
we don't deal with other courses
and I think people know you know
what financial management needs
and I think pad and had already
has that threshold every single
high school has this course now
so so you're right it probably
doesn't belong in that statute
and will will we can amended out
on our way to education.
Thank you chairman Mr name and
send I'm and thank you chair for
answering my question I was
going to ask why did you change
the name from financial literacy
to financial management is it
the same thing so and I agree
with you at as a teacher high
school students literacy is a
bit of an off putting ward for
some of them so that might have
been a good choice there my last
question is about page nine you
specify in your bill that this
will course will be taken by
ninth graders unless I'm
misreading Act
ands.
That is pretty restrictive
and can be difficult for school
districts who might need to
figure out where to place this
in their high school schedule is
also.
It also can be difficult for
school districts who don't have
another half year math course
there is there isn't one on the
books that I know of right now
unless you count econ economics
as I have here course that's
usually taken by twelfth graders
so and ninth grader would be
taking this for half a year and
then it could be scheduling
difficulties for the school what
do they do for the other half of
the year
you might consider losing that
and just saying it's it's
actually a credit that they have
to take and some point in their
high school career.
No thank you great catch madam
chair Representative Figueroa
great catch and this is great
for us to know and and the
chairman of health education is
bringing forth the rewrite of
the statute the statutes we look
at either don't have an
effective date or the effective
date is July first of that year
every now and then it we bounce
it out.
With this curriculum the magic
words are.
the magic words our students
entering the ninth grade and so
it's not for ninth graders it's
one does it kick in and so for
students entering the ninth
grade in September this would be
a requirement for students that
enter the ninth grade last year
it would not be a requirement so
if you look on page eight lines
twelve and thirteen for students
entering the ninth grade
beginning in two thousand nine.
And then you look at page eight
line six and seven for students
entering ninth grade in two
thousand five so that's simply
that the start date but you're
corrected it if it's not it's
not ninth graders it's it's nine
tenth eleventh twelfth or ninth
grader starting school this
year.
Thank you clarification and I'm
gonna.
That you need to add the word
beginning on page nine line
seventeen students entering the
ninth grade beginning in two
thousand twenty one twenty two
and every year there forward you
need that word beginning in
their.
you can amend that in the later
time but get it in there so that
all future classes will be
needing to take this course
Representative Culver second
time.
Us thank you madam chair.
As you are discussed in this Mr
chairman.
Look at and there's so much.
To be learned from interest
rates.
Thank compounding and that that
whole area.
So to take it out to be a year
long program.
No to maybe looking at maybe
interest rates.
For.
Marlene and all that in one part
of the school year and then look
at something else the second
half of the school year then
that would make it a year long
program because there's
certainly is so much is going on
with finances.
You know and and and
borrowing and spending and
earning that I think it could be
a year long.
Program so maybe before
education report guest education
you can look at a way to send it
to make it a year long program
so that when that students.
You know Lee high school you'll
know the difference between the
fees and everything on a credit
card verses the fees and
everything gone up mortgage.
You know in New plus the
interest rate and all of that so
that's just a recommendation to
make it a year long program for
these kids so that they get the
full year.
You know of particular areas.
Early on mentioned you know
working with third graders
schools would bring me in.
And the middle relief to the
middle part of may when it was
that slow period.
And I have their total attention
because it was something
different.
So that's just the way that you
know another way of looking at
it you know from.
Will pitch I guess is what I'm
saying because the half year
certainly does not give a full
picture of what finance is
really about.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative what is
over Representative Martínez.
And the two passed madam chair I
was going to do that.
Would you like to then I have a
second I will seconded behind
Martinez I I don't know what's
going on here.
And we.
For the record the only reason
I'm supporting this bill is
because Representative Powdrell
Culbert is supporting this bill.
Thank you representative that is
good to know we have a motion to
pass and it's been seconded
madam secretary would you call
the roll.
Thank you madam vice chair.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative will yes.
Okay it was yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative ****.
Yes.
Representative Colbert.
Yes.
President of cerrado yes madam
vice chair to get along yes.
Chairman my assistance yes
explain Google.
To explain his motives.
Well that's after the you do
tallied up that's right Adam
secretary what's our total.
Those.
Thank you madam secretary is
here to explain you wrote thank
you madam chair I did get a
chance to talk to.
To my career in today's I don't
want to I want to respect I want
to respect him but they my
expert witness fourteen years
ago and the angel on our
shoulders now is a is Jennifer
Riordan Mr diverted to help get
this bill passed for two years
thank you madam chair.
Thank you chair thank you
committee for a very thoughtful
working afternoon
congratulations on here and do
passed thank you thank you madam
chair thanks committee.
This.
Committee that's our agenda for
this afternoon share the
announcements before we leave
yes thank you madam chair
members up so.
Representative Chandler is
working diligently on house bill
thirty eight.
Of and so we'll see if you want
to bring it back on Wednesday or
Friday so we'll have a we'll
have an agenda out of sometime
tomorrow about noon.
Contingent on bond are travelers
wishes.
X..
Thank you share
would you like to introduce our
presenter.
This is my granddaughter Landel.
When I was on the radio and so.
This is why we do what we do.
And thank you again committee we
are the turned into Wednesday.
