Representative Johnson.
Here.
Being as.
President.
Representative Colbert.
Representative.
Madam chair.
I am here and she asked if I
hear and so great we have a
quorum
and welcome everyone everyone in
those in the zoom we're gonna
hear from our Representative.
When she gets here and then
we'll to public comment and then
we'll go to committee.
And I notice.
Former speaker Sanchez joined us
welcome Sir we when we when I go
and put their hands up for
opposition just so.
We also get organized will do
the opposition is first and then
we will proponents afterward.
In our Sanchez is down the hall
so will be a permanent.
In the virtual world she's.
Coming down the hallway.
And Representative Dow could you
you mind testing your life test
test for us.
We could hear you.
Kelly can you help or hurt
Representative.
I'm the same room with her.
But.
All right let me take the
sponsor high.
That she was just outside well
great though a joy I don't let
joy joy Garrett.
We were at intend the room.
Looking for them.
Is guaranteed.
Representative has been promoted
and we're looking for a data.
Toward the bottom.
Okay.
Yes.
Welcome.
And Garrett welcome the house
commerce we've taking the role.
We have a moral and all which is
I I just promoted them also now
they're all in let you guys get
settled in going back ready.
Senator turn up there might.
Welcome.
Mr speaker can you I mean Mr
chair chair my assist can you
hear me we sure can welcome
Representative I wanna take it
away that at your competitor
when you're ready okay finally
how my gosh I've just been
panicking here okay part of our
session part of our session try
to get a little more light on me
I'm sorry I can't take your time
Representative for a thanks it's
always.
I always breathe when I can get
into the committee said thank
you thank you chairman my Estes
and members of the of commerce
and economic development
committee thank you for the
opportunity to place H. B. one
forty forty nine before this
committee this bill amends the
small Act and the bank
installment Act of nineteen
fifty nine in the following way.
It reduces the maximum amount
allowable interest from a
hundred and seventy five percent
to thirty six percent and
ensures that the APR is all
inclusive I. E. all the fees
charged for this
loan will be part of the thirty
six percent cap it indexes of
thirty six percent cap to the
prime rate of interest meaning
that if the interest rate
exceeds ten percent to mention a
row the maximum allowable
interest rate will increase by
the amount the prime rate is
over ten percent.
I increases the size of the
loans from five thousand to ten
thousand it includes a language
to prevent businesses from
circumventing the law that's a
very short.
Explanation of the what and I'm
gonna tell you the what.
It's interesting when I first
came to this legislature in two
thousand nineteen I was I told a
group of freshmen legislature
legislators that I was going to
draw down the interest rate on
these smallest on amounts from a
hundred and seventy five to
thirty six and they said why so
hot.
I said
why not fifteen percent and I
said well the reason we're
recommending thirty six percent
it's because that that's the
interest that the department of
defense in the military lending
act allows small loan companies
to charge young men and women
serving our country when people
get trapped in these loans they
can be deployed so as a response
to a national military readiness
situation the directive was
passed by Congress in two
thousand six as a way to end
abuse of loan rates and.
Families in our military I agree
and think New Mexico should do
the same.
When I first began to think
about introducing this bill it
didn't seem like such a heavy
lift I thought people would come
to a logical conclusion and
agree with me I'm sad to say
that I found out that an entire
sub industry has been created in
New Mexico to counter the
effects of the small installment
loan industry what you should
all know as most of our major
counties or cities and colleges
have set up loan companies
within their finance departments
to help people get out of these
crippling loans in two thousand
nineteen before the pandemic
started five hundred ninety two
thousand three hundred ninety
eight small loans forgiven out
in New Mexico this isn't a
problem it's a financial
academic.
Opponents of this bill will say
these loan installment companies
are needed small businesses to
serve an important niche in our
state their local businesses
hiring about over over five
hundred people and serve a great
need.
I'm gonna tell you that five
hundred and twenty eight hundred
five hundred ninety seven are
proximally eighty five percent
of the strict about lenders in
New Mexico are out of state
corporations in June of two
thousand eighteen seventy eight
of these out of state corporate
star friends have enforcement
and supervisory regulatory
actions taken against them by
the federal consumer financial
protection bureau C. F. P. B.
and they continue to operate New
Mexico security finance had
fifty four store fronts title
Max had fourteen store fronts is
cashing stress hadn't can store
fronts let me read you the June
two thousand eighteen C. F. P.
B. enforcement action against
the security of finance or
improper debt collection
violating federal law.
Security finance made improper
collection efforts to
collectively content including
physically preventing borrowers
from leaving their home visiting
and calling farmers place of
work but knowing that this
contact could endanger their
implant placement.
It violated the fair credit
reporting act by regularly
providing inaccurate and
incomplete information about
borrowers to credit reporting
agencies that's potentially
adversely impacting credit
scores security I nexus or ready
to seize illegal collection
practices incorrect inaccurate
information provided to guests
and similar reporting agencies
this this security finance was
ordered to pay five million and
civil penalties Haidle Max was
ordered to pay nine million
civil penalties ace cash express
was ordered to pay five million
refund buyers and five million
in civil penalties opponents of
this bill will tell you that
businesses that this is a high
risk business and they need a
high rates to recover their
costs fifteen states one is some
the district of Columbia our
neighboring states to the north
Colorado to the western Center
have set up a caps at thirty six
percent I think we should do the
same.
To compound the problem the
level two literacy rate New
Mexico's forty six percent
almost one half of our
population is unable to do
simple math that's that's the
truth that means most people who
sign these loans don't even know
what they're signing it's a
perfect storm created by out of
state corporations.
Frankly as a state legislator
and as a local municipality
there's some businesses you
don't want to encourage state
law has a limit on the number of
liquor licenses that are allowed
in the community cities
discourage Mattel said engage in
sex trafficking they discourage
strip clubs I don't think that
small loan companies with
interest rates of a hundred and
seventy five percent our
businesses we should encourage
the harm communities and the
harm families and just so you
understand the enormity of this
problem there is an installment
loan company for every three
thousand eight hundred nineteen
residents in New Mexico by
comparison there's a McDonald's
for every twenty three thousand
two hundred ninety eight
presidents that's about right
for Espanola we have about seven
or eight installment loan star
friends and one McDonald's the
city of this bill is about ten
thousand people the county of re
reef is about thirty thousand I
don't think smaller companies
with interest rates at a hundred
seventy five percent our
businesses we should encourage a
harm communities they harm
families.
It's important to note that I'm
not asking that we closed down
these businesses these
businesses are allowed to stay
in New Mexico with the passage
of this legislation they just
have to cap their interest rates
at thirty six percent.
I also want to add.
I really don't consider this a
partisan bill we all represent
communities with that have poor
populations I'm a Democrat that
values a strong two party system
and I would ask the Republicans
in this house and on this
committee consider the impact of
this legislation on their
families.
Mr chair I would like to now
introduce Representative joy
Garrett who is helping me with
this legislation and then after
we have the the public speak I
would I would like to come back
to summarize my state.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
Representative.
Thank you chairman my assistant
thank you representative I'm
just going to add a couple of
small points to this my
introduction to predatory
lending was my son who secretly
got a two hundred dollar loan
and then a couple weeks later
and a couple more weeks later
came and said mom how what
happened I owe six hundred
dollars and that's when I
started looking into it and then
my other introduction where the
parents and the grandparents the
kids that I taught in some of
the poorest areas of Albuquerque
when they found out that I was
becoming a legislator one of
their.
Whether mandates to me was what
happened to their families to
their children to their
grandchildren because of this
problem
and so I'm happy that I can use
the legislative process to
improve this the other thing I
found is we research this that
there's multiple ways to do what
interest durable loans and my
biggest shock as a first year
legislator was learning that
many people in New Mexico is
specially the predatory lenders
were playing when we got the
interest rate down from three
hundred forty six percent to one
hundred seventy five percent I
consider that said so that's why
I signed on to this bill I know
that there's a bill in progress
to have financial literacy for
all of our students but I think
before we get everybody educated
about financial literacy we need
to change this situation thank
you Mr chairman thank you
committee members for listening.
Thank you very much and now
we'll go to members of the
committee I'm gonna try some
I've never done
I know of someone said they want
to know who's in the room was in
the virtual room.
So I'm gonna try to share my
screen and see if that were.
So these are the attendees.
These are the attendees in the
room.
And I'll scroll up and down.
So here's the attendees in the
room these are the folks with
their hands up.
And then these are folks that
are calling in and other folks
listening or one is Mr chairman
we're just senior
your screen not we're not seeing
what you're saying I see all
right so much for that.
All right all right great so
we'll go to the members of the
audience thank you
Representative Baldonado will
represent the ideas will just go
down the row Mr Ramon Sanchez.
Well those will let you in the
in the committee room and then
you on mute yourself and address
the committee there's a lot of
folks that want to talk so you
know everyone.
You know two or three minutes of
trying not to repeat each
other's arguments.
On it we let in a Mr Ramon
Sanchez.
Welcome Sir what in on mute
yourself and address the
committee I think and I am
unmuted now is that correct Mr
chairman absolutely we can hear
you okay thank you very much Mr
chairman of members of the
committee of Representative
Metcalfe Representative Garratt
thank you for bringing this bill
the forces giving us an
opportunity to express our views
my name is Raymond Sanchez I'm
an attorney in Albuquerque this
interest more does it Ariel I
represent consumer lenders
association.
Our New Mexico Association
composed of installment lenders
who have been within our state
going back to the sixties and
I've been a.
Been really concerned citizens
within the state and that band
now very very useful to us Mr
chairman I'd like to start by
giving a little background on
this if I may and I'm not click
to start.
It's kind of interesting to
remind you have a cold by I
believe Winston Churchill who
said to.
Politics is more dangerous with
what that more are warm war your
only kids once this bill here
seems to have a a life beyond
itself.
RT we back in twenty seventeen
we started with the advocates
and we work together to really
close the payday lenders we
limited the title of the land
lenders and we established the
one seventy five of A. P. R. of
cap and created the literacy
fund which you're well aware Mr
chairman and had at one time
been involved with us and
creating a literacy program
throughout the state of New
Mexico and that dated way back
to the Richardson administration
in twenty eighteen this bill
came up again are we thought we
had something settled in twenty
seventeen and twenty nineteen
our industry again was lumped
with the nonexistent payday
lenders all there was a thirty
six percent bill we also had a
companion bill that wouldn't
with that house bill one fifty
introduced by Representative
Lewis that bill advanced through
the legislature together with
the advocates of the industry
setting that are paid several
times I mean during that session
we most the Matt thirty thirty
five forty days trying to work
something out we finally got it
worked out and we had agreed
that we would submit additional
data if I do this additional
data with the.
Creative circle evidence about
what we wanted to what we were
doing and how we're doing it and
then we would be able to fashion
legislation for the next session
that would be the session after
this one we really wasn't
supposed to come up of twenty
twenty one because the data was
going to be ready and will be
ready in June so it was a
difficult decision for us and it
was a difficult decision for the
advocates we understand that it
was also difficult for many
legislators who voted on it but
everybody said look we're gonna
get this finally resolve because
we're gonna have the data will
be able to all get together and
do this but what happens we got
this bill you know it's hard to
tell how we how we go about it
because we're told that we don't
belong here that we don't really
do much for the community and
that we just we're takers and
that we're not givers Mr
chairman of the committee I want
to point out some facts for you
yes there are employees of the
state of Mexico they're actually
about thirteen hundred ninety
five employees of the state of
New Mexico working in
installment lenders are your
average salaries about forty six
thousand dollars a year add
that's plus benefits the total
compensation paid on a yearly
basis in New Mexico's over sixty
five million dollars to these
employees there's about six
billion dollars annually that
the company pays for our taxes
to the state there's about
sixteen million dollars that the
the the installment lenders are
paying for leases to local
owners are so we've got about a
total of nine hundred and
fifteen million dollars of
economic impact in the state you
know that's an additional of the
financial literacy fund which
has about three hundred twenty
five thousand dollars which we
volunteered to set up with our
money on an annual basis you
know.
It's clear to me that there is a
problem obviously some people
are being taken advantage of but
we are not part of the part of
that we want to be part of the
solution we're willing to work
towards getting this done but
the idea has always been that we
would get the data put it
together in all of this work
would work together based on the
empirical evidence we have Mr
chairman I think I don't want to
take up any more time because I
know there's others who are we
to speak but it's clear clear
that the Ms that the installment
lenders serve.
People who can't be served I
guarantee you that this is true
I'm gonna give you one simple
example here of years ago a
banker in blend New Mexico was
making small loans.
Of the bank time did like him
doing it he had to leave that
bank could be set up his own
small installment under company
if you were alive today he would
be telling you that they served
had a great deal to serve the
people of that community there
are other small people just like
them throughout the state and
one of them will be testifying
today by the name of John knight
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for taking the time to listen to
my up presentation are we stand
in opposition to the bill but we
also stand for the proposition
that this bill could be taken
care of during the interim when
we have all the data together
and we're willing to sit down
and help people do that.
Thank you Sir Mr David Emery.
The on mute yourself Mr me.
My apologies to you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is David Emery are you mad
I'm in New Mexico regional
manager for that you see
financial services I've lived in
our beautiful state for twenty
two years New Mexico's my home
this is where I've put down my
roots and this is where I will
retire I love our state.
I would be tell you a little bit
about our company in New Mexico
we have nine locations
throughout the state an employee
twenty four happy and successful
New Mexican team members last
year we were able to approve
eleven thousand one hundred and
eight requests for loans in
those request we help our for
will New Mexicans pay for
everything ranging from home
repairs the holidays to kids in
the US.
If you would please permit me to
illustrate an example of a
typical five hundred dollar loan
and the cost to our customers I
would appreciate it a five
hundred dollar loan taken out
today and paid back in thirty
days would have a total interest
cost of sixty six dollars and
seventy four cents if the loan
were to run the term meaning six
months the total finance charge
on that loan would be two
hundred and seventy three
dollars and thirteen cents with
the total payment being seven
hundred seventy three dollars
and thirteen cents now if I
could please sure one example
with you we have a customer
named Andrew he's a single
father who is recently divorced
Andrew found himself in a
position where he needed to
purchase some specialized
medical equipment for his
daughter and replace the hot
water heater in his home.
And you thought he had an ace in
the hole.
He thought he'd be either it
would be easy to borrow money
but when he unsuccessfully was
it but he was unsuccessful in
his attempt to borrow money from
his employer who is by the way a
major bank in the metro area
Andrew turned to us and we
successfully helped Andrew.
Now if Andrew isn't able to
borrow money from the bank being
an employee of the bank how
difficult would be for if you
could imagine for our New Mexico
citizens to of a borrow money in
similar situations we understand
it's important that New Mexico
needs to be cleaned up and rein
in the rogue actors but it's
important that people like
Andrew have a safe efficient and
practical way to have their
needs met if the regulated
industry goes away as a result
of the proposed legislation.
The need will not unscrupulous
offshore lenders will continue
to offer loans outside of any
regulatory environment week you
see financial welcome being part
of the conversation regarding
future regulations thank you for
your time today.
Thank you Sir now we're from Mr
Andrew Morrison and then
Catherine kosha.
Can you hear me now Mr can't
thank you all right thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Andrew
Morrison I'm with frontage
Management we've been doing
business in New Mexico for over
twenty five years and we've
never happened enforcement
action brought against us by the
CFPB.
When president Biden was elected
we was supposed to ensure on a
new era with the troops matches
with the facts math to.
The case for this bill on the
other hand is being made with
the succession of
misrepresentations and you end
up needing full statements.
Installment loans are not paid a
loans they are not predatory and
don't contribute to the cycle of
that.
Richard Cordray the former
director of the CFPB praised
installment loans for building
and I quote structure to support
repayment and the force of his
payday rule was to try to make
Hey David let payday loans more
light the storm is testing the
ability to repay and payable in
equal installments of principal
and interest.
Thank New Mexico opens that case
for the bill by talking about a
woman paying six hundred dollars
monthly on a five hundred
dollar.
That is already illegal the
maximum monthly payment allowed
under the twenty seventeen goal
for a lead in that size would be
less than a third.
The same goes for the experience
of Representative Garrett has
some who had a terrible
experience with payday that
experience could not happen
today.
C. R. appear confused as to the
difference between APR and
interest and use the terms
interchangeably so let's let's
just talk about the arguments
not necessarily those who are
making the arguments okay I
think it's very important that
people understand the difference
between interest and APR so for
instance when you a charitable
trust pasta low in Virginia
which is praised by think New
Mexico and they say we should do
the same get we can follow in
the footsteps of Virginia.
What what Q. is capping was the
interest rate not to the APR so
they have a thirty six percent
interest rate plus a small
monthly fee to cover the fixed
costs of the loan and the
resulting APRS on the smallest
ones are in the nineties again
that's just but the economics of
it I tried I also to put the
think New Mexico with is in
touch with with few charitable
trust to discuss this but they
they declined.
Finally referenda holes get
cited suggesting that people
support rate caps on these are
famously misleading it all
depends on how you frame the
question if you ask people if
they want cheaper loans they'll
say yes of course if you also if
they want to put the loan
companies out of business and
have known this they'll say no
we ran just such a poll in New
Mexico five years ago one of the
ninety five percent.
I respectfully ask that we wait
for the actual data on the
industry to come out later this
summer and build any
recommendations the future
legislation on the facts.
We oppose this bill thank you.
Of for the folks back home what
is C. F. P. B. the consumer
financial protection bureau
which was set up under the Dodd
Frank act up to the financial
crisis to to basically to make
rules governing financial
transactions and financial
entities one of the biggest
problems was was payday loans no
thank you Sir Mr Katherine
Posada welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representatives my name is
Katherine Posada and I'm a
registered lobbyist for all
loans up loans is not a payday
lender and make installment
loans that are under written and
has no fees at all Auckland's
also presents for applicants to
lenders with better interest
rates first so that they may
obtain a loan with a lower rate
if they qualify the typical
length of their loans as for
nine months and the typical size
is fifteen hundred dollars off
loans also reports to the major
credit bureaus helping consumers
build their credit they also
believe in the importance of
financial literacy and offer
financial education the other
off you website.
We are experiencing historical
unemployment rates in New Mexico
due to the pandemic this is the
worst time to remove credit
options from people who need it
most eliminating this industry
would also place an additional
fifteen hundred New Mexicans out
of work who are employed by
these lenders additionally as
stated previously we should
await the results the data
results directed by this
legislature and house bill one
fifty in two thousand nineteen
before changing regulations in
order to understand the universe
of landing in New Mexico.
Well this bill is aimed to
create a more equitable New
Mexico the proposed rate cap
would leave New Mexico consumers
worse off and immediately cut
access to credit for millions of
New Mexicans setting a thirty
six percent cap will also drive
consumers to pay day and tribal
lenders or these regulations do
not apply a number of lenders
including those who make up the
market place lenders association
or the and all a who charge
thirty six percent or less on
their loans have argued they can
underwrite loans for low credit
score borrowers at thirty six
percent however we know this is
not true because ninety three
percent of the applications
Auckland send to those lenders
are not only not underwritten by
those lenders they're not even
considered by the lenders and
all as a result capping loans at
thirty six percent would
permanently kill access for
credit challenge borrowers
moving forward and not to be
repetitive on the APR on talking
points I just want to add the
APRS can be confusing and APR is
not the interest rate for the
product the fiscal report for
house bill one forty nine makes
this clear It states alone under
the current SLA or B. I. L. A.
with the repayment period of
four months in the current
maximum.
You cut out miss product
Prussia.
After the word maximum.
We hear you know you cut out
after maximum okay maximum APR
of one seventy five percent
would equate to an interest rate
of fifty seven and a half
percent assuming no other fees
are charged under the proposed
bill however alone with the
repayment period of four months
and a maximum APR of thirty six
percent would be limited to an
interest rate of eleven point
eight percent assuming that no
other fees are charged credit is
priced according to risk risky
borrowers won't be able to
qualify for an eleven point
eight percent loan as a result
they won't be able to access
this type of credit and will be
locked out of the financial
system for over one hundred
years turned it traditional
installment loan lenders have
consistently provided consumers
with reliable community based
small dollar credit that is
assessable and affordable giving
borrowers a tried and tested
mechanism to safely manage their
household credit New Mexico
should look at creating a safety
valve with strong consumer
protection to prevent steering
that would allow those who
qualify for a loan at a lower
rate to obtain it and those who
don't the opportunity to apply
for a loan at a higher rate we
respectfully stand in opposition
to house bill one forty nine
thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr Lauria Begay.
And let's up let's keep it to
two minutes there's a bunch of
folks who want to talk welcome.
Okay good afternoon Mister
chairman committee my name is
Gloria Ann Begay.
I'm I work for a standalone
company for over twenty six
years and I'm glad to say I've
seen so many ways our company
has helped our people our
customers.
So some of our customers who
come to our office for instant
in Gallup area do have great
credit so do not have great
credit and they won't qualify
for with the bank okay so they
need help to establish credit so
in the future they could go to a
bank.
They come to our office to help.
Ask for.
Essential items.
This there says to do such as.
Helping out with federal crosses
groceries firewood to keep
their.
House warm in the winter propane
utility bills they need help
with vehicle repair home
improvement traditional practice
the majority of our customers
that we get on a monthly basis
are on a fixed income and self
employed therefore they don't
have a lot of money and and
accounting son loan is someone
that they can count as count on
so they can come back to us.
For a for a third you know like
necessities so.
I'm saying that I oppose this
bill because there's no way that
are six income self employed
customers we'll go to a bank or
credit union.
They might just even file for
internet loan companies that
have charge you know outrageous
interest rate and we don't want
that to happen so I'm just
opposing this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Jeff greater.
Thank you Mr chairman and
distinguished members my name is
Jack Rader thank you for
allowing me to offer these
comments in opposition on behalf
of the national stolen lenders
ciation I have three quick
points.
Number one point one is there is
a misperception that New Mexico
currently allows higher rates
than most other states that Lee
is in park drive in this
legislation and its falls short
it's been circulating that
compares New Mexico to others
excludes payday and title loans
that operate in the state for
the PR number two hundred
percent as well as tribal loans
and even higher rates in reality
New Mexico ranks in the lower
and not the hiring of the
continue.
Point two please do a deep dive
into what the Mr really measure
I suggest is an EPR cracks start
work to really understand how to
put eight yards in the proper
context the site is an excellent
resource for you avail yourself
of one thing you'll find there
is an eight year for primarily
an indicator of the size and
duration of the loan I repeat AP
are are primarily an indicator
of the size and duration will we
all know that thirty three
hundred thousand dollar thirty
year fixed mortgage will have a
low APR ninety four percent
today but will require more than
five hundred thousand dollars to
be paid back it's all said and
done.
To a small with the short term
you know all rural districts
treated this way suppose you
lend me a hundred dollars or not
if you charge me one dollar.
Late in this three hundred sixty
five percent do you are you
charge me ten cents one time is
a thirty six and a half percent
APR rate still above the cap in
the proposed legislation on
final point point three banks
and credit unions will never
have never and will never make
these loans there's more than a
hundred years Adams that proves
it given this fact in that small
loans at the time were only
being offered by organized crime
criminals rest of legislature's
a hundred years ago essentially
created the traditional smaller
loan industry it's important to
understand this history and not
will back clock not make
mistakes of the past thank you
very much.
Thank you Sir now we heard from
Ricky keys.
And then I'll have you had a
you.
And we're hearing for the the
opponents of the bill first Mr.
Mr chairman please Mr keys
welcome.
Yes my name is Dr Richard keys I
own and have developed an
educational platform that
provides financial education and
coaching to minority
communities.
I've also done consulting work
for among others the Christian
pastors fellowship and the
national black caucus of state
legislators.
I have brought copies of a
resolution I worked on for the
national Hispanic caucus of
state legislators dealing with
access to credit.
As you know equality is the
central theme of the new by
districts.
And nothing concerns a group
I've worked with more than the
uneven distribution of critical
resources among various
communities and ethnic groups.
I've done studies on food
desert's pharmacy budget
education doesn't healthcare
doesn't think credit does it is
a fact that minority communities
suffer because of on the uneven
distribution and availability of
these resources.
The United Nations defines
poverty as a lack of certain
essential goods and services
including access to credit.
If you pass this bill it has
been estimated at an astonishing
forty six percent of all New
Mexicans will lose access to
safe affordable state regulated
credit.
I grew up in a poor neighborhood
by cell.
I see what happens when it the
only option for people are bad
options it's not pretty.
They get trapped in a cycle of
their and their lives get much
worse quickly.
In the state that is already not
amongst the richest I fail to
see how promoting legislation
that reduces access to credit
will to citizens opportunities
to skate property.
With that thank you Mr president
Mr chairman and I look forward
to answering any questions that
you have a.
Thank you doctor now have you
had a you please welcome and
introduce yourself.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee can you
guys hear me okay we sure can
okay.
My name's have it a little on
with some company I live in Los
crucis I've been in Los crucis
since nineteen eighty seven and
I'm proud to be an Mexican.
I actually know what it's like
to live paycheck to paycheck I
personally struggle to establish
my credit in my early twenties I
remember when I needed to buy a
crib for my daughter Brianna I
thought it was easy to walk into
a packet get along.
The bank did not see me worthy
enough because I do not have the
have any open lines of credit or
established yup part was that I
had been in the job for three
years and thought it would make
a difference the local bank
turned me down and it was not a
good feeling I turned to a
credit union and they asked me
for deposit to be a member I
quickly understood that would I
will not be able to get what I
needed for my daughter.
This experience taught me it
doesn't come easy I don't have
anyone who could help me and
that's when my friend sent
recommended personal credit
plan.
I was already embarrassed of
being turned down but I went
anyway the manager took my
information and told me that
even though I did not qualify
for the five hundred this you
could start at two hundred
dollars she educated me on on
the credit and told me that
since their report to all three
major credit bureaus I can
establish my credit I took the
two hundred dollars and went
back.
And went and bought my used
furniture for my daughter always
make sure my payments were on
the due date or before personal
credit plan helped me establish
credit and I was able to get
approved the best.
I say low to personal credit
plan because you don't forget
those who help you.
Back in nineteen ninety eight my
friend some recruited me to work
in a small loan industry I
started my career it's been
twenty three years now I believe
in what we do and how we help
local communities I can also
speak on the method on how the
loans are approved if you guys
long to.
The loans that are made with
basically we look at stability
how long the customer has been
at their job and residents we
also test the customer's ability
to repay back the loan we make
sure that we get their total
income and look at the their
their payments that they have in
the credit report or any other
gets.
We also pull a credit report
when we pull the credit report
it'll give us a good picture of
health they're going not only on
that side the difference between
us and the fact is that we ask
questions and when someone's
passed to one on on their credit
and we don't completely just in
not because our past two this is
one of the reasons why the small
loan industry is very vital to
our customers because we're able
to help them get them we
establish our loans do not carry
any prepayment penalty as a
matter of fact if on a two
hundred dollar loan if a
customer bar was a two hundred
dollar loan and they pay within
the first month they refunded
what most of the interest.
I would like to just say that I
oppose bill ninety nine and
please are you know really think
of you know what the
consequences to this is
I lived it in thank you for your
time.
Thank you Sir and we'll we'll
talk about nine nine but when
the we go back to committee
It's similar to this one house
bill one sixty four Mister
Gibson did you want to speak now
or wait till till to the
proponents of the bill.
I can have you first up.
I.
Mistakenly put my hand up during
that I was just putting up to
testify keep it up you'll go
first for the for those in favor
okay now here from read on
welcome read on.
Next up to twenty ten.
Read on if you could take
yourself off of mute.
And address the committee if
you'd like.
All right I will go to to say
hope Mister reed and are.
Week we can hear you now.
Welcome back to re done now will
go to a Tony Turner.
Welcome.
It.
In my screen it it your your
mute button is off but I I can't
hear you.
Okay you guys sit tight let's
let's let another person and
Danielle are low let's try
agency are low.
So we can hear her.
Is all about and mute yourself
welcome you have thank you thank
you Mr chair yes thank you thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee and Danielle fake
we are low senior vice president
of the American financial
services association **** been
around for a hundred years our
members are both bank and non
bank in all areas of consumer
credit asset is not
Representative payday lenders or
title lenders and I work for the
committee to letter containerful
arguments and data just briefly
if you let me a hundred dollars
and charge me a dollar interest
the APR changes depending on
when I have to pay you back I.
P. back in a year it's one
percent I have to pay you back
in a day it's three hundred and
sixty five percent APR by pay
back your dollars an hour it's
eight thousand seven hundred
sixty percent APR it's the same
dollar but it's very different
NPR's these are about being
picky lenders this is about
lenders needing to charge a fair
amount in order to break even
and everybody knows it you can't
break even on thirty six percent
APR until about three thousand
dollars or more depending on
your fixed costs anybody who
tells you different is either
confused or misinformed if you
want to half a million New
Mexico New Mexicans caught cut
off from small dollar credit
altogether.
H. B. one forty nine will
accomplish that goal and
speaking of thirty six percent
thirty six percent of New Mexico
adults have a credit score below
six hundred forty six percent of
New Mexico adults have a credit
score below six fifty today
about nine percent of those
people thirty nine percent New
Mexican adults would be denied
small dollar credit if this bill
passes that turned down right
will be about forty percent four
in ten New Mexico adults will
not qualify for small dollar
credit under this bill New
Mexico's elite will be fine as
they've always been because they
can afford the larger loans
necessary to break even at
thirty six percent.
Thank you.
Good and take your mute up on
mute yourself Mr seconded.
Now we could hear you.
Mister Gibson if you could just
put your mute on all right we'll
come back to Mr secretary
Houston we.
I'm sorry.
please proceed yeah.
Well you're gonna speak and at
in favor these folks are against
so sit tight apologies use
yourself please I will.
from Norman secretary but he's
having issues with this new
button we're gonna from Mr Jason
Weaks.
Welcome Mr weeks.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyist for QC
holdings we stand in opposition
of this legislation for
individuals with poor credit or
limited credit traditional
credit can be impossible to
access in short term installment
loans offered by small lending
industry actually do help New
Mexico families access the much
needed credit that they use for
multitude of essential needs
industry responsible for
thousands of jobs and limit the
industry would be another blow
to our already fragile economy
we appreciate the intent of the
Sanchez from fair lending
practices imposing at thirty six
percent APR on small short term
loans would drive these
businesses and the credit they
offer out of the state well the
current hundred seventy five
percent APR may not be viable
long term interest rate for
short term loans in New Mexico
the closing imposing a flat
thirty six percent APR also owns
isn't either APR as a general
rule as you've heard some from
some others does not work well
within the context of small
short term loans as it
represents an anyone right that
does not translate well into
sponsoring loans with shorter
term small loan amounts for
shorter terms.
Impose statewide thirty six
percent APR on short term loans
to make lending on to folks with
lower credit scores almost
impossible this will cause some
to seek alternative loans from
offshore online lenders that
really are not subject to any
consumer protections at all
additionally while there are
some states that do in fact
impose a thirty six percent APR
on installment loans many of
those states offer payday loans
and title loans that have few
consumer protections and as we
know.
Payday loans have been out what
New Mexico for quite some time
that said with however well
intentioned this bill is
definitely an extreme response
to fix a problem that we don't
yet fully understand inspections
will have significant negative
impacts on our economy because
we because many small lenders to
leave the state and also close
off the source of the central
credit as an alternative we
truly feel the legislature
should wait to see the results
of the report proposed by HB
fifty four twenty nineteen ever
for will provide us with
important data on the short term
loan industry they can drive
future regulatory fixes the
promote additional consumer
protections while still allowing
New Mexicans to access the short
term credit offered by this
industry for the reasons stated
we oppose the bills drafted
thank you.
Thank you Sir.
Up next Stewart from Mr Daniel
Nagy are.
Mr chair can you hear me we can
certainly thank you Mr chairman
my name is Daniel is our
Representative access financial
services installment lender here
in the state with forty seven
employees I'm trying to reduce
my comments to not repeat
anything that's been said I
believe I probably spend as much
time as anybody who represents
lenders meeting with consumer
advocates and proponents for
this bill in the last ten years
and I know this is not motivated
by bad faith I do think both
sides tend to become entrenched
in their becomes a lot of
confusion and misunderstanding
as to the facts which is why we
benefited so greatly in two
thousand and seventeen when we
negotiated a bill that we all
worked on for probably twenty or
thirty days and ultimately
banned a lot of the bad actors
there remain bad actors in the
industry we should not deny that
but the industry as a whole is
serving a valuable purpose
thirty six percent APR on the
loans that my client makes is
not workable for us and it will
be workable for banks or credit
unions a five hundred dollar
loan for four months at thirty
six percent interest returns
nine dollars and fifty one cents
in interest per month which is
not even equal to one hour of
minimum wage no lender no bank
no credit union no installment
lender could service that loan
at that rate we respectfully
request the opportunity to
continue to meet with proponents
to see what we can do to adjust
and further refine the system
bring the rate down however in
asking for more time to look at
the data I think it's important
that some measures can be taken
sooner than that some
protections can be put in place
for consumers to allow us all
the time to actually sit down
and determine what the
appropriate rate should be and
and we stand ready at nexus
financial services to join with
anybody who's willing to talk to
us about how we move forward but
we do think that it's.
I.
We do think that the data we've
collected over the last several
years should be analyzed before
the changes occur thank you very
much.
Thank you up misting welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
optioning and I'm a lobbyist for
the online lenders alliance I
don't repeat to repeat what the
others is that but just want to
say that we support waiting for
the data coming out in April and
while we respectfully oppose
this bill we are committed to
working with all the
stakeholders once the data comes
out on a solution that protects
consumers thank you for your
time.
Thank you Mr John nine.
Yes can you hear me you're
welcome thank you very much Mr
chair and members my name is
John I work here in Santa Fe New
Mexico I am without my family
owned three small loan centers
and state we've been in business
for nine years during that time
with that Cheryl complaints we
have hundreds of thousands of
more works hundreds of families
that borrow from us from time to
time we have great respect with
our borrowers we have.
Transparency and they have
respect for us.
The.
Issue of small loans is that
sixty three percent of the loans
made by this industry or are
under a thousand dollars.
Ninety five percent are under
three thousand our company has
ninety five percent of our loans
under fifteen hundred the cost
to service a four hundred dollar
loan it is the same as a four
thousand dollar loan.
There are and intended
consequences with this thirty
six percent cap.
And we the first one is it will
put me out of business it just
is not able to be paid to make a
profit let alone about break
even.
Yes it just doesn't work.
Locals like myself will close
our doors layoff or ways you are
oil and local and have been with
this for years.
The.
Yes you will come down to where
there is no supply and the
demand is still there people
will need to borrow this money
that have credit scores of less
than six hundred I had credit
problems and nowhere else to go.
I would like to give you an
example that came from the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
when they made a study of thirty
six percent being capped in
Georgia and North Carolina.
The results were chapter seven
bankruptcies increased by nine
percent.
Bounced checks increased by
thirty six percent that's
because the internet lenders
came in and that's the biggest
thing they do is they take their
payments out of the bank account
without checking with the
customer as well as having some
very harsh types of of
collection procedures.
These loans will continue to be
made but the we made full by off
shore tribal land and offshore
excuse me offshore lenders and
by tribal land for tribal land
based lenders these companies
have no cap.
They have harsh collection
processes and there is no I mean
zero state control and
management taking up to the
Supreme Court this these people
off of off shore landing an
offer tribal land are exempt.
And that's who you'll be turning
this winding process over to.
If we can just take time do the
research on a thirty six percent
cap is not feasible for any
lender will maybe have a chance
of creating something that will
work for both sides we are not
only lending money what we are
giving people a chance to
reestablish their credit where
to start credit we work with
our.
More overs they know what
they're doing we make sure they
know what they're doing and.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Sir now we're promise
then they Cutler.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
sending it support I see hold
hold tight hold tight up Tony
Turner used to speak in
opposition or support.
Tony Tanner but you have the
floor.
The mute appears off to me but I
cannot hear you.
All right we'll come back to
Tony Turner now will up.
If there's anyone else late you
know hold just just grab me but
we're gonna go to the proponents
of the bill I in this order Mr
Gibson Mr we aqui and miss
Cutler a welcome up Mr Paul
Gibson up.
We are from the proponents of a
house bill one forty nine.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and I
specially want to thank this
bill sponsors for introducing
this important legislation my
name is Paul Gibson co founder
retake Our Democracy it's an all
volunteer organization with
twenty five hundred members
statewide and we work with
allies across the state to
identify bills we want to
support each year and this year
we identified twenty bills that
we call transformational bills
and H. B. one forty nine and SB
sixty six or two of those bills
we take has been advocating for
reform of this industry since
twenty seventeen and sincerely
hope that this is the year of
the legislature does not shy
away from substantive reform
I've personally sat in hearings
on small loan reform many many
times and listen to lobbyists
and industry representatives
agency represent their business
practices we just heard that
today I don't need to articulate
all that is wrong with their
messaging as I know that the
fair lending coalition and the
New Mexico Center on war Law and
Poverty will do an excellent job
of doing so but I just want to
strongly reiterate that
read more Chrissy is strongly in
favor of HB one forty nine thank
you very much.
Thank you Sir and thank you for
your patience Mr William we
aqui.
He was here a minute ago.
We'll get him back it will get
em back in of Mislintat color.
You have the floor.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Lindsay
Cutler I'm an attorney with the
New Mexico Center online poverty
and a member of the New Mexicans
for fair lending coalition we
stand in strong support of this
bill and we are grateful to the
sponsors for bringing it I'd
like to tells a story the
stories of of to borrowers that
I've known the first in in an
office call is this Mister Pete
is an elderly New Mexican he's a
veteran and like many elderly
people in our state he lives on
a small fixed income from social
security at the time I met him
Mr Hughes experiencing
homelessness and he was living
in this vehicle.
He had an emergency medical
procedure and ended up of the
bill we couldn't afford so it
took car title lender to borrow
a hundred dollars.
Less than a week later he
couldn't afford the payment so
we went back to the lender and
the road is long over so you can
avoid defaulting and to keep the
car he desperately needed.
His letter was all too happy to
keep meant that within the month
Mr today at still kind of for
the payment and the lender well
the loan over to with a thousand
dollars more despite the fact
that he was struggling to make
each of the payments within that
month his lone went from the
what from barring a hundred
dollars two thousand and total
what he would was nearly four
thousand at a hundred and fifty
three percent APR.
When he came to us for help as
payments were nearly a third of
his monthly income and he needed
to keep that vehicle is the
vehicle which is living we're
able to get a car title back and
within the month being out from
under that won't provide
apartment.
That story is not unusual and
far too many New Mexicans in in
that situation in similar
situations and up losing their
car to these on affordable
storefront loans.
The second bar I knew was a
grandmother.
She she she was disabled and her
only income was a thousand
dollars a month in a disability
payments.
She relies on our car in rural
New Mexico to be able to get to
medical appointments and to be
able to put food on the table as
well as to help transport her
grand children.
She was struggling to meet basic
needs and needed money for
family member for family matters
so she she went to a car title
lender and and disclosed we're
disability payment each month
that she got to a thousand
dollars a month is the sole
source of income.
and they they made are along for
twenty five hundred dollars at a
at a hundred and thirty percent
APR.
She could make payments and and
again she came back she told
Ellen are drowning here I can't
pay this
the lender let her more money
and again more money by the end
of that loan she was going to
thirty four thousand dollars.
Her payments were seven hundred
and ten dollars a month.
Seven tenths of her monthly
income the extremely
unaffordable loan triple digit
interest rates don't provide
access to credit the providing
access to dat this is a business
model that is designed to track
New Mexicans in debt for as much
profit as possible people
shouldn't have to decide between
paying for basic needs and
making a payment on a triple
digit interest loan and that is
especially important right now
in a pandemic so much so much
more than ever so for those
reasons Mr chairman and members
of the committee we stand and
and very strong support of this
bill and thank you for the
opportunity given Madam.
Thank you will not hear from
Mister Bill Jordan New and on
deck is Christina Fisher.
In the whole is Mr William
Wilkie Mr Jordan welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children we've been fighting
this fight for two decades and
we're hoping that this is
finally the year that there's
enough political will to get
this done I hear the opponents
also saying let's wait for the
data seriously how long do our
families have to wait for
financial protection if ever
there was a role for government
regulation to protect the very
people who will let them this
bill is it.
New Mexicans overwhelmingly
support of thirty six percent
cap and yet most of them have no
idea how expensive the problem
really is with this one piece of
legislation you can put more
money back in the pockets of
struggling families in the
low income comprehensive tax
rebate working families tax
credit and the state's general
assistance program combined.
All without spending a dime of
taxpayer dollars.
Simply by reining in an industry
that is targeting or poor our
families of color and siphoning
off hundreds of millions of
dollars a year from people who
are just struggling to make ends
meet this bill is one of the
most important pieces of
legislation this session for our
families who are struggling and
there's a lot of a right now in
these hard times we really
appreciate your support thank
you.
Thank you miss Christina Fisher.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
so I am with the New Mexicans
repair lending coalition and as
Alan the Cutler another member
said we're strongly supportive
of this bill I just want to
highlight three things that the
bill does that we think are
critically important to making
it as protective as possible of
New Mexicans the first as
Representative Ferrary described
is that this bill would cap
interest rates at an all
inclusive thirty six percent so
that means all the fees costs
and charges associated with the
loan would be included in the
thirty six percent cap that
matters because we know that
most people that take out these
loans they're not paying those
fees and charges up front those
would get rolled into the Lone
their finances actually so
people are paying interest on
the fees and charges and things
like credit insurance and so if
you cap it at thirty six percent
but you failed to include all of
those charges you're very
rapidly back up into a triple
digit interest rate and and we
think it's time for New Mexico
to leave behind the triple digit
interest rates forever and small
and so the all inclusive nature
of this thirty six percent cap
is really important it matches
what more more states are doing
so that's an important element.
Important element is the anti
evasion language you'll see that
on pages thirteen and fourteen
of house bill one forty nine
this is based on lessons learned
from other states so we have
seen in other states that have
passed this sort of a cap that
lenders have sort of tried to
transform their their practices
are project in such a way that
they're trying to redefine
themselves not even providing
and so the language here is to
try to close those loopholes and
make sure that we are truly
capturing all the small ending
that's happening and the third
thing again as Representative
for highlighted is that this
bill proposes to capture all
loans up to ten thousand dollars
not just five thousand dollars
as we see under the current
statute and this matter so we
see more and more high cost
loans that exceed that five
thousand dollar cap so if
someone were to get a fifty one
hundred dollar car title loan
that would fall outside the
statute all together and not be
subject to the cap on the
regulations so going up to ten
thousand dollars makes a much
more comprehensive and make sure
that we're truly are protecting
New Mexicans from these loans
that just to create a lot of
debt so want to highlight those
three elements we feet fill
their essential to achieving the
goal of a true thirty six
percent cap consistent with the
growing number of states and
with the military lending act
that's been the facts since two
thousand six and has helped a
lot of family so we urge your
support and thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Wilkie.
Mr Mr chair and members of the
committee committee my name is
sunny we aqui and I want to
thank you for hearing this bill
and now I'm here with the New
Mexico native load sorry
We're here to support H. B. one
forty nine
When we were working on the
reporting billion in twenty
seventeen
we came out for her Harris up
thirty six percent bill at that
time and.
And I thought that we had pretty
much made it clear that we would
be we are maintaining our rights
to do to make sure that these
loans got
lower down to thirty six percent
so I don't think there was any
thing disingenuous about us
coming back today before this
recording
comes at this time the.
It's a you know it's a less of a
concern of ours you know when
we're waiting on data for loans
that were made at a hundred
seventy five percent.
because we kind of know what
that picture is gonna look like
and so for us you know it is it
more important to make sure that
our communities are watched out
for you know and you know you
have Gallup in Farmington in
these areas that are that are
border towns for
tribal lands we find that in our
tribal communities are being
really
hit hard by the by these types
of loans and so we feel like
it's really important that you
make we make sure that and that
is this kind of protections are
in place for us so with that you
know I just really want to thank
you.
Thank you Sir and miss Karen
Myers welcome.
A good afternoon Mister chairman
thank you and members of the
committee my name is Karen Myers
I want to thank Representative
or or the co sponsor for
bringing this forward I'm a
consumer lawyer in Albuquerque
and before that I headed the
consumer protection division at
the New Mexico attorney
general's office for eight years
until twenty fourteen after that
I worked at the consumer
financial protection bureau or
the C. F. P. B. for a few years
on lending and other consumer
issues so I'm testifying today
with that understanding and that
background about what these
loans due to people when they
take them out.
You've heard from the lenders
that the bill this bill is
premature because we should wait
on more data from the twenty
nineteen data bill we really
don't need to wait we have a
pandemic facing us and people
are in financial crisis and we
already have a lot of data about
what these loans are doing with
these high cost loans are doing
and how they harm New Mexicans.
As a side note the twenty
nineteen data agreement as of it
was described by Ramon Sanchez
was to require lenders to report
data after most of the data
reporting had been stripped from
the twenty seventeen bill this
was needed because there was
very limited data reporting
being done after twenty
seventeen it's also interesting
to note that those lenders who
made loans at one seventy five
or less had gotten themselves
excluded from having to report
anything to FID which is why a
data bill was necessary in the
first place.
Well getting aggregate data from
F. IT will certainly expand our
understanding what we already
know about these loans that are
being made at one seventy five.
What's the business model that's
being used by these wonders what
we know that the business model
is to market refinancing of
loans to people who are having
trouble paying the first loan
after a few months of the loan
being in place and before
majority of loan.
We also know that corporate
products depend on the number of
loans that are refinanced.
And what and the amount of
ancillary products if they're
being offered or sold we know
that the business model for many
lenders in calls holding up but
borrowers and encouraging them
to take out more debt and extend
your loan term.
We also know that the business
model encourages borrowers when
they come in to pay on their
loans but are having trouble as
you've heard about from some of
the consumer stories that the
typical way of responding is to
refinance the mental longer dat
and hired that.
In higher payment of monthly
payments are by weekly payments
of these are the problems that
we see and we already have the
information from about those
data points if you will we have
this information because
attorneys who handle these cases
have reviewed loan files and
often times loan files of
four course is much more
descriptive and clear evidence
of the marketing practices that
doesn't show up in this data
bill information and it's not
going to show and it's not going
to demonstrate some of the
refinancing and what happens and
the freak and when that's done
so that when a loan is
refinanced after they've been
taken it out and they've only
paid for months and then there
extended in the refinance again
the next time they comment
that's what these loan files
show.
It's interesting to point out Mr
chairman that when we all had
the debates about payday lending
one of the issues that
repeatedly got mentioned was the
problem with rollovers payday
loans being rolled over month
after month or bi weekly after
bi weekly well what's
interesting is we're still
seeing rollovers they just call
it refinancing in the
installment loan market in in
the car title markets.
So the business model is based
on the ability to make loans at
high rate to people and when the
borrower can't pay help the
refinance into longer term debt
I don't consider that to be
access to credit I consider that
to be access to debt and
financial crisis.
Also companies who do business
in New Mexico some of them are
publicly traded they have to
report to the SEC or to their
investors and two of those major
companies to do business in New
Mexico have reported that a
majority of the company's loans
were a majority of the loans
generated and the money and
revenue generated is from
refinancing loans over and over
again.
this occurs in multiple years of
reporting.
Lastly we also know from
available information.
From national studies that these
high cost loans and the business
models that are used are harming
New Mexicans.
The national data confirms that
it's interesting to hear the
reference to Richard Cordray and
I would like to say since I
worked with him I think I could
say that the issue is.
Longer term loans can be
beneficial if there is a
determination that the person
has the ability to repay it with
out refinancing the ability to
repay it based on the terms of
the loan when they go into the
loan the first time and what
with the information in the data
we already have shows is that
these loans are dependent on
refinancing the revenue is
dependent on refinancing and
therefore these loans of or
financially risky and create
long term debt as opposed to
solving problems Leslie why now
well we have a pandemic and
people are struggling it's
evident from what we know about
the financial straits that
people are facing that it's time
to stop high cost lenders from
putting people into long term
debt that they can't afford and
that they can't get out of these
loans are at rates that do not
help people a horn people I
really strongly encouraged the
committee to pass this when they
vote and thank you for your
time.
Thank you from up Paul stole and
then on deck is Fred Nathan out
two or three minutes each we
have a seven folks are in the
queue.
Welcome as all.
Good in on mute yourself.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is Paul still I am the president
and chief executive officer of
the credit union association of
New Mexico Representative forty
credit unions and over nine
hundred thousand New Mexicans
who do business with credit
unions every day all we are very
concerned about payday lending
that we can call it that or
predatory lending or lending
that puts people into debt that
they can never pay off.
Everyday we deal with
individuals who come in to try
and get out of that and when
you're struggling under debt
that you can never repay it
seems like there is absolutely
no answer we can see individuals
commend who've taken out a loan
for a few hundred dollars and
now all a few thousand we see
individuals who will go to a
second wonder to pay off the
first lander and even a third
and once the debt bills to a
critical mass New Mexicans are
just beyond belief struggling to
get out of debt the ruins their
lives and ruins their financial
independence we believe that
this bill is been well drafted
we believe that the.
Sanchez about a great job thirty
six percent works for us we
believe it is a good right we
also believe that having the
prime rate float to the US which
will allow the cost of the
credit to go up and down
depending on the crime rate does
take into account the cost of
funds to make the smaller dollar
loans so it is a well written is
well put together it is
something that credit unions
support and we look forward to
being able to help New Mexicans
finally get out of this awfully
oppressive that that small
dollar loans have put them in we
support house bill one forty
nine and ask you to join us
thank you Mr chairman thank you
of Mr Fred Nathan and then Kurt
regular.
Thank you Mr chairman my name
spread Nathan I'm the executive
director of think New Mexico
which is a bipartisan think tank
serving New Mexicans we spent
last year studying predatory
lending in New Mexico and how to
fix it and you may recall that
we sent you a report we send a
report to all the legislators
with our findings back in
October and I'd like to make
three points based on that
report the first one is that
these reforms in house bill one
forty nine are not new in fact
house bill one forty nine simply
brings back a law that worked
well for decades let me explain
in the mid nineteen fifties your
predecessors and the Legislature
enacted the small loan act and
the bank installment loan act to
cure the same abuses we are
seeing today and the legislature
in its wisdom cap small loans
back in the mid nineteen fifties
at thirty six percent.
Thirty six percent what worked
very well until an accident of
history intervened and that was
the double digit inflation of
the late nineteen seventies and
the early nineteen eighty eight
in response the legislature
abolished the thirty six percent
cap and the predatory lending
industry poured into New Mexico.
Representative Herrera is bill
does is simply bring us back to
a period that worked well with
one big change which the the
prior witness talked about which
is time this to the prime if we
re enter a period of double
digit inflation my second point
is that this bill will benefit
local economies in New Mexico
which of course is the mission
of your committee.
In two thousand nineteen
according to the regulation and
licensing division there was six
hundred and sixty six million
dollars worth of small loans
made and much of those profits
from that were exported out of
the state we know that because
they are in terms of thank you
Mexico trace the five hundred
and sixty one loans stores in
New Mexico back to their
corporate headquarters and
determined that eighty five
percent are located outside of
New Mexico.
If you pass house bill one forty
nine it will cap loans at thirty
six percent say of a hundred and
seventy five percent and those
savings will go back into the
pockets of low income New
Mexicans they won't stay there
long because low income New
Mexicans we know live paycheck
to paycheck and that money will
be spent immediately on local
businesses like restaurants who
are also suffering right now.
So think of this bill as helping
not only the most powerless
among us but also as a free
market relief package for New
Mexico New Mexican local
businesses like restaurants who
will benefit from this
legislation along with their
customers and it won't cost the
government government attending.
Final point what will happen if
you in impact house bill one
forty nine that's that's the big
question now the lobbyists on
the other side tell you that if
you pass this legislation they
will all go out of business and
consumers want to have access to
credit.
But that's contradicted by
what's actually happened in
other states have gone from very
very high interest rates to
thirty six percent and that
includes Montana and South
Dakota who also have thirty six
percent all inclusive rates.
Now the other side is not
completely wrong some companies
will leave the state for example
world acceptance corporation
which we profiled in our report
they're the second largest
lender in New Mexico for small
loans and their business model
as they told the securities and
exchange commission.
And it's in writing is to target
states with very high rates and
low regulation of the sixteen
states that they do business in
New Mexico is their second
largest.
Market and so it really wouldn't
be a tragedy if they left New
Mexico but other companies will
say and even expands the money
name names here one main
financial opportune these are
responsible lenders their
business model is built around
lending at thirty six percent
one main financial for examples
in forty four states it's a high
volume low profit model and
they're doing quite well if you
look at their stock price on
Wall Street they will pick a is
so if you pass this bill they
will pick up market share
they'll take over leases from
their competitors who leave the
state like world acceptance
corporation and I want to note
here they're not testifying
today they're not opposed to
this bill you need to understand
that this industry is not
modeled politically opposed to
this solution.
And finally credit unions you
just heard from Mr stall in
Montana when they brought their
very high interest rates down to
thirty six percent credit unions
there reported a twenty six
percent increase in their small
loan business in the first year
after they brought their
interest rate down to thirty six
percent that's exactly what
would happen in New Mexico and I
want to remind you about the
history of credit unions they
were started by business leaders
to protect their employees from
loan sharks that's why they were
first invented and this is their
mission and a special shout out
to why don't we take credit
union.
This already offering a special
loan product to New Mexicans who
are trying to pay off loans from
predatory lenders Guadalupe
credit union stands ready to
pick up market share.
So in closing is Senate bill one
forty nine passes low income New
Mexicans will not lose access to
credit they will instead reap
great savings and those savings
will be spent on local
reputable businesses thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Kirk regular and
then in the on deck JT Matthews.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee my name is Kurt
record on the director of
littering after advocacy
administrative New Mexico within
us administrative also support
speaks on behalf The New Mexico
conference of churches and we
too are members of the New
Mexicans for fair lending
coalition I'm here today to
offer our support for H. B. one
forty nine first I want to thank
Representative Herrera and
Representative Garrett for
introducing this bill and for
being champions of this effort
on a personal note just as
Representative Garrett shared I
also had a family member who
turned to the store front
lending company.
For a loan and fell into this
endless trapped in a cycle of
debt that was almost nearly
impossible for him to get out
of.
Mr chair convincing arguments
have already been made by
proponents before me but I would
simply like to add or point out
as best as Representative
Herrera mentioned that there's
just one store front loan
company for every three thousand
residents in New Mexico but
indeed in Gallup there is one
for every five hundred residents
there is simply no debating that
triple interest digit interest
rates hurt our communities of
color and those most vulnerable
in terms of income here in New
Mexico and I would argue that
now is the time to act in this
midst of this great economic
crisis that we're in in theirM
midst of where even more New
Mexicans find themselves having
to turn to storefront lenders
meet the basic needs Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you for this time to speak to
you today and I urge your
support for H. B. one forty
nine.
Thank you Mr Jenny Matthews
followed by share and corona.
Hi Mr chair and and thank you
committee members as well my
name is Judy Matthews I'm with
Mexico working families party.
Where here in strong support for
this legislation here today I
want to thank Representative
for fighting this fight from the
beginning of your term of being
elected and the co sponsors
Roybal Caballero and and Garrett
for co sponsoring this important
legislation there been many
important facts and reasons to
support this legislation before
me and so I won't repeat them
but I hope that today you really
move New Mexico forward and vote
in favor of this legislation
it's totally appropriate for the
state to cap interest rates to
protect our citizens and make
sure that basic needs can still
be met and and figuring out
solutions for that in other ways
rather than abusing arses and so
thank you very much and please
support this bill today.
Thank you Mr on a.
You have the floor.
Thank you madam chair as system
members of the committee
committee my name is Shane
corona the senior policy and
government affairs associate
with the center for responsible
lending thank you for the
opportunity to voice my support
for H. B. one four nine which
would put an end to the use of
the predatory interest rates and
thank you to the Sanchez for
bringing this important
legislation board the center for
responsible lending is a
nonprofit nonpartisan research
and policy organization
dedicated to protecting family
wealth by working to limit
abusive financial practices
zero of the filleted of selfhelp
community financial developments
to shin who for over thirty
years has helped low income
rural communities of color
create asset building
opportunities.
So as long been warning against
abuses of predatory lending in
recent years we've noticed an
industry shift away from
traditional payday loans to
longer term larger dollar
installment loans.
Installment loans do not provide
access to credit in reality they
exploit Madam racial and
economic disparities that cannot
be solved with the triple digit
interest rate loan.
Consumers states without
predatory lending have a lot of
options to help make ends meet
and at a fraction of the cost.
This guy doesn't fall in
interest rates are capped.
As mentioned before New Mexico
can lead to other states.
Sample of this and for the
purposes of this I'm gonna and
speak about South Dakota.
In two thousand sixteen South
Dakota captive small dollar loan
interest rates at thirty six
percent inclusive of all fees
and charges.
And research has shown that
credit is available and the
credit economy for individuals
in South Dakota stable in South
Dakota payday alternative loans
and unsecured consumer loans are
made available by credit unions
at much lower interest rates of
eighteen and twenty eight
percent as have since increased
in volume.
Any community based
organizations also provide short
term loans needed at community
development financial
institutions have provided
twelve million dollars in loans
and created or retained over
eight hundred jobs.
They even provide a credit
builder small loan product which
carries an eleven percent
interest rate for loans up to
five thousand dollars this is a
responsible financial products
help folks get out of debt and
build wealth.
These high cost debt traps are
better off saving billions of
dollars each year as such we
urge the committee to pass H. B.
one four nine to protect New
Mexicans from predatory and
abusive financial practices
thank you.
Thank you we'll hear from
Dan SantaFe and then read on.
This is set up okay welcome.
Okay.
Well Griego I'm the chief
financial empowerment officer
at.
Your are you pressed mute you
inadvertently pressed mute so
what in on.
Well Griego I'm the chief
financial empowerment officer at
one of the credit union which is
a low income designated
community financial.
Institution we are here to
please support this bill to
protect our communities my
primary focus in my organization
as financial counseling and
financial education the counties
part of New Mexico for the last
eight years.
During this time I have
witnessed time and time again
the negative impacts of
predatory lending that affects
our communities.
During this time of the pandemic
maybe this effort more immediate
and necessary as these places
are often referred to as the
lenders of last resort.
I'm genuinely concerned that
these types of letters will jump
on this opportunity to push
these predatory loans and how it
will impact our economic
recovery during the pandemic
I heard from others opposing
that data should be analyzed
however with the pandemic we
should be aware that this data
maybe prolong to our queue.
Why their presence is necessary
include but are not limited to
that no one else will rent to
them
people with bad credit that they
offered assistance to help
people but I'm not really sure
if any of these
statements are true.
and they do say that we have to
charge a higher rate and to
compensate for the large losses
to me this means that we need to
review the leading practices to
make it a more sound and
affordable so that there's less
people defaulting on.
We created a predatory
definitely flown.
we've been offering for the last
three years.
During that time we saved New
Mexicans over six hundred
thousand interests since that
program started right now we
hold seventy one of these loans
currently two hundred thirty
five thousand of our loans are
are in this category.
we find that when we're we're
working with members in this
financially situation that is
necessary to include financial
counseling and education an
emergency savings of ongoing
support to help them improve
their financial situation I
don't see any of this from any
of the above mentioned lenders
that are opposing this bill.
Titles are extremely risky and
take assets
they say that no one else will
lead to them however we've been
landing for over sixty years of
in the northern New Mexico area
and I've always have some type
of alternatives to predatory
loan.
this.
Now also finds the practice of
keeping people and repeated
farming cycles I think where
these are located low income
areas and I feel like those are
specially targeted
and I don't really see that
there is a.
Positive outcome having them in
those communities and charging
the most or credit
the easy process with limited
information in order to obtain
funds are causing our numbers to
track on and actually damage
their credit more than help a
build it
they usually referred to them
whether it's a quick thing and
they don't really have time to
think about the repercussions
and that's where we come and we
want to be that that bridge to
help these families that sounded
and affordable loans access to
credit is not only important but
it's also a human right to have
fair access to financial
services.
Representative credit union
offers support to all of these
folks with our programs and so I
think I'm just getting a lot of
what the previous opponents that
I just want to make sure that.
The committee knows that there
are organizations that are
willing to help that are willing
to do the leg work and this
recap really shouldn't do that
Questionable if for anyone that
works in fighting.
Thank you for your time
committee I appreciate are your
year and I hope that you will be
read this bill.
Thank you and I'll hear from a
re done but in introduce
yourself.
Welcome so on your devices look
to on mute your I believe you
unmuted now.
We cannot hear you go check the
microphone on your device.
For some reason we can't hear
you so there's a stay on the
line Redondo give it a try we
have one more person who wishes
to speak that might actually
welcome.
You're good to go.
Can you hear me Mr chair okay
all right thank you so much a
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee I'm the
director of advancement for
prosperity works who is also a
member of the New Mexicans for
fair lending coalition
prosperity works appreciate the
opportunity to provide comment
before the committee in strong
support of house bill one forty
nine and we are exceedingly
grateful for the bill's sponsors
property works as a twenty year
old Albuquerque based nonprofit
that grows the capacity of
individuals and organizations
through asset building resources
including fair lending options
which pertains to house bill one
forty nine for limited income
individuals or those without a
develop credit history the
savings offered by employer
based learning models such as
the true connect program with
which prosperity works partners
and equitable low interest loans
can mean the difference between
financial security and financial
ruin the current interest rate
of a hundred seventy five
percent is a debilitating the
high predatory interest rate
they can quickly thrust hard
working limited income borrowers
into an inescapable deathtrap as
we've heard New Mexico has one
the highest interest rate caps
on storefront loans and the
country moreover triple digit
interest rates have communities
of color and members of tribes
and pueblos the hardest in fact
sixty five percent of lenders
are located within fifteen miles
of native populations all told
hundreds of millions of dollars
are being extracted from limited
income families and leaving our
state each year because of
predatory lenders with the
pandemic and its associated
economic downturn reducing the
interest rate cap on storefront
loans from a hundred seventy
five percent to an all inclusive
thirty six percent this time
more than ever as is increasing
more equitable lending
alternatives like to connect for
large scale employers.
For example many employers
across New Mexico and across all
sectors have adopted true
connect with wonderful success
including multiple counties such
as Bernalillo Dona Ana major
cities such as Santa Fe
Albuquerque in Los crucis major
educational institutions such as
Santa Fe public schools in
northern New Mexico college and
multi scalar businesses and
organizations when families have
access to a more equitable
credit source as a reasonable
interest rate and are not
reliant on high interest
predatory lenders the
socioeconomic advantages ripple
through their respective
communities enhancing household
and community health reducing
the interest rate on storefront
loans from a hundred seventy
five percent to an all inclusive
cap of thirty six percent as an
equitable path for helping
ensure the socio economic
solvency of limited income
households across New Mexico
especially as we collectively
rebuild New Mexico post comment
so prosperity works is again
please to see it house bill one
forty nine and we stand and
strong support thank you so much
thank you Sir and pronounce your
last name for us it is Marky
Marky welcome any last the folks
who wish to address the
committee raise your hand now.
For the record this fifty four
folks as attendees and there's
eighteen persons in the panel we
have a couple more quick
comments submitted each.
you go for against at this point
Mr David Humphreys.
Welcome hi.
Look.
Mr chairman thank you committee
my name is David Humphreys on
consumer protection or.
Impacts for thirty years I live
in Santa Fe I have first hand
knowledge of security finance
the biggest.
My biggest in this market
biggest in the country or one of
the biggest players in the
market I find very interesting
that they're not here our world
finance another major lender
here I'm here addressed and
specifically and not necessarily
a local lenders I would say also
that everybody heard from that
was in so our guests this bill
as a financial centre all the
paper.
But I actually can help by these
loan products from my experience
looking at loan files my
experience helping people that
are trapped in debt I have a few
comments my personal experience
to make a not a policy personal
what you all do your job but
from what I have seen.
Lenders are you go to
extraordinary lengths to keep
people trapped that they
congratulate their review very
closely by the management and
management hi I sent
congratulates them for keeping
people in loans even when they
have I can I've seen one census
represent a fifty thousand
dollar workers compensation
settlement and a person read
alone never congratulated for
keeping on this stat.
The model of the industry is
about trapping people in that we
had testimony in a case where.
The employee witness said that
people don't leave this place
they don't have the staff here
unless they dire file
bankruptcy.
That borrowing money from one of
the since these financial
princes are these bankruptcy or
death or financial ruin and that
this stress on families is on
believable when they have it you
know and and and and for for the
we've always had poor this entry
is not going to solve poverty
what what they're doing is
they're.
Giving credit are exploited
terms to people that are
desperate and and people some
people don't need credit.
The portraying this as if you
know it's great yeah we want
help one person get a new water
heater well that would be great
if that's what they did with the
loan terms of so onerous insult
inexplicable you the the
consumer can understand loan
terms I am the president of
security finance on the witness
stand a master could you please
explain to us if a customer came
in want to pay this phone off
after thirty days how that would
work out.
She couldn't do it she doesn't
just present the company
could not Senator loan terms or
she knew did want to tell us so
the idea that that.
You know if you are a dollar or
you know.
Are you a hundred dollars and
it's only a dollar that that
argument doesn't like fly
And if it's a business cannot
make money at thirty six percent
loan.
You have to wonder what what why
still business them in the oven
the agency to make a lot of
really about loans and and once
it should not be made.
We've also seen people take
security for for loans like the
family Bible or a personal
sentimental item like a family
violence or something and they
do that not because they want a
security they want to use it to
scare the person the paying to
put fear in our lives and we've
seen here in New Mexico in Las
Vegas.
A lonely alone company.
Chase somebody the place to work
the former they were fired.
You know these incredibly
extreme collection practices to
make people pay them and and
this follows founded on the idea
of never let him go you are in
debt for life concluding that
people are are are it Americans
whose first language is not
English so I'm in favor of.
Capping.
This credit to a reasonable rate
of thirty six percent thank you
for allowing me to speak at the
time Mr Humphries last week
about the settlement as welcome.
Thank you so much I work
alongside my Santa at one of the
credit union and I just wanted
to share a really quick story of
one of the many many vigils that
come to us this man was in a
very desperate state because he
had a total loan was one of the
title companies and Santa Fe and
he was about to lose his vehicle
because you can't afford to pay
the the human anyway was too
high he couldn't afford it and
this is just from the long
contract that he was able to
provide any the annual
percentage rate on the loan was
a hundred and sixty seven
percent the amount that you
financed was three thousand one
hundred dollars the finance
charge within three years is
going to be twelve thousand six
hundred sixty seven dollars at
the end of the loan being a
total of fifteen thousand seven
hundred and seventy two dollars
for a three thousand dollar low.
Thank you.
Thank you very much and I want
to thank everyone I know that
this bill is very close to home
of for everyone.
and we appreciate the decorum
of.
In arguing the ideas as opposed
to.
You know who pays who are things
of that nature this this
committee.
Intellectually you know
deciphered the arguments not the
not the the motives but before
we go gonna let the sponsor have
the final word but I'm gonna
take a chair structure for a
very.
selfless plug no matter whether
you're for this bill are against
your bill I look forward to your
public support for house bill
one sixty three financial
literacy and high schools
financial this in high schools
Representative Madrid my asked
us Powdrell at all so please
look for your public support on
that bill and talk to your
clients and your organizations
for their formal support thank
you and then I'll Representative
but I don't want to take a quick
set for the final where they
will go to committee
we thank all the public for for
their participation.
Thank you so much Mr chair I'd
like to thank all the witnesses
today and certainly the
committee.
I want to talk about house bill
fifty that was passed in two
thousand nine hundred nineteen
the study.
When I answer that I have
because a lot of people say oh
we should wait for the study you
know they're fifty ways to leave
your lover and their fifty ways
to kill the bill a study is one
of the you know I and and now
that study was to you know to
say that we could really do this
deep dive I I think lots of
people have done a deep dive I
think you can see by the
testimony today that.
Thirty six percent cap is the
best way to go ahead and I think
that's what we should do I just
want to answer that question
because as it seems come up over
and over again
From the opponents of this
legislation of what you all
should know is that senator
Neville souls is caring this he
he he sponsored for C. sponsored
this bill in the Senate first it
was it Senate bill sixty six.
I hope you take Senate bill
sixty six up to the mountain and
plants the flag on top I really
do.
I'm his bill will be heard
tomorrow
and I will gladly carry his bill
in the house and I told him so I
really would.
I carry this legislation similar
legislation and in two thousand
nineteen and I'm gonna tell all
of you.
The opposition to this bill is
formidable don't.
Take that take that to the bank
the opposition to this bill is
formidable I had a strong
progressive legislators come to
me and committee and say come to
me before committee and say I
cannot vote for you on this
bill.
I made a promise I cannot vote
for you on this bill I and
members the other committees and
before the vote in tell me later
I had to leave that committee I
had to leave that community I
don't know this but I know this
I know that elections were won
and lost over this bill some
people have called the small
loan installment companies the
big bill for the legislature
there is a lot of money backing.
Backing this so I
want you all to know I passed a
house bill ninety nine
yesterday and C. pack I voted
three to two.
I do that I did that because I
think we need to back up ladies
and gentlemen I do.
I know how tough this is going
to be so while I hope the Senate
bill sixty six gets through the
Senate and it comes over to the
house and I hope I hope that I
can carry.
Senator sells legislation in the
house I'm holding on to HB
ninety nine just in case.
We can amended before it gets to
Judiciary it won't be the same
as one forty nine or Senate bill
sixty six but we can certainly
improve what we have and will
have another shot at the Senate
sometimes as legislators you
know what I went through a hard
battle in two thousand nineteen
I was a freshman and I I thought
everybody would vote for this
bill I really did I got spit up
should have thrown against the
wall
but what doesn't kill you makes
you stronger and so here I am
again.
And.
I am I just want to let
everybody know that because.
This is gonna be a fight and
this is just the beginning.
In closing Mister speaker I'd
like to remind this body.
The law on its majesty prevents
the rich and poor alike from
sleeping under a bridge for
stealing a loaf of bread.
The New Mexico law in its
majesty prevents the rich import
allows rich and poor alike to
take out a loan and hundred and
seventy five percent.
And with Mr chair I stand for
questions.
Thank you so very much
represented a great presentation
and and let me just ofpercent
folks at home and I want to
thank you for your wisdom and
maturity with regards to the
strategy so Senate bill sixty
six is identical to house bill
one forty nine and it it's and.
Like everyone has their own
style right so if I'm doing a
bill that has just one or two
words are changes a paragraph I
would may be inclined to do one
through both chambers so that
when that second ball gets over
those last ten days your body
grease the wheels for bills as
complicated as this not only in
textual statutory construction
as well as just the policy
implications are.
I don't see the I think that is
bad strategy to drop to bills
but I know there's a lot of
folks who support this so the
god of the Gulf her our rules
can only you know formally
endorse one bill and so the gov
of the cubs initials on Senate
bill sixty six and we await that
bill if that bill were to come
over he would come to this very
committee house bill ninety nine
as you mentioned pass it back
yesterday it's a different bill
it's a different bills like I
think it's a seven page bill
dealing with the same subject
matter if this bill were to go
over it would also be and house
judiciary judiciary is one of
the few committees that has the
culture of combining bill
numbers.
But but that's not necessary
here because you combine bill
numbers when there's two
different Sanchez in the same
section of law that this one the
same sponsor and so ninety nine
because it's the same subject
matter theoretically ninety nine
could morph into one forty nine
or vice versa so I think just
strategically and procedurally
and because we're in the same
world we want to have a robust
hearing we're gonna go back to
the committee but a ninety nine
is in House Judiciary and
cynical sixty six the house
awaits its passage but we want
to have this conversation here
to educate the members and give
folks a chance to address that
the legislature we'll go to
members of the committee
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative headed up for
bringing this bill forward
I've of the sentence committee
for three terms now so I think
I've heard something in some
variation of this type of bill
for the last six years of
becoming well versed with that
and and and well versed with the
people that are both proponents
and opponents of the bill Mr
chair and representative
couple things you know it it
just you know I I remember
distinctly from from the last we
we passed a bill once a couple
sessions ago
actually there was a deal cut
between the proponents of the
bill in the industry and and I
feel like that was repeated
several times today in testimony
do you feel that way
Representative had a that there
was a deal in that that we were
gonna wait til til figures and
and reporting came back before
we acted on this type of
legislation again or is that not
the way that you sought Mr Mr
chair and representative
Baldonado I see I I certainly
think there was a deal that I I
totally agree except I wasn't
part of that deal here in two
thousand seventeen so like I
said very naively might be I
came to this I came to this
legislature in two thousand
nineteen because I've heard a
million stories you know what
that kid a computer and really
proud of it and then having this
truck taken away a woman putting
a thousand dollars on a home I
mean barring a thousand dollars
and having your home repossessed
I mean it was just story after
story after story and I I didn't
know all these deals over at I
think we I need I think the deal
was made with the devil and I
think we should move on.
And Mr chairman and Mr chair
Representative procedure candor
on that you know it in this body
it is things move around very
quickly and I've I've seen this
you're more than once do you
know where you have a situation
without we felt like we dealt
with something already in our
we're seeing it again and you
know I can I can agree and and
you know anecdotally we hear all
sorts of stories about all sorts
of things you know I'm I'm a
real estate practitioner I've I
rent rental homes for for a
living and I and there's a bill
in the system that the
proportion that that all
property managers are the devil
and we're taking advantage of
everybody during COVID or taking
them out on the street and we're
doing all these bad things
because when I read the bill the
solutions that that the bill
offers you know I feel like a
direct attack on my industry and
I know that that's what these
folks that that are opposing
your bill feel the same thing
they go home to their families
they feed their families out
this this business that they run
and you know Mr chair
representative you know former
speaker incentives mentioned the
city but when and where I grew
up and and I know who's talking
about I know these people that
run that business and I know
that they've been successful and
they've helped many generations
of families over the years and
you know I feel like you know
it's it's the one bad apple that
ruins the whole cart we keep
seeing it over and over in our
legislature and it's just it's
frustrating to me because you
know I want to see this type of
of industry exist for the need
that exists out there there are
people that that might wake up
on a on a Monday morning
realizing the you know Google
grant to take care of something
and they can go somewhere to do
that
if that if that business doesn't
exist if we if we legislate them
out of business Mr chairman
president.
Where are those people going to
go borrow money Representative I
mean do you do you have an
answer for us on that.
Mr chair representative
Baldonado I think I do I I I
struggled with that too I mean
it it's not like everybody in
this industry is terrible it's
not like every lobbyist
representing them as a terrible
person I I understand that I
understand the need for cash
I talked to I talked to them
A small.
Installment loan person during
two thousand nineteen and I.
And you know she's very she's
very proud of our business issue
should be have been in the
family have kids were in the
business it was a it was a good
business I mean they did help
people and she was very proud
because they have good health
insurance and they have just
provided all their employees
with four oh one K. very proud
she is very proud and rightfully
so it is not easy to run a small
business I understand.
she said that they took a look
at this bill and last year of
this it was like my house bill
ninety nine it was at thirty six
percent and
you know that's really all we
change thirty six percent and
she said she had her son in law
look at the numbers and they
looked at the numbers and she
said you know we decided we
could do it thirty six percent
if we we wouldn't we would no
longer be able to make loans of
three hundred we can make loans
at five hundred and thirty six
percent right because what she
said is here's what they thought
they were a locally owned
business and been and in this
area for generations her father
owned it she owned it now and
her kids were taking it over and
she said what they thought is
that the bad actors would leave
the state and they would in fact
have more business that's really
what she said so I think it I
think she said it could be done
at thirty six percent I'm and
the I certainly appreciated that
it's not my intention to put
everybody out of business it's
my intention to get these rates
down so that people
can afford these loans and Mr
chair representative I do.
Enjoy that answer because I it
makes sense you know there are
there there are certain things
at a work in certain business
model are not everybody that
we're that's that's opposing
your bill today is it in a
cookie cutter business some some
can do you know if things a
different way and and make it
work on maybe some have lower
overhead maybe some and we have
different opportunities to serve
people in a different way but I
do know that there's there's a
substantial amount of of often
online kind of off shore
operations going on the do the
same thing and you know I it
feels like we we may be pushing
yeah we close the local mom and
pop shop we push that the
demands not going to go away
they're still gonna be people
that are gonna find themselves
in in a in a financial pinch
they need a few hundred Bucks to
get to get them through
and and I don't feel like you
know as a state or the country
we have a good grasp on
regulating those those
industries that that operate
outside of the boundaries of
this country
you know there's.
There's there's gonna be that
situation where for these folks
are still looking for those
dollars and I don't think that
bye bye clamping down so to
speak you know this aggressive
with this bill I I'm sure
there's some sort of middle
ground somewhere between where
were for these practitioners can
still operate and folks can
still seek in a short term learn
loan they can get them through
and we heard Mr chair from
couple of folks from the credit
union industry it sounded like
maybe there that maybe they're
the answer I don't know if they
want to do short term loans you
know active credit card for
crying out loud I mean you know
most of those are fifteen to
thirty percent interest and you
know my my oldest is nineteen
now in college and she gets a
credit card off every other day
and and and actually you know
got a card and and and it was
where is because the Senate
locations I just want to use it
you know like because it's shiny
and pretty and I'm like well you
have to if to teach that in
pointing to
Mr chair so shameless plug of
his other bill the the financial
literacy bill I I I like that
bill Representative and and Mr
chairman I do it we talked about
that bill in House education
that in the bill hasn't even
come House education we move
because we're talking about it
being a requirement high school
so I think that's a good
direction we could head in terms
of teaching our children are
next generations how to balance
the checkbook or how do we do it
now and in the virtual world
because it's not a checkbook
anymore how they look at home
loan how they consider a credit
card or how they consider an
automobile purchase whether it's
from a buy here pay here lot or
you know a more you know
traditional you know credit
union or a bank that's going to
make that long and how that
looks you know I mentioned the
buy here pay here lots the that
industry has thrived for years
and has gotten people what they
need an automobile when they
need whether they have bad
credit or whatever it is you
know the commercials what is at
the back credits.
credit no credit we can do that
they get it but I think we need
to have that personal
responsibility intertwined into
this and I and I like other
options rather than just simply
saying that this industry's bat
and they're bad players and
maybe you're not saying that but
it feels like they're saying
that and it feels like these
people that run these businesses
on the bad end of the deal if we
pass this bill so thank you for
president in it's a good robust
discussion and that that's all I
have today thank you Mr chairman
and thank you representative
thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you representative I
believe.
Representative Johnson was next.
Was it Representative Martinez.
I think it was represented
Martinez you're in the upper
left corner of my screen so.
Representative Martinez very
gracious Representative Martinez
is that.
Thank you so very very gracious
I agree
thank you Mr chairman and
Representative under percent of
Garrett I don't know if you
still with us but thank you for
a very robust discussion you
know I've actually worked on
this issue for for quite a long
time this issue was one of the
reasons why I sorry going to the
legislative session in my
advocacy
and it became pretty apparent
early on that you know thirty
six percent was not something
that the legislature at least
back then
was very interested in and so we
shifted some of our strategies
to both use local zoning code in
this case in Albuquerque to
limit the number of of of
Of these this is licenses.
Through the code because as was
explained by both sides actually
you know part of the profit
margin is to refinance those
loans and so see that again is a
pretty pretty strong.
Zoning regulation for you know
small loans small lenders.
that has I think
allowed for
for more protections for for
borrowers the other strategy
that the the very proud to be
part of in my professional life.
Is working to find alternatives
to these loan products and I
forget which one of the
commenters mentioned a couple of
them but there's there are
products out there there's the
opportunity product which I
think it's it's cap that like
twenty five percent they're not
fit out of California I believe
other storefront lenders as far
as we can tell very fair and and
like I said very
very low compared we speaking
interest rates others also the
true connect program
which the good folks at
prosperity works have been
closed while working closely
with and these are loans that
are made through employers and
so they they've gone I believe
that occurred yet believe in
your county
I believe there are a number for
of government organizations that
are providing these loans to
people.
And then the loan is repaid
through a payroll deduction
again very up front very fair
very relatively low interest
rate I mean it's still in the
twenties which still a very I I
would go to get that loan but
but it's certainly there is an
option and then the one that I'm
really proud of
is a product that is being
offered in the credit union and
it is still in the piloting
stages but essentially what time
send it does work with community
organizations organizations that
have relationships with people
and based on that relationship
with that individual of those
individuals can secure loans I I
believe up to ten thousand
dollars cap to any five percent
interest rate let me say that
again five percent interest rate
no credit checks and that stuff
is based on the relationship
unfortunately it's not the
widely available product because
like I said it's still in the
pilot in the pilot stage and
it's also a little
reserved for a number of
organizations are part of the
pilot but you know ideally these
are what exactly would
eventually be expanded to other
credit unions and other lenders.
You know I I think that to me as
I was saying earlier it became
apparent that
you know we as a as a community
needed to provide.
Alternatives because we just
couldn't afford to wait every
legislative session for for the
eight to act.
You know we I'm proud that we've
been able to do that and we've
been able to offer those
alternatives for people
having said that you know I
think that also
you know to to to the folks who
who spoke against this bill you
know some of the industry folks
and and we we know I got a lot
of emails from folks saying Hey
I work for one of these
companies my job is at stake.
I mean quite frankly if if any
piece of legislation is going to
drive your business out of
business your business model is
probably a little bit faulty
because we as as much power as
we like to think we have we
don't have that much power but
we hear that a lot you know what
whether it's environmental
regulation whether it's finance
regulation you're gonna put my
business you gonna drive my
business out you know of that
and then I just to me that you
know that this is not a good
argument.
So.
You know understanding that
there Senate bill sixty six that
thinks what you said that has
the governor's endorsement on it
and that you'll be waiting for
that bill to come over you know
for us to act on it I do want to
also say that there are people
I'm in this virtual room
both in opposition and in
support of this bill who have
come together in the past to
work and collaborate
and you know the people who take
policy making and policy
development very seriously and
people who are not driven by
ideologies
by rigid ideologies one way or
the other you know very
pragmatic folks who who
understand the value of
compromise you know I was not
crazy about voting for the one
hundred and seventy five percent
interest rate you know three
years ago whenever that was but
hundreds any I was way better
than.
you know and and I would vote
yes on that bill any day
I feeding now we have another
opportunity another bite at the
apple to do right by New
Mexicans but to do right by
consumers in a way that is
balanced in a way that you know
really help support the economy
of save New Mexico you know my
my biggest concern is that the
the these these payments may be
made on interest and whatnot
if they're not seen here where
are they going and when they
leave the state they're not
helping anyone so I look forward
to further discussion I look
forward to to to your work
Representative Anderson Garrett
to the work of Senators souls to
work in the advocates the work
of folks in the industry to to
figure out how we're gonna move
forward because we do need to
move forward in action is not
going to be in an alternative I
don't think and and so I hope to
see some action and to see some
progress on this front
this session thank you Mr chair
and and thank you
representatives.
Thank you representative
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Herrera for
bringing this bill forward along
with your team and thank you
chair Martinez or talking about.
Strategies and alternatives and
resources and you know how we
can come to a solution and I
would be remiss if I didn't talk
about my situation in this area
because I live in Gallup and I
represent Gallup and
This is definitely a concern in
my area in so many ways for so
many people in so many
situations.
And Alek representative Garrett
I have first hand experience
with one of my family members
who received a loan locally and
paid and paid and paid on that
loan and never saw the end of
the light at the end of the
tunnel or how how we say that.
Never saw the light at the end
of the tunnel.
Finally we got some money
together and we paid off the
loan and we asked do not ever do
that again.
If you need help come to us and
we'll figure it out.
But that's not the case for
everyone.
So
I don't oppose anyone
building their credit and I am
for expiring alone.
And I don't
I don't bash my Gallup community
because I have to live in Gallup
I live in Gallup with the loan
customers.
Come to me and talk about their
dire situation and their
experiences and I live in the
community with the.
Local businesses local
businesses but I also conduct
other businesses but I'll also
conduct business with those
businesses in other areas.
So you know just trying to be
diplomatic to you know talk
about a solution.
I do know that many people do
get trapped.
Long lifelong dance.
One of the new situations is
COVID so now we have our people
who are receiving their stimulus
dollars.
Or hardship paying on loans that
they received.
years prior to the pandemic when
they should be using their
stimulus and hardship money four
PP equipment for food for needs
to get through the COVID but now
they're paying on loans.
So you know it is a trap.
And and I'm not you know I I
don't want to tell.
Well how to spend their money
back but it is a concern.
And so you know North Dakota
South Dakota they have a large
native American population and
they continue to
Continue to develop their
business so you know maybe we
should follow their
Their solution their their their
program.
I think that it was hard for me
to hear that some people are
getting loans for that there and
basic necessities I don't think
we should have to get loans for
food or aerials are things of
that nature.
And to my constituents who come
to me for that situation you
know we have resources within
the Navajo Nation within our
veterans department within our
social services.
For those types of situations
so.
I guess I'm.
I think.
I'd like to CS four the
opportunity for our people to
acquire good credit.
Real credit and not just
lifelong.
and I think that's going to just
continue to take.
Continue to take work continue
to take conversations work
together with the industry.
I think we all understand the
situation and like I said
there's just so many situations
so many people in so many ways
this affects my community so
with that I just want to say
thank you for working on this
bill and
I look forward to continued
working on it as well thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Dow.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
are you able to hear me.
We are it's kind of tough but we
can hear you okay I'm I'm trying
to your place real quick thank
you.
But it's coming as well so I'm
just have a lot of technical
issues.
Hearing community in order to
to work it was better the last.
Shoots okay.
Good please.
I'm.
Questions for Cramer can answer
them in regards to the bill I
did not see or if you could
point me to the bill aside from
the the fixed annual rates at
what other fees fees I just gone
online as we were hearing the
bill and look at different types
of these that could be applied
there that's like application
fees and the fees may still be
processing service fees
underwriting fees causing these
difficulties.
So people charging Pirtle
insurance so does this so so if
we do this this is bill also
approved other people's fees to
make up.
Mr chair and Representative Dow
yes thirty C. in this bill that
thirty six percent cap off the
so it has to be inclusive of all
those fees so you can have an
insurance policy you can't have
a.
Occasion that you can't have any
of those fees at thirty six
percent would be all inclusive.
Six percent is based on the C.
R..
Yeah.
Representative on APR cap art is
all inclusive yes for for the
loan include itself.
If.
Representative Baldonado ask who
else will lend to them but I
don't think I heard an answer I
mean this is
I think what this bill this week
and I have in past sessions and
so I I.
This to people under with a
credit score under three hundred
where would they go.
Representative and Mr chair and
and Representative.
I think chairman.
Mr chair representative daft you
know yeah is it it's probably
tough for them now and it did
they all get a loan from a small
landing company now I mean that
a small loan installment company
it's not like they land
everybody that comes in the door
either so yes is it is I'm not
I'm not going to say this is
going to solve credit for
everybody in the state it's not
it's gonna limiting us and
people from getting a lot of the
I understand that and I think
that I agree with the
Representative have you Martinez
we are proud of it we probably
need to look at other mechanisms
where we can where we can help
people I mean we're certainly
doing enough on the tax side to
on the you know lower income tax
rate for families working
families tax fed a lot of things
that we worked on trying to get
more money into low income
communities.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Herrera.
Well the technology today.
Senator
Wirth twenty nineteen session I
think we all through the twenty
nineteen session where there is
a compromise for the data so I'm
going to ask some questions we
received an answer and that's
why we know this bill is still
necessary so don't will provide
correct.
In.
Mr chair representative I I'm
sorry I I couldn't hear that.
He's.
I got the fancy your pieces but
it doesn't seem to make it
better this is it's better.
Okay good okay all right so we
do not know who would look to
people with the credit rate
below three hundred.
No.
There's a steady the study
address question but that that
we passed in twenty nineteen.
Are we going to gather that data
from the study.
Mr chair and Representative
Santa Fe I assume will be
pulling in that study was
supposed to be ready I think in
April of this year it's now been
extended to I think June or July
of this year so that we don't
have the data from that study
now.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Herrera I noticed
in the testimony several people
gave examples of folks have a
loan to pay off a loan to pay
off alone do you know how many
of these lenders only allow one
loan at a time or what
percentage of these borrowers
have more than one lone open at
a time.
I'm Mr chair and representative
that I don't I don't have any
data on that currently else if I
can get that for you can get it
back to you I can tell you that
what happens is that the more
common practice is that they
keep re issuing loans like a as
a friend told me I you know I I
took at a two hundred dollar
loan we didn't have the money
First Medicine somebody got sick
and I took it out and I went to
pay off my last payment of two
hundred dollars you know I went
to bank the last payment and
just because you make that last
payment doesn't mean you're not
still poor right so then that
lender says well would you like
to extend this we can give you
another three hundred so the
issue said so five years later
we're still paying off that
we're still extending that it it
just it's just a continual cycle
for some people and that's
That's how they work.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
Herrera so what you're saying is
they're they're paying off one
loan and getting another one
because they're still living
paycheck to paycheck and they
still have an expense that
exceeds their their buying
capital and did I understand
correctly to say that they're
not building any cap they're not
building any credit by doing
this.
You know I mean they can it's
it's not that they can't build
credit you heard some people
from that you know some people
have told me yes you got a
hundred thousand on the rate
back they went that another and
some people have done that I'm
just saying most people haven't
Mr chair and Representative Dow
it's it's a problem I'm sure
it's a problem it's got to be a
problem in your area.
Yes thank thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Garratt test prop
poverty is a problem I think
statewide but I but I know that
I'm I'm trying to get to the
actual the data do we know how
many people of the people who
are barring do we know how many
are actually doing that back on
back in renewing and extending
their their borrowing.
Mr chair and representative that
I don't have a question for you
now reach out to somebody else
and see if I can get that one a
question answered for you by
tomorrow.
Okay I'm Mr chairman
Representative Herrera when are
we going when are we seeing this
bill next.
Is it coming back on Friday do.
Representative don't know we're
having a full robust hearing
today and we await those six
coming over from the Senate
prying about a month all.
Okay I'm thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
Herrera I guess I'm I thought
we'd come to a compromise in
nineteen when we did the study
on data and so I would like to
know data so that I can make an
informed decision especially
where the alternative loans can
be obtained and how we want
people to get access to if they
do have to where is the more the
cliff effect we're gonna see a
lot more people if we win wage
we put in some of these other
practices in the federal
standards and eligibility for
low income families does not
change we're gonna see less
people eligible for assistance
and they can be paid have less
disposable income I'm not saying
that there's going to be for
more lending but I I do not want
to cut off low income families
in my community from buying
something I I I'm learning about
this process admittedly you know
I have never taken out this type
of loan but I'm I'm just I've
been try I've been looking
online and the factors that go
into whether low income first
person can receive a small loan
or any type of loan is their
credit scores it's there the the
risk of what they're borrowing
money for the time that they had
their child and right now a lot
of people are unemployed their
annual revenue and their ability
to repay a loan their existing
debts and then the different
guidelines lenders and I've
heard some of the lenders talked
about today
but I don't know the
differentials I mean somebody
said something about companies
so one main an opportune those
are new names to me but it
sounded like they do different
types of loans for different
types of people types of credit
and so I I'm concerned about
cutting people off completely
then Mr chair and Representative
Herrera it sounded like there
are people who will still
continue to give these loans who
operate in New Mexico but
outside of the Privy of our
regulatory environment what do
they plan to do have you.
Maybe agreements with folks I
think it maybe it was tribal
areas are what it for whatever
reason these folks we do not
regulate them are they agreeing
to also quit and to to match
these caps and standards.
Mr chair and representative now
I can just tell you that that
this law will also apply to
online lending and and I think
it's it's it's really set up to
regulate the industry and keep
this cap at thirty six percent
there are companies who can
manage at thirty six percent I
and do so and again I've talked
to the US some lending companies
it said what they think will
happen is that that players will
leave New Mexico open not it's
it's not easy to just leave a
state and and leave a business
and I think I think the bad
actors will leave and will will
hopefully have New Mexican
companies that stay with us and
that continued alone at a camp
with thirty six percent that's
what that's what we hope.
Okay so chair Representative
Herrera.
Someone text me while I was
asking that question they're
nursing off shore and tribal but
they are not subject to this law
and that they will still be able
to offer these lines loans
online do you consider that
being about after that they will
continue to operate outside the
boundaries of the bill or.
Is it is that that's gonna be
okay with you.
Mr chair and Representative Dow
certainly that's not okay with
me certainly we want any and we
want to try and do the best we
can right now this is the bill
as is we've tried to capture the
best of that we can right now
and that's where it's at.
Thank you I'm thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative for I'm not
that's fair that's fair I'm just
trying to grant
If this actually stops that it's
it's going to re direct were
people to get people who feel
that they need cash we'll have
to get their loan and how many
complaints and have the small
lenders received like annually
how many complaints are there to
the FID.
The.
I don't have the answer for that
now.
I'm.
I and it does not have the
answer for you right now.
So okay.
I'm I'm curious Mr chair
representative Representative
how it compares to bank the
number of complaints that we get
about banks or credit unions
mortgage lenders other two
wonders.
Mr chair and now Representative
down this isn't something people
like to talk about I'm just
going to tell you that when
they're in there is that they've
got themselves in a loan trap
and there they don't share this
information readily with other
people that's part of the
problem I mean I'm sure if you
talk to some of your families
and home visiting and and I know
the families that you work with
they probably ask them their
stories and and they might tell
you but it's not something that
people share easily I I had a
secretary who worked for me went
bankrupt as of because of the
installment loan company I mean
and title companies that had she
told me I I we I could have
helped her but I didn't know and
and tell it was all too late so
it's it's it's you know it's not
the kind of the kind of people
who automatically report
a serious problem to somebody
else or share this problem are
the problem is is people are
embarrassed I you know their
best by their poverty their best
beginning alone they're
embarrassed that they took at a
high rate their best if they
weren't able to pay it back and
it kinda it circles the circle
back on themselves circle back
on themselves so so I do do
people even complain aren't what
they would complain to I doubt
it I doubt it so a lot of this a
lot of this this I'm reported to
tell you the truth.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Herrera so
there are I think there's three
bills I've seen three bills at
least a lot of our emails either
asking us to support or oppose
lit three bills and that have
the same subject but are they
the same how is yours different
than the others.
Well you have Senator built a
Senators souls bill in this
Senate bill sixty six is it and
the more bill of this bill which
is a house bill one forty nine I
also passed a similar bill in C.
pack yesterday which is house
bill ninety nine which simply
takes the it's a seven page bill
it simply takes the
the hundred seventy five percent
right and reduces it to thirty
set a six percent rate I call
that the Volkswagen builder the
Hyundai yeah this is the
Cadillac building is one forty
nine okay I'm just going to tell
you I admit it up this this is a
better bill I'm worried that
this bill will pass I know how
Farm formidable the opposition
ends us so I have a back up plan
we'll see we'll see what happens
so those are the three bills I
know if you if you have another
bill I I don't know what it is.
Okay I thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that
Representative Herrera I'm sure
that's that those are the bills
and and then does the other bill
that passed the pack yesterday
Mr chair representative very
decided dress online lending.
Or or tribal lending.
No it does it does not.
Not at this point I'm is Mr
chairman and and Representative
Herrera is there thank you their
area where we see higher rates
of lending.
For these at this type of small
loans are used more often.
There is it Mr chair
representative restate that
question.
Are there more I'm wondering if
there's a connection between the
small lending and areas of of
minority.
Yeah minority yes yes
Representative the these these
small ending US small
installment loan companies are
mainly located in the poorest
sections of the community you
know the higher the lower your
the lower your poverty rate is
the more of these in stock yet
installment loan company she'll
say you know just go to the
south side of Santa Fe disco to
Espanola just you know we have
we have seven to eight.
A small loan companies in the
city of Espanola we have one
Donald's okay that's how
prominently in poor communities
I'm sure you could drive around
I've I've given to your town and
I've seen a lot of those small
lives title companies and small
installment loan companies there
too they tend to reside in a
port communities.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
thank you representative and I'm
learning so can you explain to
me the difference between a
short term loan and installment
loan a payday loans and title
loans.
It seems like if we pass one am
I just going to go to the other
option I'm trying to figure out
what is going to shift to a
different type of loan.
Mr chair and Representative Dow
what we're trying to do is cap
the percentage rate for all
these different companies okay
that's what we're trying to do
here okay so this would this
would go across the board okay
and.
What's the average interest rate
on a short term loan.
In New Mexico for.
Well you know I'm Mr chairman
beckoned and excuse me and and
Representative out sorry it can
go anywhere and everywhere they
sign it could be anywhere from
you know thirty six percent two
hundred and seventy five percent
right now it's whatever it's
whatever it's whatever contract
to the borrower signs with the
company that's what I can go to
right now.
Okay thank you very much I Mr
chairman Representative Herrera
and I I I got a study up some
more on this before compact
chair committee for about thank
you very much.
Representative great questions
Representative Powdrell Culbert
forgive me actually the senior
member but whatever reason of
our.
Thank you Mr chairman that you
don't have to remind everybody
that I'm the senior member okay.
I'm just a little bit of history
you guys Representative
Lundstrom and I
sponsored.
The first pieces start
addressing this entire industry
and it had to be like twelve
thirteen years ago.
And we started the discussion
and and working with some of the
same folks that are still
involved so that's how long this
goes back and so
You know we we.
I'm a big supporter of business
but I'm not a big supporter of
people ripping other people off
the.
And that was some of the
discussion that we had way back
when when this first came to
really you know came to our
attention we had
committee hearings to address
this just this alone over the
Gallup grants airy.
And are you all know my
husband's military so.
The first base that started
addressing this whole interest.
Loan interest process was for
bill Burr Ford Billboard
Virginia I believe that was the
first place and I had all these
loan companies that was setting
up right outside the gate that's
how bad it had gotten and so
that one back in may this word
with the state of the Virginia
legislature to try to address
some this so it didn't just
start and seventeen.
You know to get to this
agreement
but we have to keep in mind that
the lender.
Is a borrower as well.
So I think sometimes we think
that these folks just got money
sitting in the bank to make
these loans they're more in the
money from somewhere.
And one of the things we learned
way back then with all the fees.
Are really.
Some of their profits.
Okay because there's a hard cost
to borrow money
money and I think this is a.
Great spot for me to go back and
do a promotional.
Passing house bill one sixty
three.
And making sure that we all
address this piece about
educating folks.
On
Process mining.
I'm.
The fees are high.
But in all fairness.
I think that we need to wait for
the data.
So that we can all relate I
understand.
What's going on here in New
Mexico I mean we've come a long
ways but we got a low a long way
to go and to get a real break
down as to what those fees.
Our.
What they're charging for the
hard cost of money.
And then what they're charging
for the feeds and maybe the data
would separate that out.
No I I think we need to bring
the cost down to borrow money I
don't think thirty six percent.
Is the way to go because people
go into business to make money
not to do somebody a favor but
at the same
time.
We have to know that so
Representative Mr chair I'm
wondering in the data.
Is there in the data collection.
Are we asking them to show the
real cost breakdown how much are
they paying for the hard money
that they're borrowing to loan
to these individuals can you do
you know what is that is being
asked for in the data
collection.
Mr chair and representative
project over thank you for your
question are you know I don't
know that but I think I can get
that by tomorrow and get back to
you
I'll try I'll get that for you
as as fast as I can thank you
okay because I think that that
is the crux of where in order to
get to what's fair to both sides
we need to know what the cost of
money is.
Borrowing it from somewhere then
what are those fees are and what
are the usual and customary
fees.
You know and and also that needs
to needs to be
I included.
In this final data and I'm
hoping that.
Can you tell me in the final
data collection.
What committees.
do you think that information is
going to go through before you
get to the legislature in twenty
one and twenty two if this does
not pets.
Mr chair and representative I am
not you know I have to review
that bill again I think it I I
forget the agency it went to
there's one agency they only
have two people that really work
on this that the study was
supposed to be done in April of
this year it is on July I will
go back and get that for you and
I'll talk to them and see where
they're at in their study and
and I'll give the outline of the
study to I should probably have
that for this committee
apologize I get the outline and
studies show that you.
Okay because I'd like to know
have the answer the some of
those do not come from a very
large family but my parents not
to remember when they went back
in and back in the fifties.
I'm not the senior citizen you
guys but back in the fifties
when they were borrowing.
From
Small loans you know in our
community and how they struggle
to pay it back so growing up I'm
pretty familiar.
With this you know and again I
find that Representative
Martinez and I agreed on some
other stuff today and that that
really scared me my fears are
getting more and more you know
with him but in all seriousness
that there is some.
We've got to keep an environment
of where these folks can borrow
money but we've got to also
create.
On the environment to where they
can pay it off and it's not
costing you know every single
penny that they may to just pay
off the small loans and I've
been talking with some of the
folks who are in opposition and
I know you said that you think
the.
Data can be a legislative
Bill killer but I think it'll
bring some information to those
of us who don't sit down and
talk about this stuff on a real.
Regular basis it was
Representative Lundstrom and I
our goal was to get it started
so people will start paying
attention and looking at.
You know we've accomplished that
and
I don't agree with you with the
thirty six percent.
But I think it's it's
You know my hat off to you to
keep bringing that forward but I
really believe that we need to
look at the data thank you Mr
chairman thank members thank you
Representative Roybal.
Fajardo and I'll turn the chair
over to Representative Figueroa
gonna stretch my legs for
governments Representative part
of.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you Representative most of
my questions have been answered
I am like most especially
Representative Dow these these
are very complicated issues you
know payday loan but to
understand or not the state
anymore and have installment
loans and then you have the
title loans.
I'm and research at and I'm
sorry to the check.
Madam chair I'm sorry.
I want to make sure I go through
the chair appropriately Madam
chairwoman and representative
what is there is there do we
have any other loans besides
installment and the title loans
left in New Mexico.
Madam chair I guess and the and
representative that I think
we're pretty much down to those
two loans and and and.
The legislation and ninth two
thousand seventeen did address
some of those issues and I want
to and I want to also recognize
the representative of the
pontifical bird I I know we
stand on the shoulders of the
many in this legislature and
there it in a lot of people
worked at this problem for many
many years and I I do appreciate
that
and I'm still learning I think I
can tell you that I'm still
learning so yeah we we change we
change the payday loans as
return out thank god I and we
have small installment loan
companies and we do have the
title loans right now and
And that's really what we're
working on in this legislation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and so that in
two thousand nineteen we took it
a step further we issued a study
and that was kind of a
compromise between the the the
loan companies and the
legislature and my understanding
that you know and if you
disagree with me if you you
think I'm off base please let me
now is yeah we had a lot of
testimony earlier stating that
you know there's a missed
misinformation I'm with these
guys loans are there's you know
that may I miss you know
characterization what we're
doing we're not Hey Terry
lenders and we're not doing
these things and others that
pushed back so the legislature
decided to to say okay we're
going to do a study.
And and figure this out is it
would would you characterize
that this the same or would you
do it curious to think what what
you thought the reasoning was to
to go to that study and I can't
remember Representative if
you're in the legislature during
that time if you refresh my
memory is that as well Madam
chairwoman chair and and the
Representative yes I was in the
legislature I I I I you know I I
took this legislation and I I
got it through two committees
and never reach the floor of the
house and that was the kind of
the alternative bill I voted for
that too I mean you know I
wanted to I wanted to hear more
learn more and see if we can do
that I mean the the the problem
with that with that you know
we're always short on on staff
in our in our state agencies we
had two people that would
oversee this program you know it
it's it's very difficult and and
and and that's study did need to
be done so I voted for that too
I mean I vote for everything
that can make
landing better in the state and
that I bill for everything that
can you know help help people
who are really struggling have a
better chance so so yes I voted
for that and I mean I had hoped
that that study would be done
probably would have been done
sooner without of cook without
comment but that's kind of the
where where the way we roll
these days if we catch up as
best we can so and you know for
April I could give you an answer
but I can't well no it's not
till July now so I'm gonna come
up and I haven't done that I
apologize I'll call them up and
see I'd like to know how far
they are in the study and maybe
they would have some good
information that I could bring
back to you and I should have
done that I I just didn't think
that I apologize thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
representative that we all we
all want it's something that we
need you know it just you know
we had in it in
yeah I bill for financial
literacy ins in.
Schools and that came before our
committee and I supported a
hundred percent because of this
very situation because you do
hear those stories of people who
get in the into this final that
they cannot get out at and you
know if they would just have
some basic financial knowledge
is a basic financial standing we
could have prevented that
this tell the story when I was
in school I did take a financial
a class and I learned about
interest rates and what I
learned you know if you have a
thirty year mortgage at this
present you know and all the
thousands of dollars a year
spending by the time that
mortgage is paid off.
And it stays with me and I don't
think.
Understand adults don't
understand kids don't understand
I'm and it just rips my my heart
when it when you hear the you
know lower income families
struggling and they have no
place to go and you have these
loan companies and they're
willing to stick out a hand and
help.
But the interest rates are
higher but then I'm also going
to get that side of it and so I
I agree with you I want to fix
this I want to make sure we're
on the same same path.
But then I also don't want to
say prevent something where they
don't have a place to go when
their they're not giving
anything and they're part of you
know it's kind of like let you
know it's like I I I hate the
word safety net kind of the
thing I'm you know it's I don't
know if these.
The.
And that's what I want to work
through and work out I don't
oppose your your bill on on the
merits or anything like that I
just want to make sure that we
have something in place for
these families.
My district I'm blessed County
you know what you and I are in
the same area which is different
to different parts of Santa Fe
you know you have people that
that will go out and and on
Fridays bill they'll get these
loans and then they hit all the
I'm what you call those at
garage sales.
And then they go and then they
go and they they sell everything
and they pay the loan back and
the interest rate is very low
they're paying ten or fifteen
dollars but they're making their
income they're making a
livelihood are I don't want to
prevent that I don't want to
stop somebody from using these
these opportunities and take
away their livelihood because
the banks won't help them.
Because and I know I'm a small
business person and so comment
as hit my my business hard it is
hit my family hard we're we're
mice my chip my son is is
getting is buying a house and
it's been a nightmare.
Because of how Covid is affected
and it's been jumping through
hoops and so I get both sides I
don't want my son to be in a
position where there's nothing
for him maybe that you can't
figure something out but.
I also don't want to take
something away and so I really
want to study I think that's
important I think you know one
of the
Representative was talking it
was talking about some of the
issues in the community and you
even said that you know these
are a lot of these loan
companies are centralized to to
certain areas.
Yeah you have one McDonald's I
think you said seven loan
companies.
And we know McKinley County and
Representative of Johnson's
district is dealing with the
same problem I'm hoping that the
steady can actually maybe bring
springs and other things the
state at you know maybe we need
to get bring some provide
financial literacy.
Where you can get a second loan
into you understand how this is
going to affect you I want
people to build credit I want
people to have lives I want
people to be able to to not stay
in poverty but.
You know so I that was just my
speech I guess I really don't
have a question because my
questions were already already
asked I'm but I I get where
you're coming I just.
I want more data I want to see
that you know and I would love
to it you know if we get the
data and we want to take this
somewhere and you need help with
this you let me now
because I want to find a balance
between helping people in my
community and not take in the
rug out from underneath them so
they don't have any resources
and so Mr chair representative
my list of questions were
answered so I just went on a
rampage.
Thank you Representative last of
last but not least
Representative cerrado.
Thank you so much Mister
chairman and thank you to
sponsor for this bill for
bringing this forward I just
really quickly I was curious how
does compounded interest work
today.
On the short term slash title
loans.
It.
It really depends I can answer
that for the for every single on
this given I'm just going to
tell you everybody every company
works differently they have
their own formulas they have
their own you know and some will
tell you that they think they do
a very fair job for people and
they do a good job and I'm just
telling you it really depends on
that individual walking in
a signing that paper making that
contact with that loan so I can
tell you exactly how it works
for every single on so so but
it's possible to thank you and
Mr chairman it's possible to our
I.
Only interest and then charges
hundred seventy six percent
eighty our interest on this is
that is that right.
I don't know if that's if that's
a possibility
Mr chair and representative at.
Well yes it's if they can make
it is a it depends on the length
of the loan it depends on that
the interest rate that they
charge so I you know.
When I can say is that there are
some companies that they do a
fair job I'm I I don't I'm not.
I'm not.
Criticizing every single loan
small more out there I I I
wouldn't I think there's some
people that do a big job job but
I'm just going to say the
majority of them are out of
state corporations which is what
you should know and they come
into this state the setup sort
star friends and that they
engage in that practice and it's
it's a it's it's a rampage it is
a
all through our communities and
it goes to the poorest of our
communities which include yours
and mine I think yeah I I think
you Mr chairman and I do
represent effort road which
significant number of small and
small loan document title loans
and I actually grew up pretty
much on.
Installment loans and you're
absolutely right I mean I might
my parents had to had to borrow
off the titles and and that's
how we got to month to month for
years to be quite Frank amber
the relief my dad finally had
when when it was gone and I'll
never forget it was so striking
on that the the the weight that
you carry for Sino de as a kid
and it really impacted how we
grew up and and made it
available so I I appreciate
the roll and and kind of where
they're at in and honestly the
convenience of the brain which
is kind of a negative right I
mean to Representative hardest
point that you know if the only
every time they would have like
a booklet the say Hey they're
better places to borrow from and
better rates you could possibly
getting I know that the the
commenter from Guadalupe credit
union mention some work they
were doing that they could come
to that some of those so I mean
you know there there's a little
bit of that in there and I just
I I appreciate this conversation
and all I guess I'll leave it at
that but I I really do
appreciate you bringing this
bill forward and you know I
looked I I hope that in the
future I can work with you
towards these is bigger goals
thank you.
Very much thank you Mr chair.
Thank you all thank you all very
very much thank you all very
very much this is tough stuff I
didn't think we'd stay this long
but I just want to thank the
sponsors and evaluate your your
true champion true champion and
in a citizen legislature to take
on something this huge on this
impactful is just tremendous and
it's a tribute to your
perseverance in your leadership
I want to thank you for that the
and thank all the members public
couple quick comments and we
could wrap it up
It's it's expensive to be poor.
It's expensive to be poor.
You know you ten Bucks in a
community or does not get you as
much as ten Bucks in a.
The grocery store.
Or if you know if you have if
you know your wealthy that up
Sam's club or Costco whatever
and bye Joanne jars of stuff and
it's cheaper it's cheaper when
you have more money and you
could of.
The all the members are what not
and so the cost of money you
know what is the cost of money
you know if if if my phone's
gonna get shut off on Tuesday I
don't get paid till Friday you
know I borrow twenty Bucks on
Monday and pay back two hundred
thirty Bucks on Friday that
that's in my interest.
So that my phone is get cut off
they they
But that interest rate you know
if you calculated over or the
course of the year would be off
the chart.
And so what I hope to do is as
you know we were all very
philosophical today and and not
Representative the points that
remedy Martinez made because we
we we can be ideological when
and if Senate bill sixty six
gets over.
Let's talk about the words on
the page you know we need it we
do the math we we need like some
economist describes the numbers
force but let's talk about
paragraphs enough on page seven.
You know let's talk about of the
language on page thirteen.
You know let's talk about the
language on page thirty two and
thirty three that's the crux of
the bill.
And ask ourselves you know with
the with the payday lenders they
were like well what this bill
passes.
I won't be able to do business
and what I yeah that's what
we're passionate.
But but in this situation there
is a market for these loans and
so even if we pass this bill as
it is we don't do away with that
with that consumer need and so
what we so we got it think about
the unintended consequence of
that we're aware that I don't
have a negative ripple effect.
We definitely need to COVID
reminded our country that even
though we're living in twenty
twenty in the twenty first
century we still haven't reached
the twenty percent.
We still haven't got there I
mean over fifty percent of our
population is living paycheck to
paycheck.
In in in the most advanced
couple of society in in the
world so we we have to
We have to learn from our fellow
human beings and we have to get
there with to get there quick
and some of these big big leaps
are are tough on folks
But I really appreciate the the
smarts of the leadership of
everyone we will get there and
so any final comments and then
and then Representative that we
can take action are you you can
roll that it's.
but Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
I thank you Mr chairman I'm just
I'm just wondering if
This sounds kind of crazy but
I'm wondering.
We look that or has to
Representative.
Look at the numbers of
The stores you know these
companies in the small
communities and the reason I
bring that up Jon Stewart Leo
you know anyone that's familiar
with the area no it's not a big
community and I'll start with
the more in there is eight.
Of these low.
businesses in their community so
I'm wondering when you when
Representative Mr chair when you
get the data.
You know is there anything in
there about those numbers.
You know the numbers of of
stores and community and then
the other thing you know I'm
always was sent to much
government but is.
There's something in there what
we could work with the local
councils to limit the number of
stores.
You know in their communities
that have these types of
businesses you know we're
looking at it with the liquor
law and so maybe this is
something else we really need
to.
Thank you consideration and that
I'm just wondering if if we
could do that Mr chairman I'm
not sure you're the.
The attorney among us so is that
something that can be considered
to
minimize the number of stores
that are in these communities.
Thank you representative
Representative part of course
that's a great point that's a
great point they they there's a
plethora of stories in various
communities there's other
committees they don't have a lot
of stores or no stores.
and sold their not a license the
way liquor stores are liquor
stores are just in their in a
class by themselves.
But we just have to ask
ourselves you know do we want
some stores no stores.
We want to let's do the math
let's do the math between now
and the next month when the bill
comes to this committee let's
let's do the math I want to
fight about this every two years
because you know for two years
and reverse and it flips back
and let's figure out what we
want to do as a state dealing
with
you know some of the the poorest
counties in in this country.
that's how we deal with that how
we have access to capital how we
increase financial literacy just
in closing Representative up I
made the
When I was a rookie and you were
doing that bill with
Representative Lundstrom
actually introduced Hospital
twelve twenty four twelve twenty
four and I'll read the magic
words says.
All under subject to the Mexico
small loan act of nineteen fifty
five shall provide information
on financial literacy courses
the consumer at the time a
consumer enters a short term
loan agreement so we just
dialogue's been going on for
over a decade and we can get
there there's reasonable people
on both sides.
Someone as a legal business it's
a legal business and so the mind
doesn't you know it's not a
moral or moral is legal and so
if someone is illegal business.
We're gonna fight for the legal
business and so we have to
respect that and we have to
acknowledge that.
Some businesses will shut down
if a business in our district is
going to shut down that's.
And that's reasonable for us to
vote against that shut down
hopefully all of us will take a
step back and think about what's
best for New Mexico but that had
a Kanemi that that may go away
it doesn't go away that money
that money would circulate with
stores and local businesses as
opposed to I'm interest rates
but my point is is let's let's
listen to one another that's
work with one another and let's
that shape this bill
When it comes comes across our
desk resume that I do want to.
Procedurally at Gentilly table
at our.
Or register role that it's.
Mr chair if if we can just
Roland I think Senate bills I
hope Senate bill sixty six comes
over it's the more bills will
I just really like to think this
entire committee I this was a
very helpful discussion for me I
I think everybody here it
doesn't matter what side of the
aisle you're on his is for
improving the situation in our
state I'm very grateful for that
and I and I will work harder to
answer your questions and to
just see if we can in the bill
we need in the state so thank
you very much I I've I'm very
deeply appreciate and we're very
happy you agreed to have this
hearing.
And you enlighten us all we're
all better better position to
make a decision thank everybody
on hearing we appreciate
everybody a.
We are adjourned.
