Chair here.
Here.
All right thank you we're gonna
go ahead and start with SP three
eighty two.
You madam chair and
representative is I want to be
with you here today especially
presenting this bill SB three
eighty to the bioscience Fund
the version and investment John
act I have with me Michelle
Henry from have a lapse and Paul
Lauer from mercury bio who also
sits on the board of the
bioscience Authority the
bioscience Authority was started
in twenty seventeen to build
investment into bioscience
development here in New Mexico
through the university of New
Mexico bioscience is probably
the fastest growing new
entrepreneurial industry in the
United States and here we're
talking about medications
as a
potentially new way to look at
else timers disease and treat it
and also something that could
even prevent allergies which all
of us seem to be suffering from
right now to take the the
juniper out of the air but it is
a fast fast developing field and
it's an area where New Mexico
because of the laps and because
of the university's where we do
have a leg up on Ph.D capital to
be able to move these ideas into
true investments at twenty five
million has been authorized
through house bill two to invest
in the bioscience Authority and
what the authority will do the
way it's structured is that it
will seek out investment
partners who put in a two to one
match so this is to save a
hundred thousand is put in by
the bioscience Authority the
investment partners will put in
two hundred thousand they have
to build the company here in New
Mexico and that is critical
these these type of invest.
Mentzer not only to bring more
economy into the state but but
definitely to create better
paying jobs which we know we are
going to need as we diversify
into our new economy that's
coming in five to ten years it
and and and be able to build the
tax base and individuals who are
have a great middle incomes so
but the other piece of it is
that we can you imagine if we
have a company here who could
literally take the juniper out
of the air that working on it
and that's just a few examples
the when when the.
When the start up and of course
this is risk reward this isn't
just kind of putting money in a
bank internet two percent this
is finding the right idea the
capital to back it and very
importantly and this is what my
observations invest New Mexico
desperately needs.
They need I'm gonna say the
jackets because when you get our
investment it's a jockey not the
horse a lot of people don't know
that Google was that north
search engine developed they
went out and got the right
entrepreneurs to build the
business we've got to build
experience in building
entrepreneurs in our state to be
able to do these start ups and
to get in to grow and that's one
other huge benefit of what this
bill will do what's in the the
company has become very
successful the Authority then
we'll that someone else may come
along and buy it and again we'll
do everything we can to keep it
here in New Mexico but that's it
you know if you put in a hundred
thousand which earned million
that million dollars comes back
into the fact and so this money
does not refer it's there in the
fund continues to build on
itself as the success is built
Adam south so I think that
covers most of the key points
and and I did agree to Mallya
one of my mentors Senator
Padilla hi that I would try and
be brief so I'm gonna turn it
over to my experts in that be
happy to stand for support
professionals thank you.
Madam chair thank you
Representative thank you for
hearing us today thank you to
our sponsors to everyone in this
room who has helped get us this
far we made it through the
Senate with no opposition no one
even stood in opposition all of
the votes were unanimous and so
we're delighted to have that
kind of support for this program
my name is Michelle Henry my day
job is with Google lapse they
have loaned me to this bill
during this session as it's
registered lobbyist but Google
labs is a member of the
bioscience community we work on
food security the idea is when a
farmer puts a plant in the
ground he's invested in the seat
he's invested in the water he
has done a lot and if that plant
get sick and it doesn't actually
make it to your plate as food
that's a lost investment and
that's what Google is working to
address we work on plant viruses
viruses that right now have no
solution and we engineer micro
that works with the bottom of
the plant to help the plant
resist the virus kind of have a
probiotic works you've got just
to make your body stronger and
help you don't get sick same
kind of idea so we are we are
delighted to support this a
couple laps on the Senator did a
great job of of presenting here
in New Mexico we have the basic
ingredients to grow the
bioscience industry but it
doesn't happen naturally why
part of it is because other
states have incentives the
trough businesses so the
bioscience Authority a few years
ago actually hired an expert to
save all of the things that
other states do to to grow to
retain to attract bioscience
industry what fits best for us
and that experts that this co
investment programs at the
Senator explain to you is the
thing that New Mexico should do
there should be a fund that is
funded between twenty five and
fifty million dollars this year
we finally get to fund that fund
what is so key about this
program is is the senator said
it's a two to one match so
somebody who is in the world of
raising money even if I have
investors willing to put in a
certain amount the state comes
along and I get fifty percent
more and it's it's a fabulous
thing and it's exactly what we
need and.
Then as the senator says that
the company comes and buys our
company the shares the stock the
equity that the state has in our
company does grow as well and
that money up on the exit go
back into the fund so it's a
beautiful program I look forward
to talking with you more about
it we appreciate the support so
far and hope that this committee
will support us as well.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative is my name's Paul
or on the founder president and
CEO of Mercuri bile located here
in Santa Fe and Santa Fe
business incubator we are
currently working on a drug
delivery platform for small
molecules and RNase so I think
everyone's familiar with that
mRNA vaccines that mature and
Fizer came out with for COVID we
can package them in a better
delivery system that can be
targeted at specific cells so
it's very versatile we have a
team of scientists working at
the bench a lot of that really
brilliant people many of whom
work at Los Alamos national lab
and we were together for twelve
years or more so this is one
start up that I have currently
doing which is to at closing at
two million dollar raise and a
ten million dollar valuation and
we'll go out in the year and
raised in other twenty million
at a hundred million dollar
valuation so that gives you an
idea of how biotech works
during a raised over a billion
to billion dollars
and when they went when they
finally had a product on the
market the clear eighteen
billion in the first year so
that's another way the money
comes back to the state because
when companies do very well they
also pay dividends and Senator
dividends go to the stockholders
shareowners just and and the
state would become one of those
and I'll mention one other
example of bioscience and I was
personally involved in I started
a company called Eldorado
biofuels and we built a pilot
project in Jalan New Mexico from
two thousand ten to two thousand
fifteen we were growing algae
and treated produced water from
oil and gas operations and we
demonstrated that it's feasible
to grow salt water algae in this
non fresh water read a reservoir
that's under the.
The size of the Great Lakes
under the state of New Mexico we
have great sunshine here we have
mild winters especially in the
south part of the state we have
nutrients like carbon dioxide
allergy actually sequesters
carbon dioxide so it's a way to
create renewable energy take
carbon dioxide out of the
atmosphere produce protein that
we demonstrated could be tried
to cattle safely and it creates
jobs in the oil field and if we
are trying to diversify the
economy off of oil and gas this
is that that a plug and play
industries that can take over
that economic engine and and
southeast northwest New Mexico
and create wealth so with that
I'll answer questions thank you.
At the end of your presentation
yes it is madam chair thank you
okay do we have anybody in the.
R. as in in support of this
bill.
But it posed.
Start over here in support.
Can
receive New Mexico we had the
ball sciences's University of
New Mexico but it also is New
Mexico tech and an agency you
are bored consist of people that
are appointed by the governor
the EDD secretary spaceport
authority director and then the
presidents of the universities
are all the people on there we
have to from UNM to from and
miss you and want to tack thank
you.
X..
Thank you madam chair members
the committee type hard on
behalf of strategies three sixty
where the registered lobbyists
for but by biotechnology
innovation organization bio is
the world's largest advocacy
association Representative
member companies state
biological groups as well as
academic and research
institutions institutions I
think the Senator great job
explaining what the benefits of
this bill does and so we gladly
support this legislation thank
you anybody else in support.
K. anybody
the economy.
No madam chair or.
Do believe there was some
requests for.
Meditational panelist.
I Stephanie is on the issues the
executive director of the last
things.
At this.
Hello my name is second to PGA
N. executive director of the New
Mexico biocides Authority I am
very much in favor of this bill
we've been working for the last
four years since it was
identified by eighteen and
outside consultant that this was
a really great movie for the
state to make to be able to
increase its biocides industry
we have worked with the
university and the state to be
able to develop the legal
mechanisms to be able to manage
this kind of partnership between
private and public funds we just
had our first pilot one of the
co investment we were able to
invest in by any by which
they're able to join today and
we are really really excited to
be able to move this forward
more thank you.
And still rose you are a
available to talk as well.
I'm rose founder of the
bioscience center this is an
incubator for companies in
biotechnology in Albuquerque I
want to say is our final tech
sector in the state is
absolutely booming we have lots
and lots of start up for we're
having a dramatic and have the
potential to make dramatic
impact on state the the efforts
of the state especially the
catalyst fund to create small
venture capital firms have led
to significant investment in
early stage companies.
The problem we're facing now is
that national venture capital
firms and brought the best
Frederick future recessions
complicated further by the
failure of the Silicon Valley
bank last week we what that
means is the company so we
currently have that have been
successful to date are going to
struggle with raising capital.
Every state in the country that
has has that has a successful
bioscience sector has started
with significant investment from
its state and that has led to
the growth of.
Jobs in the state companies are
having a huge impact in health
care we have a company in in the
state that has the potential of
a way to prevent out time
and maybe even cure us of course
we have a company in the state
that that is looks like it's
going to be able to treat
depression and schizophrenia
with with diagnosis using
completely new technology to not
to go on but I won't take the
time to do that right now if we
don't get this money from the
state most of these companies
are going to fail simply because
I know they cannot raise capital
outside is just not there right
now we really need help a lot of
science and industry and I hope
you will support this bill.
And thank you bye your available
to talk.
Madam chairwoman of committee
members my name is John
I work and I am the president
and CEO of bio and then a mile
we have developed
instrumentation to help advance
biological discovery and
accelerate drug discovery and
development especially in the
cancer field.
we were one of the pilots
programs that receive money from
the New Mexico biosciences
Authority
this is directly helped us to
retain key employees.
Purchase inventory to develop
and build a new instrumentation.
and I also just want to state
that it is a struggle right now
is to set to provide money for
the season I anticipated to be a
little bit worse with the
failures of the bank so I really
hope that the committee will
support this bill I think it's
really needed for start ups
especially in stages like us at
the commercialization stage so
thank you very much thank you
let's go straight to the the
committee to be and there's no
opposition okay so then let's go
straight to the committee
Representative Lundstrom thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you senator for paying the bill
for a do have some questions
about the bill
I don't I I see that you've got
a fairly substantial
appropriation in here Madam
chair Senator has been reduced
down to twenty five million is
that in the Senate version of
the budget.
Madam chair and representative I
believe that is in the Senate
version of the budget yes Mr
Madam chair Senator I'm always
concerned about
information in the budget when
the budget hasn't been approved
it still needs to come to the
house for concurrence no idea
what the new chairs going to do
with some of these items but I
just but I just raise that madam
chair and senator how much of
this fund is used for
administration.
Madam chair Representative
Lundstrom none the bioscience
Authority administrative
process is separate from the
fund madam chair.
Like lady I'm sorry I didn't
catch your name can you tell me
what those eligibility
requirements are in order to to
access these funds Madam chair
representative Lundstrom
The company needs to be based in
New Mexico are willing to move
to New Mexico and they need to
be here for five years and other
than that the the details of the
program will be informed by the
the pilot program that was done
that you've heard about but it's
really going to happen in
rulemaking this this is going to
have to go through rulemaking
like any other agency so you're
right we don't have all the
details in the bill but there
will be an opportunity for
participation rulemaking.
Madam chair Senator lady what
well what do you think it would
be I mean you're asking for
twenty five million dollars in
the state of New Mexico what is
it that we would be paid for.
Madam chair and Representative
Lundstrom with our pilot project
what we did is we went through
the RFP process using UNM
purchasing to provide our co
investment partners and so our
partner on our pilot project was
The New Mexico angels and so we
went to that R. P. process we
went through all the legal
aspects of it using we have a
lawyer at UNM that's one hundred
percent
Her time goes not a hundred
percent for time but she is our
main where at that yes I.
And so went through all of that
then The New Mexico angels
brought forth companies for us
to look at and we had a rigorous
process with the committee of
the board that looked at several
different metrics with regards
to their growth potential all of
the different things that you
would do in New and when you're
gonna do your own investment
looking at
how far they've gotten with
their technology having a place
to have all of those sorts of
different metrics and then it
went to the full board for a
vote and so we have that whole
process with this process we're
gonna all of that plus we have
to go to the EDD secretary and
explain what we're doing with
regards each investment and then
it goes to the DFA secretary
because the money will be housed
at the treasury department here
at the New Mexico state treasury
and so we'll go through that
process and so the EDD secretary
just sign off on it they DFA
secretary has to sign off on it
as well.
Madam chair of the the UP board
actually runs the funders act
director does.
projects will be funded based on
eligibility requirements.
And whatever those matrix are
the looks like it's going to be
a successful venture.
Representative yes correct okay
all right thank you.
It is.
Madam.
Thank you just for bringing this
so we have a company to that
just open Rio Rancho Public text
file that took advantage of I
like this it started out here
the bio science park actually in
Los Alamos New they were part of
the mRNA vaccination
and they just got a huge grant
to make the mRNA stuff more
accessible from the bill and
Melinda gates foundation so I we
have seen what.
This one will do so I just want
to thank you guys for bringing
this for total support expenses
thank you Representative
Serrato.
Thank you madam chair let me
back hi.
I really appreciate this for a
lot of reasons and I mean it I
mean I think I think we so it's
a lot about the concerns of we
have with Education clause and
how that's gone the way for us
to build out a lot of things I'm
curious senator is is vital
signs including the governor
strategic plan.
I don't have madam chair and
representative it is I think I
was gonna say I personally don't
know that but someone here does
thank you that your because I do
know is that I think okay.
I'm I'm I'm a bit sooner to here
today.
No I think this is a great bill
because you know hi my they had
a drive through governmental
supplement and they have a put
money directly towards a
building this out it is resulted
in significant creek significant
increase in wages and entire
bios of the science community
that's been built people come
for that reason in the state and
I think it is short sighted for
us not to support M. as in the
we do this so I wanted to
support you and can to give you
a question thank you.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Inc as
is this brand only million we're
talking about.
Madam chair center
Representative
it's it's an investment so it's
not a grant it's have it
basically by equity in the
company just over ten LFC.
Purchase that percentage of the
company if it's a Delaware C.
Corp or corporation you'll get
stock in the company.
That sure so madam chair that
one that valuation comes back to
intended million then the state
gets back quite a big chunk of
change right so if the state
owns just Princeton's ten
percent and
I the state would get a million
dollars out of that
sale of the company.
Or or investment that are an IPO
circuit the company could go
public as well and the staff
because traded on
nasdaq and if that goes up in
value according to the
performance of the company.
Thank you madam chair I just
recommend you guys come over.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair of
Senators this is a.
Very interesting concept I love
the idea of of public private
ship.
Are there are there any I mean I
realize it's an investment.
We are talking about taxpayer
money.
Are there any guarantees are
there is there a clawback
provision.
What happens if if.
That business fails is there any
way for the for us to retrieve
that taxpayer money.
That madam chair and senator
Representative Martinez there is
a risk factor involved in this
just like any investment and the
problem with clawbacks is that
small companies start up
companies just don't have money
to put up as a strict security
for the call back so when they
get to be a little bigger they
can sometimes get bonds and so
forth but the just like any
venture capital group you bank
on selecting good companies to
begin with with good quality
level management and board of
directors it's possible for the
state to have a say in the
operation of the company it was
certainly have a vote as a
shareholder and if it's a
significant investment than
there's also put up possibility
for board seat so there is there
are there are ways to control of
how the company is operated and
there were there will be some
failures and but there are
studying successes should more
than make up for it and this
fund could potentially grow to
be a hundred million dollars in
in several years.
Madam chair Senator
Show court would.
Madam chair Senator Woods
occupied that works.
Who determines that.
It would most likely be
determined by the bioscience
Authority port which is as that
sorry thank you mention is made
up of appointees by the state I
was appointed by a Senate pro
tem Mimi Stewart and so I have a
lot of business experience I've
been an entrepreneur here for
thirty years so I'm you know
someone would be elected from
our board or potentially it
would go out for our fear that
could be in a in a rule making
that committee decision and and
so keep in mind it's not like
the film industry where.
It's a tax break this is a
chance to create jobs which is
the main purpose of it
diversified economy but also be
self sustaining.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
At Representative Mason that
Madam chair
The of
the this little stuff October.
those were.
And I was.
That a lot of
the the budget I like but what
is the package with the dollar.
The representative office of and
I thought that's what happened
so so we're not taking a hundred
percent but were.
Not sure that I somebody else.
What you know is the study the.
Senator after the rest there's
also an was presented not.
Wrist I.
What would like all of the all
of the movie.
But the after.
Senator that's all nobody else's
that.
Based on the information second
the state and.
But
Representative and in order yes.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative and is.
Representative one that.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yes
Representative back.
Last year yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you I thank you madam.
At three twenty seven.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee of senator Michael
Padilla the government over the
years
I have Marquita Russel Crowe the
X. to chief executive officer of
the New Mexico finance authority
a for that I serve on the
oversight committee of Senate
bill three twenty seven this is
the third time I've carried this
legislation as a requirement
madam chair members of the
committee we have The New Mexico
finance authority must connect
the legislature every four years
so that they can receive
approval to continue their work
over a four year period without
the Legislature proving every
single provided economic on
project that they work on.
so I brought this legislation
and thirteen sixteen nineteen
all of the various years and
that essentially what it does is
it allows them to continue doing
the great work that they're
doing in two thousand eleven
that they had only done I would
say about five or six projects
or for three projects and then
since two thousand eleven
they've actually had forty
successful projects in many of
our communities and many of your
communities as well these
projects have also let
themselves to the movie industry
which we know is doing very well
in New Mexico creating jobs and
things of that nature hospitals
redesigns of hotels downtown
pluses you name it they've done
a very very good job there so
the legislature maintains its
oversight authority with this
legislation but also allows the
great work that they're doing
someone just miss Russell just a
few words and then we'll take
some questions thank you thank
you madam chair members of the
committee through this fund we
were able in the during the
recovery to operate essential
services working capital program
for those businesses that did
not have access to the PPP we
provided funding as a result of
this legislation we were able to
accept applications monthly we
funded childcare centers we
funded behavioural health care
center centers other medical
providers and some businesses of
essential goods and it was
really critical that we be able
to accept those applications as
they were needed to rather than
waiting a year to be able to
approve them so which is really
wonderful things we ask your
support for another four years
thank you madam chair these are
very time sensitive projects to
make really canonic development
impact of the state and there is
no impact the general fund thank
you Mr.
It here.
They are provisions.
The committee Representative.
Sure.
this is.
She also.
The rules are changed here I.
Thanks to.
Please take the role
Representative.
All of it yes Representative is
yes Representative Lente is a.
A little yes Representative
Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative is based yes.
Yes.
Last year yes madam chair yes.
Yes.
It's just a.
Madam chair and I have already
provided you with the bill I
thank you I appreciate that and
you've got another bill here
with the senator we do as.
SB one fifty five.
The reason I'm sure with cheers
what you four inches off the
what makes you know yes.
Is one.
No it's.
That's what.
It's you do lose a few pounds.
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee I have
Representative such is here with
me I think he has already
traveled through this committee
with a similar piece of
legislation and we do a lot of
work in surgery to it in the
Senate and so essentially is you
know one of the major swim lines
I've had since the in my time
here the legislature is building
out broadband across the state
and in doing so you know we need
to modernize how we handle the
roll universal service fund
which is really what we're doing
here today tend to do today and
all the other various ways that
we pushed broadband forward with
this legislation essentially we
did as I mentioned have a lot of
surgery to the bill through the
Senate which was very good for
the first time we we were able
to bring back that much like
back in two thousand seventeen
madam chair you were here and I
think you mentioned Medicare the
bill for me on the floor I'm
sorry Representative Lundstrom I
think that that you that and so
I was able to bring the New
Mexico strange Care group about
ten or fifteen depending on how
you look at them rural service
companies here in New Mexico
together with the smaller of
wireless companies the larger
wireless companies and I have
everyone sit down go fifteen
rounds and figure out how we're
going to we're gonna do here to
modernize the real universal
service but in two thousand
seventeen I should bring two
pieces of legislation one was to
place well three broadband in
the local infrastructure act to
to reform at that point the
universal serve the role
universal service fund but I
think we all know that every ten
years every decade the goes by
we advance up more than the
previous one hundred years
before that and so that's why
we're here in about five or six
years later to reform even
further and then we also did
rewrite the entire New Mexico
telecommunications act that
you're Senate bill one fifty
five as it's been amended this
point freezes the excess
reduction payments for a three
year period what we ask the new
newly designed configured public
regulation commission to.
tell us what what are some of
the great ways we can better
utilize the are you upset Fund
it also retains the requirement
for for that role carriers will
receive access reduction
payments utilized at a minimum
of sixty percent of those funds
or more percent if they can
adjust on broadband projects
within their areas that they
serve it also requires the PRC
to fund the full thirty million
dollars that we increase that
you're aware reform Fund we went
from the eighteen million
dollars that year to thirty
million dollars because you know
time to change or withdraw it
touched in a while it also takes
of the thirty million
right now we require that the
minimum minimum of eight million
dollars of those requests go to
broadband we increased that to
thirteen million dollars up to
thirty million dollars the the
poor thing that it does is it
requires the PRC to include
really specific items in the
analysis that they come forward
with after this first three year
period and with with these
changes the specific items are
whether to repurpose the excess
reduction support payments
into the commission's broadband
support program the second thing
is a methodology to determine
broadband support levels the for
the third thing is the
appropriate size of the fund
maybe we need to trick it may we
need to grow we we don't know
what what is going to be best
for New Mexico and then the
impact of proposed changes on
Perkins should assessments of
the committee of substitute
again was the result of a lot of
work in a lot of meetings and a
lot of late nights and early
mornings and I'm very proud of
the work that this group came
together they were able to do
I'm gonna ask saying no you're
in a time crunch I'm gonna ask
my experts to speak only
whenever we have questions I
want to give Representative
Sweetser has worked with me
along the way to just a few
words as we move forward I know
it's very different than what he
presented before but I wanted to
hear that before he said
anything.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'll be straight
to the point this is going to
help expand broadband to the
rural areas and our I think this
is gonna be huge are at stake
Senator but yes there's a lot of
work that went into this he did
a lot of work in our I'm here
for the right to support in the
get about about to the rural
areas thank you madam chair.
Right is there anybody here in
support of this.
Position.
so if you'd like to speak
because we are friends you could
amended that would be
appreciated.
What
do you want.
madam chair I I just I am very
very grateful for all I didn't
realize there but it was too so
the the if you say you're you
know all of A. R. P. maybe one
or two can speak and then maybe
we could do that various groups
however you like to have a look
at thank you one okay so what
I'm getting the sponsor is more.
That yes.
W. that.
And madam chair members of the
committee my name is Leo Baca on
the government affairs director
for lumen in New Mexico and I
stand in support of this bill
it's pretty rare that you see
the whole industry come together
and agree on something like this
and I think it is something
that'll benefit rural broadband
in New Mexico thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Margaret
gray and I'm a volunteer
advocate with a a RP New Mexico
and it's two hundred and forty
members in New Mexico.
At A. R. P. supports SB five one
fifty five for all the reasons
that the Senator laid out and we
ask for your full support thank
you.
Madam chair members committee
many Mr Lovelace on the
operations manager dust
broadband access an expansion
and I got director slightly
here's well we also support the
the Senate bill one fifty five
as it stands we believe this is
gonna take broadband forward
into the future thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon let's
take a order the honest I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico exchange carrier group
this is a telephone internet
broadband association that's
been mentioned by R. Sanchez
that provides service to your
rural areas in New Mexico we
strongly support Senate tax
business transportation
committee substitute to Senate
bill one I I for all the reasons
stated I also stand for
questions and we ask for your
support thank you to our
sponsors.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
rather hear behalf of secret
when communication in support of
Senate bill one fifty five with
this legislation is necessary
since currently rural telecom
carriers are financially
rewarded for retaining of ways
customers but are penalized for
converting the same customers to
broadband service we feel this
legislation is necessary now
because with our state's intent
to expand broadband telecom
companies are driven to provide
affordable broadband solutions
in hard to reach areas and this
bill is another resource the hot
get that job done thank you.
There's a.
Bob big nail.
Yes yes I'm here.
Madam chair and members thank
you very much for your time
today I am of this nail
representing eighteen anti in
New Mexico very much in support
of the bill we appreciate the
cooperation of the other players
in the industry and likely to go
she Asians just enter Padilla
said this is good policy for New
Mexico it will take a good hard
look at the future of New Mexico
universal service fund in light
of all the changes in our
industry.
Thanks to Senator Padilla for
bringing the industry together
to carve out what looks like a
very very good policy going
forward thank you madam chair
and members.
Which ever.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for
sponsoring this bill and we also
like to thank our sponsors
Senator Padilla my name is
Richard I am the community
affairs and economic development
manager for finance over the
telephone we certainly can of
terror jams and the
at least we have about one
customer per two square miles
and we're we're we're counting
on the spot on to not only
maintain but to increase getting
brought out to our loyal
customers so thank you thank you
very much for your time.
On wall or.
Thank you madam chair committee
members I'm gonna learn the CEO
to telecommunications in Clovis
New Mexico we operate in a very
rural areas of eastern New
Mexico and on joining support
the substitute bill and all of
the previous comments made in
support of the bill I also want
to thank Senator Padilla for
sponsoring the legislation and
bring all the parties together
to discuss concerns and coming
up with this final version of
the bill thank you very much.
And madam chair with your
permission I do have can look at
here is representing Senate
Bagley one of the more rural the
most rural wireless companies in
the state she was also part of
the negotiate they were sort of
like the fourth part of the
agreement that we have we asked
to see which one would let's go
to the opposition.
Presentation of their I was
gonna up opposition.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Albert cat knack on the
president's you of New Mexico
serve I'm also a veteran.
SB one fifty five point use
telecom money mostly paid by
cell phone wireless providers
for broadband but it does the
opposite New Mexico currently
ranks forty fifth and fiftieth
and broadband according to two
industry websites income and
phone companies want to keep an
estimated seventeen million and
landline subsidies that were
paid in twenty twenty three for
the next three years even if
they lose voice line
subscribers.
Some of these phone companies
forced consumers to have a land
line with DSL this seventeen
million that subsidizes land
lines takes away from the thirty
million dollar fund that could
be earmarked for broadband.
Yes C. C. in the forbearance
order nineteen seventy two
reported that in June of twenty
seventeen and COVID phone
company served a minority of
voice fine lines in other words
most customers use a cell phone.
This legislation will continue
to support legacy technologies
by allowing incumbent phone
companies to receive these
landline subsidies until twenty
twenty six and with out PRC
oversight I urge you to put
broadband as a priority and vote
no on SB one fifty five or amend
the bill to remove the three
year payout thank you very much.
Thank you.
Hello my name is Brian economic
come vice president New Mexico
serve a member of the wireless
internet service provider of
this association
there are twenty six current
lists in New Mexico and I'd like
to speak on behalf of them
basically this hurts our type of
company because they are just
takes away from the broadband
service bucket which is used for
projects broadband projects and
we should let this fun deplete
in anti it is entirely because
it's paying out legacy telephone
companies for landline service
and taking away from the
broadband bucket so if there's
seventy million depletes eight
million increases for broadband
projects that's part that's not
being told talked about right
now so if the funded to you do a
million let's say they are just
it would be twenty nine million
for broadband projects and so we
should let it deplete we should
not continue to pay these
companies for three years for
service that they're not
providing basically.
That's basically what's what's
going on here thank you thank
you.
Good afternoon members committee
my name is Terry agam restaurant
lobbyists in New Mexico Sir and
for the aforementioned reasons
for the opposition I really do
think that the committee and I
appreciate what the Senators
everybody has worked on this
really looking into the
seventeen point five million
dollars that's been put into
this and that's really the three
underlying issue that New Mexico
serve has insulation want more
detail auditing the county for
that money is going thank you
thank you we have anybody on the
team in opposition.
All right let's go to the
committee Representative
Lundstrom.
I
have a question Senator.
How's that we've got left over
more active looking on page
seven.
And.
In this version it was it was
permissible.
Check.
chair over the years all those
chambers and I just away from.
I'm just curious thank you for
reading
anybody else from the committee.
Representative thank you madam
chair I do have a question about
the the three year payout and
the concern about funding to
broadband can you respond to
some of those concerns Madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair and so I appreciate
that madam vice chair I want to
jump in and say Hey can I
respond to the I I do want to
let you know though that all
three individuals that you heard
speaking opposition I have great
respect for them I want to know
that they are all from the same
entity the the second gentleman
it works for other in the
company in this vice president
there was respectfully
representing the the other wisps
that are in the state
they did come to the
conversations very late in the
campaign I did meet with them
and then included them in all
the discussions until right as
the session was beginning
because that's when they chose
to come forward number one
number two I did assure them
that all of you have been
working with me the legislature
at least some years I bring
legislation on broadband that
relates to the role company some
days so some years I bring
legislation as related to make a
large bill we have worked
companies anymore on this but we
do though sometimes we would you
legislation wireless companies
so I did assure them and I and I
and I'm a man the person of my
word that I would work with them
on how to best service requests
within the state that's item
number one minimized a manager
minimized her the second one
which you know is I am I am I am
respectfully of a little
concerned about some of the
comments that were made because
as I understand it the very
company you heard from received
a million dollars being grant
the grant funding from this fund
so it's not as though they're
being left out in the cold with
no supports whatsoever there
were there part in the million
dollars in grants to this
particular company the grant
portion of the of the money that
comes in so I I just all of that
that's and then the third piece
to get more directly to your
question madam chairman and vice
chair
There is so many moving parts
with how each one of the vote
one other thing I want to
mention one of the things you
heard is that these companies
don't I I heard so I was
surprised to hear that they
don't provide broadband most of
these companies that receive the
support to provide broadband
that that they provide some of
the highest broadband speeds in
the state so I was really
surprised to hear that but
respectfully I want to learn
more about that and I did assure
them that I would work with them
in this next year because they
just came to me now so I want to
find a way to support them as
well help them as well
that the best solution we could
find because there is so much
movement in the industry to
simply freeze these payments for
three years don't go up at all
but also the letting go down so
they can do proper budgeting and
planning in the more rural parts
they serve and they can we can
use that three year period for
all the items that I outlined in
my in my original presentation
so that these four pieces of
information can be brought
together with the new version of
our public regulation commission
come back to the legislature I'm
assuming they may come back to
me I don't know I so that I can
help them with whatever it is
that they think would be better
better use of these monies maybe
one of them that we're gonna
find is that there be an
addition that million dollars
this companies receive maybe
they're gonna say something like
we just should receive a third
of the money I don't know but I
do want to make that judgment
because I'm not in their
businesses I'd rather this get
done over three year period.
Senator you also wanted agency
we get to make some comments yes
ma'am if we could thank you just
a.
Whatever Mexico that.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Kim looking
at I am the registered lobbyists
for Smith that we most of you
know this company company a
cellular one they provide mobile
communication services to San
Juan County McKinley and most
important the Navajo Nation
since the inception of the
broadband program four years ago
Smith Bagley has been awarded
thirty nine projects sixty
million dollars in funding four
of which have been matching
funds by Smith Bagley includes
twenty two hours fifty nine
tower upgrades and affects
ninety four thousand New
Mexicans and I just want to say
that this bill will transition
yes our fund into a full
broadband fund for rural New
Mexico and so with that I hope
you support the bill thank you
madam chair the other to my
right just respect I want to
allow Mr something honest to say
we're too he is with the New
Mexico change your group which
represents the small world.
Madam chair members of the
committee of I'm Jason young as
a representative of the New
Mexico state exchange care
company on the I. million the
registered lobbyist and I just
want to point out that the New
Mexico exchange care companies
so they cover about two thirds
of the.
Area of the state that so so I
mean it's it's a lot of areas.
That we cover thank you.
Thank.
Thank you for your presentation
and test it okay so
Representative a Martinez.
Thank you madam chair sure
referred a couple of times this.
Can you tell me what.
It's essentially the sex on that
your question I'm sorry okay so
madam chair and representative
it's a wireless fixed wireless
company so you'll have.
Tower a tower a receiver of some
kind it's they're really affects
not a mobile it's not a movie or
whatever this again with
represents sort of the of the
mobile wireless company they
would provide this would be
providing wireless broadband to
a fixed fixed wireless
connection.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay anybody else in the
committee.
What's the desire the committee.
Second
question and the second going to
take the role.
Representative and in order.
Representative Duncan yes
Representative is yes.
Lente.
Presented will yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative working as yes
Representative Mason.
Representative is yes.
At western yes madam chair yes.
And what is yes or.
Yes this.
Three eighty nine.
Eighty nine madam chair audible
members thank you so much of
three line is up.
Did dealing with the tourism
department and it's.
Quietly this to
It's existing sports Authority
division so we're not creating
any theme or.
You know adding to any notions
of the government actually what
we're doing is we're shrinking
government the the sports
authority division us the D.
funded for over a decade it got
minimal funding in FY twenty for
a little bit of funding and and
now.
FY twenty three whether now FY
twenty four and so what this
does is two things one is that
it focuses its responsibilities
on on identifying infrastructure
statewide which is the key to
sports tourism and then on page
three it shrinks the sports
advisory committee from twenty
five members including nineteen
public members to eleven members
take a chair by the to the
governor with ten public members
I think this is conducive to the
limited funding available at the
tourism department hopefully the
department hired director here
this spring and
Get the ball rolling on the on
the statutorily required
division.
Without all stand for questions
thank you
anybody here in favor of this.
Ready anybody in opposition.
Sir.
Press.
Sorry about that thank you I
just want to let you know I was
in support for all reasons
mentioned in the building like
to see it supported thank you
thank you on jump earlier Mr
farmer and rancher from New
Mexico this is important to us
thank you thank you for being
here today and even.
Already have anybody.
Okay and anybody in opposition.
Okay I'll.
Let's go to the committee.
Right yes.
You madam chair sure or
This action.
Years.
What was it why was it not
getting funding across.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Martinez so it's
created in two thousand three as
you know the you know the bank's
question October of wait.
And I think you got to funded in
fiscal ten it just wasn't a
priority I mean we were slashed
by just left and right we've
been trump the government like
eight percent in the middle of
fiscal year the new
administration came in two
thousand eleven and just didn't
I didn't
It it just kind of became out of
sight out of mind it's still was
good law I was still in statute
was still a legal requirement of
the government but it just never
got funded never got done and
then so last year I ran a bill
to kind of.
The size it and bring it back to
life and that's when we got some
funding last year a little bit
of funding issue.
madam chair Senator how much.
Lunches and House Bill to issue.
Madam chair a risen much things
I don't know because everyone's
pretty exhausted from the Senate
debate yesterday so I haven't I
haven't checked but it was when
it came out of the house it was
had no funding.
but it was in the executive
recommendation I believe that
was on on the Senate side so
maybe two hundred thousand two
hundred thousand.
thank you madam chair Senator on
on page.
Representative C..
Coming up with the this is an
issue or.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Martinez it's up
it's good just it just kind of
further instructs the the sports
authority with regards to be
current laws identify existing
infrastructure for sporting
activities and there's just kind
of.
Kind of captures that inventory
inventory all high school and
college sports venues that was a
it was eluded to in the FIR that
it deals with high school and
college sports it does not we're
talking about the news and then
also inventory all essentially
all non high school and college
venues which would be
of little league field soccer
fields indoor basketball courts
ice reaches any every venue in
the state that could
theoretically host a Attorney
then or or at this point
I just want to inventory all
think in our of P. was recently
sent out a couple weeks ago
and and that R. P. hopefully
someone will be hired to do that
study.
Madam chair senators so this is.
Like you said just to be aware
of what in use or available on
their different parts of the
state.
So they're gonna do.
Master list of every baseball
fan.
Madam chair representative
Martinez yes that was the are
few that went out a couple weeks
ago I think that they're going
to use about a hundred thousand
dollars higher
Economist or some company to to
do that inventory and so this
this of century fix just kind of
guy that that R. S. P..
Madam chair summer things reuse
ordering is.
Extremely important that we
continue.
Provide as much as we can.
You know what I understand the
water this is inventory and.
Instruction what.
This back.
for you it's for.
and expand the.
For more.
President.
It's important to give these
kids goals are project so.
You know we can identify some of
these fields and and track
these major tournaments
basketball for baseball
tournaments whatever.
One of the bills that sports
tourism and this is a great
idea.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Lundstrom.
What just might when you're
ready I'd like to make the
motion and representative
Duncan.
Okay.
So I have a couple questions and
Senator so each in the FIR it
talks about there's not there
was an item of.
Appropriation but you said on
the Senate side there was and
you think it's about two two
hundred to two fifty Madam chair
of register goes I believe it is
and I'll get back to the get
back to you by by tomorrow but
it was in several several Senate
finance committee members
request to to keep it a flat
budget at two fifty but I'm not
sure how much got into but I
know that the tourism department
budget increased tremendously
maybe ninety percent.
Thank you and is that going to
be enough.
Madam chair representative okay
was it is not too it it it in
speaking with the tourism sector
last year I think a million
dollars would be a robust
agency with the director and
maybe two staff people and some
later some studies or some
promotions I think California
will get us off off you will get
us moving in the right direction
but it just
I didn't didn't do to my work
this summer and fall to
emphasize it it was the money
was put in by the house and and
junior money so that the non
reoccurring category and so it
we didn't receive an LFC a
budget recommendation in my mind
it was two fifty in the
department LFC is mind it was
non reoccurring and the
executive apparently didn't make
it a super party so so I'll stay
on the all state on it this year
and get it fully funded next
year okay thank you it's so you
guys you said you had are you
wanted eleven board members why
such a big number thank you
there is a guy goes well it's
today it's twenty five so we're
shrink it from twenty five to
eleven.
you know eleven seven or nine
would be great but twenty five
is definitely too big and
current statute has several
cabinet secretaries part of the
board was created in the and the
a classic Richardson
ministrations thank I could see
having that many board members
you almost never get anything
that you can't even agree to me
probably so that that's all
about what to desire the
committee.
And.
I think you take the role please
Patrick.
Representative.
Representative dot and yeah.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Senator let this.
Yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Martinez yes Representative yes.
Yes.
Question yes
yes.
Thank you all right you've got
another bill with this Senator
four sixty four S. you know when
you're ready.
Thank you madam chair honorable
members it's great to be.
Christy just a powerful house
commerce committee.
The at this deals with the New
Mexico outdoor recreation Act
that was that was with that we
did several years ago it's in
the economic development
department and what this bill
does is it simply button the
magic word echo tourism.
in the first paragraph there on
line twenty three by Scott
recreation division of the
department shall increase agro
tourism and that has a
definition of agro tourism on
the bottom of page two and if I
may madam chair the
conservation.
Many in the Senate put in
paragraph six which is line
seven eight it it's it's I must
admit it is redundant with
with paragraph to.
It is redundant with
Shucks I think there's a mention
of in state businesses somewhere
in statute so that I just want
to give you a heads up on that
that it was put in and was not
part of the original bill as a
friendly amendment.
I don't recall I think it's
redundant but I am I can't I
don't recall workers.
So Representative wants to wants
to help you out here.
Thank you what that'll stand for
questions.
Yes a page two line seven eight
was in addition to the bill in a
Senate committee because they
want to emphasize in state.
but I think that words in state
or somewhere in the existing
law.
I just wanna give you a heads up
thank you madam chair.
Thank you for writing this
anybody
Favor this bill.
Anybody opposes bill.
Okay have.
The start of the.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee to be Rivera with
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau first off I want to thank
senator my office for bringing
this forward for us agritourism
has long been a priority for our
organization and for agriculture
throughout the state we are so
very excited to hopefully
finally get in the box and get
this industry prioritized and so
that we can start taking major
steps to promote those locations
across the state that many of us
like to visit from pumpkin
patches to lavender fields and
of course our winery so thank
you guys for your support and I
encourage you to support the
bill.
All right thank you know the
version while ago I was me
mailing lists on the kind
Senator shouldn't appeared I
thought is on the wrong.
I
right days anyway little light.
Anyway the Jember layer of New
Mexico former rancher not just
like to so much support for this
bill it's a wonderful way for
young farmers and ranchers
agricultural is to get started
in a business and you can't
depend on.
Drugs for a living a lot of time
special small scale this allows
people to put in things like
Tiffany of state and for
lavender fields and pumpkin
patches and just urge your
support and thank to sponsor
thank you.
Madam chair
that madam chair committee
members mines pampering here
representing to New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
in terms tabling to realize it
really appreciate this and
bringing this forward same thing
and to add on to that we see
agriculture here in New Mexico
is a very important part of not
only the economy but for people
to learn about where their food
comes from who grows it who
raises it and how delicious it
can be my family is in has added
agritourism as part of the year
farming business he's a huge
part of it is so important to
have office thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
just before sixty four and thank
the sponsor for bring it forward
our members believe agritourism
as a valuable piece of the
agricultural industry at large
we believe this step aligns with
the Economic Development
Department economic
diversification strategy by
targeting two of the nine
identified industry outdoor
recreational sorry outdoor
recreation and sustainable
agriculture the goal of their
strategy is to build a diverse
and robust economy that enables
local talent cultivates
innovation and delivers
prosperity for all New Mexicans
please support and up let up
with New Mexican industries that
are going to contribute to
diversifying our economy thank
you.
Already and I think we've got
some folks on soon.
There are.
It is your available.
Yeah.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is David you
Serra and I am from fort Sumner
New Mexico.
in two thousand twenty one my
wife and I planted a fruit
orchard and we want to make it
right or is a big part of our of
our operation and and for that
reason we we strongly support
this legislation hope you guys
are just thank you.
That really.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I think really it
seems that we producers of New
Mexico we also standing strong
support Senate bill four sixty
four and thank the sponsor for
bringing forward agriculture is
vital to New Mexico and this
legislation will be a great
right educate the public about
what we do to even close the
state the nation and.
For this reason it and others
already stated we support this
bill and encouraging the
committee to do the same to
support our adventurism
operations thank you.
Hello.
Yes.
This whitewater with Wagner
forms.
Full support of this bill I
would like your support thank
you.
Tax day.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee try to stay
registered lobbyists in New
Mexico Chile Association we sent
a strong order Senate bill four
sixty four your first provides a
great opportunity for membership
should diversify their revenue
potential the Chile industry has
been declining over the years
are so ciation is looking at a
number of different options from
members to generate additional
revenue other than selling
across and the passage of this
bill will help accomplish that
initiative we just worked thank
you.
Committee.
The question was thank you madam
chair Mike my question madam
chair is will this agritourism
be mandated to utilize New
Mexico true branding.
we test New Mexico true madam
chair throughout everybody else
and create to lose that are
haven't side of.
Madam chair of the religion it's
not mandated but I believe it's
in their interest it's in all of
our interest because it's such a
great brand for our state.
There's nothing in this this
this statutes actually the the
Economic department not tourism.
They kind of go hand in hand so
I would hope that everybody
listening online in the audience
would would take you I think but
there's nothing that mandates.
I don't see madam chair Senator
we have billing here few weeks
ago.
Regarding outdoor tourism or the
Sanchez trying to it.
The outdoor tourism to the
thanks to the tourism department
canonic development and one of
the reasons why this is a
marketing piece.
So I don't know madam chair but
it seemed like that was a big
deal with that other group and
they're trying to prevent filing
in the one of the that kind of
support but this is an economic
development program Madam chair
of the lunch and this is in the
economic development department
it's a division within that
department
the
The house founder that division
is Representative Rubio who's
who's.
This is a friendly bill to but
But I would think that big you
know it says the words tourism
agritourism is in state and out
of state I would think that they
would utilize that Brandon and
it would be some cohesiveness
amongst the two departments but
we'll see how that plays out
with the secretaries and.
Things that nature.
Thank you Representative Eli
and.
Thank you madam chair Senator
I've got to most constituents
and friends to do this last
summer a little bit bigger
farmers than others some small
and so I'm all for this.
to the second.
The funds to percent about
making sure that that is kept
there.
The other part of this would be
that
You grew up on a farm or ranch
you know this is nothing.
Probably going to like it but
anymore.
but for those who grew up in a
in Albuquerque or.
Right middle of city this is a
great great thing for them and
to get out and enjoy it
Representative Lujan I would
Google crawls that we would be
willing to to try and the two
shovels and.
So I'm just wondering that if
that's alright.
Okay thank you madam chair.
So.
And your bill the terms that the
revenue this state
you Senator have that.
Thank you madam chair of rules
are great as the I mean it's a
billion dollar industry nation
wide it was up in the recent
economic development.
Up.
You know state that was produced
and you know nine two of the
nine sectors fit into this bill
of value added agriculture and.
And tourism the numbers.
I don't know the numbers of
agro.
Echo business agritourism
business in this state but it's
it's definitely more than than a
million dollars I think that.
I think if this
if both secretary secretary
Keyes
secretary.
Of of tourism keep an eye on
this I think we get some good
stats for for next year but I
think
But yeah it's it's like it's
like a German said
representative Duncan folks from
that basis if this stuff up but
like I'm sure you would you
would want to make another call
and I put a lot of folks.
But and of course the or are a
wonderful wineries and funding
batches and things are currently
madam chair there's border sixty
five agro tourism type
businesses New Mexico generating
over eighteen million dollars
and now GDP revenue.
That point
in our state.
Hi that would raise.
Senator.
Where I just.
These and.
That.
Yeah sure.
Nineties and she she hasn't the
times.
The market.
Thank you to buy me what I
mentioned earlier the.
The the program of six I was
thinking does it contradict a
paragraph one paragraph one is
increase agro tourism in the
state and then programs sixes
promote and support in state
recreational agro tourism
business so if you think.
If you have problems with that
that's fine you can take it out
if not we'll just need.
But I promised the.
The Senate founder Senator
Steinborn I would mention it to
this committee.
Is there.
It's Patrick Representative.
Representative out and yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Little yes.
Yes.
Margins.
Representative uses.
Representative that is yes.
Yes
Yes.
Yes zero.
The HSD everyone's already we're
going to go to
Just be a Levin before you get
to see that I don't always
everybody before we had talked
about
Consenting out SB one forty
three and I didn't get everybody
on on record me that it is the
same bill that we heard it has
more bill for three house bill
three oh nine.
And so I just wanted to make
sure that everybody was okay
with that we briefly talked
about it last time but wanted to
at least take a pulse and make
sure that everybody was good.
Okay.
Okay so we've got to do pass on
that.
Yes it was they gave me machine
pay out we heard it already.
And so let's just do a quick
tally really quick so I've got
it on record.
SB one organises consent I'm
requesting that we can set SB
one forty three it's a more bill
to H. B..
Three oh nine the.
Okay so going to take the wrong
that of Representative Lundstrom
moved to do pass or I think.
That's used in the second.
Representative and in order
service center.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah Representative update.
Yes Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Martinez yes
Mason yeah.
Sure yes Sir yes.
Thank you let's go to SB eleven
which is a carry over from.
Tribal.
Paid family and medical leave.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee on.
My experts again to see
McDaniels entirely Massey both
with a southwest of women's Law
Center okay welcome back I know
that the committee.
Make some revisions and some
amendments and have you done so
so we made to amendments with
consultation with some of the
members to kind of understand to
make sure that we're hearing
from all parties involved and
one of the pieces so I believe
we have the amendment before you
all if we could move the
discussion madam chair.
So most.
Thank you madam chair so there
are three major things that that
come out of this amended that
you have before you the number
on.
Right point two two six one six
oh dot three.
Also the three major things that
happen here in conversations
with different folks we heard
that there is concern about how
to define the health care
providers in so we want to make
sure that that was well defined
so it's you know it's very clear
that it was a doctor or up so
impact medicine or surgery is
appropriate and where they're at
and then in the next section to
the amendments to in three both
affect we do the same thing all
we heard concern from folks
about the solvency of the fund
and I something else to talk
about all that and but I'll just
focus on the amendment but now
to ensure that we were not
raising it too high on the
individuals or for employers at
one point we amended and and to
make sure that it would be
solved it we amended to reflect
how the department currently
handles their other funds that
they manage and so what that
means is that at they could
increase it up to one ten in a
single year so for example right
now the rates are would be at
point four for employers and
point five for employees if for
whatever reason they felt they
needed to raise it then they
could raise it to be equivalent
to a one point zero overall and
then when it was divided it
would be point four five four
employers and point I would I I
for employees so that that's the
amount to be able to be
increased at any given time.
And that way they could go up to
my last one slides into it
funding numbers not writing them
down.
Finally the last one we want to
make clear there was some
concern when we're looking at
this that they wanted to be
clear that the putting use this
as a calendar year it was a
rolling twelve month period this
we felt very comfortable with
the intention of the the the
bill the entire time we don't
want people utilizing this
constantly and so we didn't
serve the language rolling in
there as well there were other
amendments that we could come to
and and you know some examples
of those and I've spoken a lot
about this is yeah we've
exempted two thirds of small
businesses and businesses in the
state on it we cannot exempt all
of them another proposal was up
point six five percent on
employees point three five on
employers that's just a very
heavy burden for a lot of the
workers in the wages they make
at this point students will come
to some of those but these are
these are efforts to make a good
faith effort again towards
making this a better bill for
everyone and like I said this is
this is born out of the task
force that we also need
additional amendments in the
Senate and these are more than
we're looking at now without it
Senator questions.
Okay.
Everybody's got the amendment
other questions from the
committee regarding the
amendments.
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair
I guess and I went back to the
bill and what I'm seeing here is
that
the most substantial piece of
this amendment is capped the
amount an employee pays is that
correct chair of that is that is
that we one of the three pieces
yeah Madam chair representative
Madam chair representative I see
some definitions for health care
providers I see the
Out.
capping what an employee pays
and then some other things
rolling here did you know Madam
chair representative.
Thank you for bringing the
amendment for the distance not.
Eight what my expectation was in
terms of looking at
sustainability for the fund.
Thank you thank you I'm
Representative people what you
when your co sponsors is here
would you like her to set up at
this absolutely.
We get a state reserves are.
Welcome Senator thank you.
Okay.
Representative Hernandez.
Okay.
Sorry I keep I want the same
thing but you know thank you for
trying to make some changes but
I I agree with Representative
Lundstrom this is just not
enough to make this bill
palatable
All.
Things.
So
anybody else on the amendment
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative
Just wanted to have as far as
negotiations as you were
I just wanted to follow up
well there were some that were
agreed to
there were a number of other
topics that were discussed in it
know that that the sponsors not
willing to make amendments and I
just very quickly want to
confirm what those were
talking about issues with
Give me just one second here.
There were
They wanted to yeah that was
that request a Titan of
The answer is no yeah
recommendation definition
tighten up healthcare providers.
That can prove the Lee I'm sorry
every.
Critical public safety employees
police firefighters and some way
to ensure they get some leave
and then there's some discussion
about how that might be done
there was discussion about what
we do know that the current
shortages in some of these
critical public safety
healthcare fields and that that
was requests for these
discussion about.
Some kind of process or
procedure or something to allow
some modification on some of
this to deal with those kinds of
situations
the players correct thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative so we have some
of those conversations some of
them we with that we're not
we were not amenable to us and
we we were not looking to
exclude certain classes of
workers because they protect our
communities are because they
work with our kids we felt
really important that all
workers have access to paid time
off I will turn it over to my
experts briefly on to talk about
how the first issue that brought
up is is addressed Madam
chairwoman and Representative
Matthews the definition of
serious medical condition is
word for word the same as FMLA
so that's already in the bill
and we did at
I I I commented on that
okay.
I think and I think that
addresses the primary issue
about the I I will talk to the
solvency about it but I can wait
on that until after the.
I have
for the Representative we also
talked about some of these
businesses that have mandated
state staffing ratios at
childcare hospitals pre K.
classrooms correctional
facilities and again that was an
area where we were able to agree
to
a change in the.
Would you like to go on this and
that.
Madam chair and representative.
You know staffing ratios maybe
what what are they doing now
when people get sick as my
question so.
We you know staffing ratios are
are all over state governments
and and even some private
industry
those workers we still want to
protect those workers were paid
family medical leave so when
people are sick now they have to
deal with that this would be no
different if they are having a
schedule pregnancy are scheduled
surgery or having to go to
dialysis or anything else so at
the deal right now people being
sick this would be no different.
I was thank you senator for that
use your tier
Our New York agents
businesses and then having to
deal with these issues and they
frequently work them out.
We are testimony last week I
think this last week.
They would.
It should.
we are one testimony about
particularly small businesses
treating employees like family
working with them on these kinds
of issues a lot of it done not
because the law requires it but
because of the repair for one
another your respective support
for one another
So
the suggestion that that there
are ways that you can work on
scheduling ideas and work with
staff and so forth and we do try
to cover things I think this is
the way that people have been
doing this indeed it's also
dependent.
without having a family medical
leave act.
And madam chair this this
certainly helps every business
be able to do what some
businesses.
Yeah we certainly do have larger
displays is the Mike Senator.
But we certainly have a
businesses.
That are much larger that have
programs and of course they can
get away for in this program
that fits substantially similar
similar but that's only about
three or four percent of our of
our businesses of course we're
exempting sixty six percent of
our businesses from having to
pay at
but you know at least of a large
portion of our workers who are
not protected and a large
portion of our businesses who
want this to help them so some
don't they do it themselves if
they've got a good enough
program they can get away for
certainly reflected that in the
bill.
Thank you thanks.
Madam chair.
my point is only that is that
there were additional
discussions about these ads
concerns I think that's correct
is that Madam chair
representative I agree that I
just mentioned a few off the top
of
this page I appreciate that
Here in Senator Representative
another tough topics that was
discussed
Was the fact that to an extent
this is an on chain.
Potentially possibly and in many
instances will be an unfunded
mandate for those childcare
workers
And other times the people who
work for nonprofits that have
contracts with the state to
provide various kinds of.
Programs for developmentally
disabled people for childcare
for entities range of.
Important social services and
there was a discussion began
about
a concern about the fact that
those provider businesses will
Not be able to increase their
rates or their prices if you
will in order to cover the cost
of the program again I'm just
confirming that we have a
discussion about.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative actually a group
of Senator refer to that we did
have discussions about how much
of those costs were were dressed
I will also acknowledge the tax
act impact the recently pass out
of this chamber Madam chair
representative that included a
point two five percent decrease
in G. R. T. for businesses which
will be in excess of how much
the they're expected and in this
piece of I will tend to to the
senator to discuss more.
madam chair in addition to that
in our budget we are we are
significantly increasing
Medicaid provider rate.
So
these businesses that that live
off of Medicaid Medicare will
have the ability to at this very
small feet.
I mean we're talking a hundred
dollars for work for for
business at these lower rate
health care as for this.
Which is nothing and yet the
business itself will get help
because before it could really
afford to pay for workers that
had to stay home with that
difficult pregnancies now they
won't even have to pay them when
they're staying home through the
program so we believe the
program is designed to help
small businesses certainly the
case in other states and one
more thing if I may add madam
chair representative in addition
in the tax package we also have
is we cut the G. R. T. faster on
child care facilities are
private child care facilities
this is a a significant
reduction in costs for them you
know we heard in the and not to
go outside chair representative
to address the concern of how
much again that this was a
significant cost they were
concerned about and and as I had
mentioned in a previously hadn't
utilizing these such this this
kind of care those were those
pregnant individuals at these
places it is a one time there
was three last summer and none
of those individuals came back
and it the state still suffer
from lack of attention Madam
chair representative because
they can't.
Madam chair I care for state run
child care.
They're already offered a state
program right now which is
twelve weeks okay so this state
will benefit from joining this
program instead of what they're
doing now which was his only
through an executive order that
would be subject to overturning
within the governor.
And I have madam chair
Representative I think it would
be some figures during our
discussions that the that the
entire childcare industry and
how this is going to cost the
providers I believe is one point
three million dollars this do
you remember our discussions
about that I'm that's my memory
of the State.
Offsite.
Is a substantial amount of
money.
So madam chair I think you and I
talked about that Representative
but but you're looking all of
the child care workers in the
entire state and yet many of
them are at state plans which
have this right now
many of them are in.
Public schools.
Which have this right now and
that program is too expensive to
to maintain because there's no
they're still paying into it
it's all state funded.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative also act that
that it was status taxpayers
we're already paying for the
state's program for paid family
leave for state employees we are
do that on this fund would
ensure that that was accessible
to any Wirth New Mexicans that
have been working for six months
in the job production.
In those.
Madam chair the presenters thank
you for that information
and I just want to follow up on
one commented Senator said that
the
It.
To people on.
Please leave under the family
medical leave act that there
would be they would be paid but
in fact as I read the bill
This wage employees are paid
full salary but other.
Graham and other employees of
minimum wages are paid
of percentage seven percent or
sixty percent of their wages so
there is a cost and and we do
pre and in addition but if
you're having to replace that
employee is very much for
example you may incur training
cost you may.
Paying the salary of another
employee who's the replacement
person
providing benefits for them if
they're eligible for many may
not always be so there is no
cost to the employer of for New.
Representative can I get ready
to use the money people are
having.
Yes okay so madam chair
representative I I think we had
a miscommunication then when I
said.
They wouldn't have to pay on
that the employer when the
employees on leave the employer
does not pay their salary that's
what I meant so while they're on
leave employer can use that
salary for training for someone
else
So the employer doesn't pay the
employee's salary when they're
on leave that's paid by the fund
and madam chair representative
one one benefit I think we don't
talk about enough is that we
need.
It is
is that people are then able to
train the person who is taking
that place to it offers more
opportunity for planning for
businesses than usually would
exist when someone is putting
off telling the employee they're
gonna take some time off so it
allows for more planning stage
than usual and and share your
representative senator that
would certainly be true in most
instances with pregnancy where
there's a certain amount of time
to think about that.
which we all know and allows for
planning one of them but with
other times
Leave that may be taken on the
plan there would always be a lot
of forewarning that this was
going to agree with them thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for that this
stipulates I think three things
that are important on this one
if you can plan ahead
workarounds you know was not
unduly stressful for the
business to do so number two
that the business is allowed to
have checked in to see what that
would would that make sense and
and those elements as well so
again that can help for planning
for how long someone is
experiencing emergency maybe out
so it offers those funding
opportunities and I Madam chair
representative I don't know the
number three less but I'm
Representative at.
Well.
You know if it's if it's like a
heart attack.
You know you can't really plan
for that and and that's an
emergency if something like that
but the majority of these
illnesses are ones that are ones
that happen over time that you
start note knowing about so
surgeries chemotherapy things
like that even dialysis can't
can be pip up but yeah there is
an element of there will be some
there will be if we put this in
place there could be a medical
emergency that that that that
they can't even get approval for
because that happens too fast
because you still have to get
the approval you still have to
your path your medical doctor
you still have to go through
that process we did put in ten
days if the department can
decide within ten days of but up
to ten days they would have to
approve it but there there could
be situations where you don't
get the approval it happens too
fast madam chair that is the
current state of affairs as well
and you know.
Here.
Senator at the bill originally
had.
I have individuals to take this
that family leave in a box of
four hours and that was teaching
the Senate and now the
now they're allowed to take it
in and eight hours lock it.
You madam chair this was a
business issue
you know it's like dialysis
dialysis you need couple times a
week we need to leave for half a
day of the task force came up
with the four hours businesses
wanted to longer than that.
Easier on them to have it be a
full day so that is one change
we make to make it the eight
hours as a minimum.
This is a reminder we're talking
about the amendment.
The minute the.
The reason I'm madam chair
reason I'm asking is that
related discussions about other
things including them and.
In these discussions that led to
the state.
Just give some framework for the
fact that the direct number of
issues committee.
and all of them did not result
in at this and.
Right thank you madam chair
thank you.
and then just that I think just
probably one board there were
there were a lot of discussions
about issues but the the other
one I missed I wanted to mention
was in
of the of the request that I
presented to use that had come
from there is business
business people was and this is
language that having a.
It is kind of an unusual
provision about being able to
receive leave for a at and if
you do I'm not I don't I'm sorry
I don't have the exact language
in front of me but someone who
is actually not a family member
but is allowed to be treated as
a family member for purposes of
the bill what the request was
and is that remember seeing
several times is that to ask the
workers yes the name who that
person was going to be as
opposed allowing it to be
changed all the time today to
designate this special person
I was you mentioned that there
would be some knowledge and
could just be changed every
every week or whatever and that
was dispatched to thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative for that I think
so two pieces I actually talked
further with one of the
Representative it is our
presenters about in the in the
general objective was that would
be someone that would be named
annually the could be could be
given example up to all of this
one is that again only being
able to do it within a rolling
twelve month period we help with
part of the solution that but
the bigger element was that to a
certain degree and I don't have.
The to to the poison pill to be
honest because we talked the
department of workforce
solutions they all those to
owners for them to keep track
and in the spirit of not wanting
to make businesses keep track of
everybody's one exception or or
one family member that's close
to them but may not be by blood
we didn't want to put that on
businesses as well and so we
felt that by doing that the
rolling would encompass that
sense of it it wasn't coming up
all these different places.
Madam chair but we also if you
look at that amendment number
one we change the definition so
that number one is the health
care provider and number two
would be determined by the
secretary of with that long list
of groups that grandparents we
just got a variety of family
members so
amendment number one both
provided to change the health
care provider and then to look
at but giving that bility to the
secretary to look at who else
was part of that medical
process.
And share.
I think that that is.
Those are the questions that I
have on the.
Okay does anybody else have
anything on the amendment
Representative at chairman and
to.
Thank you madam chairwoman I
just simply want to appreciate
the work of Representative
Matthews of the have the
business community that and and
and your clothes and then do we
get I think that based on the
conversation that we had on
Friday after the link the one we
heard from all the people coming
through that up and at that
point in time I think there was
the writing was on the wall
requests for this bill was going
but I believe that because there
was a willingness and openness
to want to collaborate.
Issues that you were or still
are.
Both sides of the table to try
to defend those out of some way
and if and if the and it does
not go for I just wanna also
matters is the statute my
comments on Friday but at the
same time.
Eight Representative Matthews is
and you it was just about of
work to do and do the work thank
you.
Representative Duncan on the
amendment.
Thank you madam chair
Representative it still doesn't
address the issue that I have.
With the lack of employees.
and and I was hoping that some
rain here we would.
Address small companies having
to spend two weeks to three
months training an individual
and then that individual leaving
when I can't find the employees
that I need right now.
And then the other issue was I
was hoping that there would be a
voluntary opt in with this and
and and there is in the for that
madam chair I would move to
table.
The motion to table is there
He was arrested because there.
Second.
Can I talk.
So so.
Yes.
So when you're the last person
to speak you cannot make the
motion the Representative
Hernandez made the motion and
Martinez made the second let's
go ahead and take a.
It.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative that yes to
table.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative elected.
noted.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative lunch yes to
table.
Representative Martinez yes to
table.
Representative Mason yes I.
Representative Matthews.
Yes to table.
Here no to table.
Madam chair to table.
Yes I was.
Okay.
You like to.
Consider
briefly I a on this because I
know the topic that came up a
lot and so on the solvency the
bill and so are the of the of
the fund we did reach out
actually to the White House is
department of labor to
understand how this particular
bill would fare on it would be
Mexico and as we known as we
talked about bureau the bureau
business and economic research I
also done it in there estimate
was around four five percent
usage rate is not that great in
those expected I see we saw the
range for an uptake rate with
and was interesting about I will
go back to be real fast is the
presumption was that there was
fully use in the twelve week
period that's typically not the
case very few actually use the
entirety of the twelve weeks
since then we've been able to
get information from the White
House to utilize our speed one
and it's on your desk at the
simulation model estimates for
New Mexico SB eleven and this
came again recently they were
doing this for over a week for
us and I really appreciate
working now if you look at the
top of the second page it says
clearly that approximately four
point eight percent of all
workers or five percent point
three percent of eligible
workers but it's very it's a
cover family or medical needs
take leave work and have an
approved application for paid
family and medical benefits so
this is again significantly
lower than what we saw on the
FIR and that does that should
causes applies because that part
was extremely high and it was
and again it was based on this
we simply don't know but we have
to economic research sites that
have come forward and said what
we have a good idea these are
the US and we got have based on
that idea and even being overly
generous with how much time
people actually take and so from
that perspective on this bill I
I think it really does come down
to the question of is this.
The time for New Mexico to do
paid family leave because there
has been significant business
interests that have been put
taken into account right right
things we've already discussed
in the right protections are in
place we've had task force a new
task force will not necessarily
turn out of something or when
more than a third businesses
have already purchase would not
result in more than a third
business owner nonprofits also
occupied a significant portion
as well and we seen it succeed
in other states we seem to do
well for those families and as a
as a representative I have to
ask why not in New Mexico when
we have families that are
dealing with these crises and we
have families that needed help
take care of their kids and
that's what happens they have to
make sure that.
I know families that have family
members with terminal illnesses
and they had to limit how much
time they were by those but
sites because they had to go to
work and keep a roof over their
heads and I know families with
the mothers were back on
hospital floors working after
giving birth days before so we
know that the experience here in
New Mexico we've seen other
states thrive in this we have
evidence from our economic
research arms that showed is
that this can be a successful
effort we have put significant
work into this and so I I I want
to make sure that we're looking
at this that I know where the
commerce committee and I know we
want to care about small
businesses and those protections
this is also about making sure
that would keep the people can
come back to work and when they
return to a healthy enough to
build Mexico's economy so that
madam chair I think the
questions.
So back to the bill.
Question one million.
Representative and in order no
to table.
Representative docket yes the
table.
Representative no.
Representative little no.
Representative Lundstrom yes to
table.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes yes yes.
The state panels that are.
Thank you can we pass.
Thank.
Everybody's else's voted and and
that the last two are are the
vice chair and the chair so you
go before.
Yes the table.
By your.
Thank you madam chair at a
table.
I want to thank you for
incredible work feeding your
team have done.
Bills the table.
We are adjourned I think we will
be having of meetings on
Wednesday so we prepare to work.
Yeah.
