Okay so my understanding is H.
B. three thirty eight is the
active roles.
So we've got that base be one
sixty three and then just be
eighty three so we'll start of
those as soon as we take the
wrong.
Representative enormous.
Representative in your.
Senator that is.
Representative Lente.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom here.
Representative Martinez your.
The base here.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Sure here madam chair.
Of course thank you all righty
Eighty one sixty three Europe.
Receive the sept.
And my understanding is
Representative Lundstrom has
moved it
discussion right the second.
All right.
Representative here.
Right.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives.
Senator John block this is
Representative twenty emit about
Miner you've seen this before
and the so previously we had a
bill that we were discussing
house bill one sixty three so.
Sermon.
Okay you can hear me now.
Thank you so we have a house
bill one sixty three.
Which is now a substitute and
the substitute pretty much that
we made a few changes that were
recommended by the committee
members
first of all.
We put a sunset on this for
twenty twenty eight.
We put a one million dollar G.
R. T. cap on on revenue I
believe.
It's just.
You have to be a registered
agent in the state.
And then the twenty five percent
G. R. T. cut comes from the
state portion that's what we
discussed previously so the main
changes that you have anything
at.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I just
wanted to clarify the it was one
of them because a because of
Representative Lente is example
of the real estate agent that
makes you know quite a bit of
money and would this apply to
him if they have less than those
kind of the for employees so we
did put a cap of
receive no more than one million
dollars in gross receipts per
calendar prior calendar year
prior and then just in case the
calendar year prior they did not
and then this year they're
making a lot of money we also
then put a twenty thousand
dollar cap for that curry
calendar year that that's this
much of the deduction that they
can utilize because they're
taking it per month.
And madam chair we we're waiting
on Clinton Turner he's our
expert from the drafting service
and he should be here soon so
we'll be happy to start though
madam chair.
since it's a substitution let's
go ahead and ask anybody in the
audience if there for.
this bill.
Everybody yes the bill.
They're civilians in.
Yes.
Matthew Mante.
Your available to talk.
Madam chair committee members
can everyone hear me okay.
Yes.
We're in strong support of this
bill we're small business we've
been operating Albuquerque on
cemetery in Comanche since
nineteen seventy six we employs
six people support three
families and as a small business
it's still trying to recover
from the COVID shut down this
would be a game changer for us
we could talk about hiring
people increasing inventory and
possibly even giving employees a
raise so we're in strong support
this legislation thank you all
very much.
Thank you.
Okay.
Carlo.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee it's
Leri Sonntag here speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico
business coalition which
represents hundreds of
businesses large and small and
thousands of New Mexicans.
Appreciate the bill sponsor
bringing this forward there's
been many many other bills that
are being advanced in this
session that amount to tax
increases and other mandates on
small businesses we fully
support this effort to having
she arching deduction for our
small businesses in New Mexico
thank you.
All right thank you
would you like to ICO would
assist you would you like him to
say anything or do you want to
go on to the committee.
On the.
Thank you madam chair I think
just any questions technical
will assist him with thank you
all right let's go on to the
committee does any but if the
committee have anything to ask
for comment on Representative
Mason.
That level.
I.
Seven where.
For the J..
Have.
Have a.
And.
The.
I have the tools
that.
While.
The.
What
what.
So.
The the the the for employees.
Well.
For those
of us those are.
So that.
The.
Yeah.
I.
What.
And.
Yeah.
That is.
We have more than one is that
although
the location.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I think it's
based on the business so madam
chair representative I'm not
sure what what your businesses
are set up like.
All of your.
With our.
Is that what that.
That.
That.
The fact that.
The recall.
One.
The.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yeah the that
makes sense so it sounds like
it's only it's one business
madam chair but there are two
locations on that one business
so you said you have five
employees and six employees so
total of eleven then you would
not qualify madam chair.
did you have anything to add to
that thank you.
Your.
This is the.
That.
Will the order.
The ability to.
I
have.
There.
Let.
That.
The borders.
The.
For the two.
Share.
The issue at.
I.
What it.
I have worked for.
That.
This.
The thirty eight.
So they is those.
What.
One.
Valuation of.
One of the.
All.
Also.
What is that the actual trial
let.
Yeah
they do one of the.
Right.
That that I.
That that that would work.
There's.
Madam chair representative our
goal with this legislation is to
help those that meet this
criteria in order so they can
eventually get on their feet and
get that stabilization so that
they can kind of qualify
themselves out of this of this.
type of a grant so to speak and
so that is the goal and that's
why we kind of had to put some
parameters so it's not just all
of them because there are some
that are small business is very
successful and and and so there
that that's not what this bill
is intended for this is intended
for those that are possibly
struggling or possibly at this
point can't afford to get those
extra
maybe maybe they only have three
employees and they can't afford
it maybe this one will help them
afford that that fourth
employees so that they can
hopefully again excel out of
this qualification and then
prosper and they won't have to
worry about.
What's going on.
Electors.
As.
For.
This is for.
Or.
What.
For employees.
One this is for.
For one is not for.
Right.
That one or the other.
Yeah.
What
we're able.
But.
On.
Madam.
In the Sanchez that.
You look at the regional one six
years substituting adhere as
all.
The.
Russians use tax Representative
and that is we need to be.
Later Mr.
You know when we talk about the
members of the bill talk to the
number of employees they were up
front about that we need here is
to chair and or and they were
not in any other direction and
then on seeing changes on them I
think it's much later
what that and.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Hi along with.
Representative Lundstrom agree
with you on this
Tax credit is much easier to
swallow.
Then you know just sitting on
the.
Tax committee the representative
The days or.
Gentleman there.
We hear a lot of the season.
Trying to.
But while the other it's it's
it's very difficult to do madam
chair and try to figure out what
to do this this makes it a whole
lot better I have one question
one question and that is
Marshall writers
In addition the answer is yes
because.
J. ask question last few of real
estate agents and you just to
make a seven thousand years.
Is that correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yeah that's
correct.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair
Representative thanks thanks for
the work that you put into the
committee set up.
I'm glad you to lots of
knowledge because it looks like
you've Corporation everything
that this committee asked for.
Question is the purpose of this
bill.
Seems to me to focus on the
small mom and pops in the start
ups that just need a little bit
of help to get over the hump
my corrected.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that that's
exactly correct we're trying to
target these micro businesses
madam chair so that they can
move into a higher tax bracket
in the future and and grow madam
chair.
Madam chair representative but
and I do I like the COVID that
the hope is that the roll out of
this.
This budget.
I know that when.
Years ago when I had here and
still have the.
This would come in handy.
Because you do want the whole
reason to be in business your
role provide for your family.
By your employees also I I
really like the concept and I
really like to work that you put
in
And I pledge that with which
were this bill so I appreciate
it.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you dear.
Chair.
Sorry.
I really didn't have any
questions at.
I have a question.
So
Madam chair presenters at you
obviously and then what will
work on this and and I
appreciate that you took a lot
of our comments to but I still.
A little confused at that.
Whether or not such.
Anticipate that the business
owner is actually.
Collecting gross receipts tax
from its customers the first
twenty thousand.
Because it's only a twenty two
to twenty thousand dollar
credit.
And it is is retaining that
money.
And able to do that because of
the credits is that what you're
anticipating.
Madam chair representative I I
will turn it over to Turner
Clinton Clinton Turner to answer
that for you just to make sure
that we're getting the right
answer.
Sure Representative and madam
chair Clint Turner from the
Legislative Council Service this
that this claim always for any
of the LCS staff is that we're
here not in favor of the bill
are in opposition just answer
any technical questions at your
discretion so Representative
Matthews and say that's up to
the business as with any
transaction in the state of New
Mexico our gross receipts taxes
on the seller and they can
include that are not include
that the contract or they can
separately state that are not
it's up to them we have a lot of
credits where you don't know if
you qualify Intel after the
transaction so that higher wage
jobs tax credit
and you don't have to
tryin estimate that put that
ahead of time on the bill so
that
that might not specifically
answer your question because
we've seen that I think that a
lot of cases paid taxpayer
thinks that the amount of tax
due is completely known up front
and if they separately stated
they're going to remain exactly
that amount some taxpayers might
come back two years later and
claim a deduction that they
didn't originally file or
finally I qualify for credit so
the short answer is it's up to
the business and they can
include or not include the tax
when they make that transaction.
Chair
Thank you Mr I'm sorry Clinton
Turner.
I have pictures so.
So that tax credit process Madam
chair Mr.
Is up to the business owners
twelve gross receipts to
determine whether or not they're
going to actually charge New
Testament collect that movie.
Up to the twenty thousand
dollars.
Missing some up and madam chair
representative and
Representative Matthews I think
that's with any gross receipts
tax and met in New Mexico that
the gross receipts taxes the
legal incidences alternately on
the seller
how much the separately state or
pass on your don't pass on pass
on that economic incidences is
up to those two parties that
Chair I I will yield to that
Representative Lundstrom to.
Explain why that.
What are missing out of chair.
The way these tax credits work
is that you run a business and
you can use charges across
states tax and then at the end
of the year you apply for the
credit and at that time during
the application process is to
determine whether or not you
qualify so you're running a
business as you've always run at
you're not going to add an
additional tax you're just going
to see whether or not you meet
the qualifications for this tax
credit that you have to apply.
Madam chair representative that
I'm still still charging the tax
to your customers just add more
yeah we're you have just to hear
just running your business as
you normally would you're
charging the taxes you normally
would and then then at the end
of the year you would apply for
a tax credit.
Madam chair representative
mentioned thank you for that
explanation welcome that.
It
is going to no I don't want it
on slash.
Madam chair representative so
let me ask you another question
because
With that understanding so
here's here's here's the money
coming in but you know that your
credit can only be twenty
thousand dollars as I understand
correct is that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes that that
would be correct.
And so
Madam chair.
Centers and I.
When when the the the the fax
came on to the app as you can
talk about at the tax credit
being game changer.
I'm just.
My question is sort of four year
you don't have to gain change.
I mean you have the money but
you you know you still do you
still limits of twenty thousand.
And is that.
Twenty thousand a.
We take out an as is.
Is no off.
Well it depends on the business
I sing give as to whether or not
that would actually be a game
changer would be helpful to any
basically twenty thousand that
they that yeah I mean to be like
three months.
just wondering if.
Because you and cheers I am.
That one here but
Your.
You have this process and hear
with their ears and the
valuation.
This is.
Are you.
Me just a moment to find and I.
Yes.
So.
Okay.
Job that question because.
Provisioning you seven seven
thank you very much thank you.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
for the like I think you have
fun on the commerce attacks
Committee and spitting it out
there I think I policy interest
and and I I appreciate this this
effort you brought forward
thanks to conserve I did not see
an update FIR was the FIR
updated to consider the changes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I believe there
were changes to the F. I. R. I
believe it says under amendments
in the new affair I believe
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair let me
double check.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I'm looking at
the FIR and it looks like the
last update that I have is from.
February third Madam but maybe
Mr Turner has another answer.
Okay madam chair at so it
wouldn't be there until to drive
it.
You madam chair.
Thank you Representative I kind
of thought that I really wasn't
setting you up I promise just
because sometimes things get to
session so things are always a
bit lightly a look at some of
the the committee report ready
and and and nothing else is this
I know that you need to give a
lot of the concerns with the
costs that would be into I just
want to see what they end up
saying
From with the changes that you
made in how much those costs
would be and how that would
affect the bottom line for all
and then I'm curious also Madam
chair representative you know of
course literally just today you
could out of anticipated the
three just a we just.
Passed out of tax the tax on the
bus built on to be very
difficult to move things through
tax this point not because
that's primarily done but I met
in this is not the only time you
anticipate working on something
like this is that.
Absolutely is madam madam chair
and representative of actually
this isn't the only time that we
would want to I mean I
definitely understand down the
road with taxes this is that's a
whole different story.
Especially both of us being
freshmen but but yeah so this is
the that's not going to.
This from from any of this going
forward.
I'm sure thank you
Representative again I think you
know we have such a tight
timeline which we're doing
things no matter what happens or
you know might get held up you
know get taxed Commerce fabulous
places to hang on thank you.
Thank you.
Have
is.
I think Representative Mason
made a really good point.
A clear on the definition and I
think moving forward I want to
verify that
Good point.
Nine yeah.
Have that was that is that what
is the.
Of the
I found the provision that
simply stated here.
presenters.
I think the question that's sort
of interesting to me is a policy
question and that is do we want
to fund.
It businesses small businesses
with tax receipts.
We want to provide that is
instant.
And it to me that specific
policy questions is that the
best source of capital is that
the best use of tax proceeds and
if you would
and I think people may disagree
about that.
And.
I worked a lot of small
businesses and always looking
for money.
But I would like your.
Explanation as to why you think
this is a good policy decisions
to help businesses small
businesses this isn't just
businesses small businesses with
tax money.
Proceeds act this twelve.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative very good
question I think the.
The bottom line for the
businesses to save money and to
be able to grow madam chair and
I think if we give them any kind
of incentive I think this would
probably be the easiest way to
do it madam chair.
But I'm sure that there are many
other incentives that we could
think about later at a later
date madam chair.
Madam chair representative again
very good question my I would
add that right now I know of in
in in Miami just personal sphere
of people that own a small
businesses they've had
discussions with me because of
the atmosphere that New Mexico
currently has for small
businesses in our and our and
and the amount of gross receipts
tax that we have to that they
have to pay at this point many
of them are contemplating
especially those that can
technically do business.
Located out of the state they're
debating on whether they're
going to move their business
somewhere else and they can
still do it and something like
this would help them and like
you said is is is the amount of
of tax credit the game changer
for the people that I talked to
they said this would pay the
rent for my building for six
months you know this this could
keep me here
where where if I can't get this
if this is not a part of the
process then and then I might
have to move somewhere else and
and and and and do the same type
of business and and personally
I'd rather keep as many of these
small businesses here because
you've actually then they'll
employ people here so that
that's that's that's a kind of
my thinking.
And check out those two greats.
Thank you.
Sure let.
One sixty three thousand.
And you know.
Okay.
Representative docket yes.
Representative that is here.
Representative Lente.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Presented Martinez yes
Representative basin
Representative Matthews yes.
That last year yes Madam yes.
Madam chair about Sally's ten
tendency just one vote.
Eight seven steps to build I
hope that you this is an
experience was a good experience
for you because I think you to
back other committees advise and
it really applaud it so I
appreciate that so thank.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee much appreciated.
All right Mexico Senate bill
eighty three.
We didn't.
Yeah.
I.
It was on the.
How is it different than the one
we did following.
Read this budget I thought we
wouldn't have.
Senator welcome to converse
today.
Are you ready to present your
belt.
Good afternoon everyone thank
you and madam chair.
I'm very pleased the this
afternoon to.
Present Senate bill eighty
three.
this bill.
The jury with the today would
Senator Diamond and the.
This Marco Gonzales.
Who you may or may not hear
from.
Later on depending on how this
goes.
So this bill passed the.
The mother bill house bill one
seventy.
which is
Yes committees.
Okay.
Passes the committee so our
manager that regional statute
go.
Issue was enacted in nineteen
ninety nine when wireless
telephone service was still in
its infancy.
That was back when the so called
second third or second
generation of wireless service
to G. as is no when people use
flip phones that they use
exclusively to make telephone
calls travel to remember.
Way before two G. when it party
line to pick up the phone
there's somebody what your
neighbors talking.
So
That's how far we've come since
then we've progressed to the
fifth generation of wireless
service I need it most of us
have smartphones with screen
displays that multiple apps
today there's just one.
This is just one of many
services to which our phones
give us access we also use them
to watch videos listen to music.
Play video games and much more
our telephone billing statues
not kept pace with the changes
in wireless technology under the
original nineteen ninety nine
statute customers cannot choose
could choose to have services
like video streaming from third
parties charge on their
telephone bills that robs
customers Pueblo and vignettes
that is not available to them.
So one sentence or less madam
chair this bill modernizes the
statue by an able to customers
to authorize charges for non
telecommunication services other
telephone bills so thank you
and
We stand for questions of us
like to partners here want to
make.
Madam chair to state to very
frankly what this does is to
stop updates the telephone
building statute so twenty four
years old right now you can not
add to the telephone building
any sort of a non
telecommunication services and
obviously where the technology
advance insists it's doctors
putting in place and so this
just updated to allow that I
would compare this to perhaps
like your roku service or some
sort of service in which you you
use subscribe through and an
initial
company that provides would be
HBO or Disney plus or whatever
shortage.
Purpose of subscriptions that
may be connected to that
to the extent they surprised and
then would be able to offer a
perfect example of Disney plus
at a discounted rate and so your
provider that would be your cell
phone company a New Mexico is
the only state lesson nation it
doesn't allow for that so that
was dental questions.
Chair members the committee I
would just like to verify so
this is the exactly build those
changes apple seven one seventy
that is passes committee passed
a second committee and asked us
for years.
I think we it has now passed
Senate Judiciary.
Thank you so it is it more bills
okay already
do we have anybody here in the
audience that would like to
speak in favor of the bill.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Eighteen eighteen we stand in
support of this bill we
appreciate the Sanchez work in
the right this chart do you
think this help wireless
customers access more details
once again we appreciate your
support.
Thank you anybody else.
Anybody in opposition.
Right nobody on them.
All right committee.
Okay Representative Matthews is
on first.
this year presenters thank you
very much
We all had that moment of deja
vu icing.
So have I'm actually involved in
unrelated piece of legislation
that has made it to the house
and then through more bill came
through the Senate and chair and
now is coming back to the house
and so we're likely to have a
bill that passes three houses
before it becomes law and I'm
just curious about what.
Whether or not you all have and
here had an opportunity to
confer with that house Sanchez
and and why
you've already passed in the
Senate now your the house in
any effort to sort of streamline
it a little bit.
Madam chair members the
committee I can answer that I
have had conversations with the
house sponsor and we are pushing
as quickly as we can to get that
bill heard in it's a Senate
committee and of course with you
know with the bills being caught
up in various committees I mean
it's no telling and which
committee will hear what when
and we're very fortunate to be
your tier we've leapt over the
gap of the Senate Judiciary
which is stalled us last time
and and on the Senate floor for
the first time passing so we're
trying to move something as
quickly as we can as most
expeditiously cat without
wasting any committee's time.
And share it presenters at that
makes perfect sense for this
particular case.
Thank you Representative
Lundstrom.
Madam chair I made for it to
pass.
I think in just a second.
All right did you want to say
that the you second.
You know for the grandparents
ever chairman I I would do
exactly what.
Already can we going to take the
role I know you for this bill
before so I I think.
Representative anymore yes.
Yes Representative that is yes
Representative what they yes
Representative little yes
Representative Rod Stewart yes
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yeah
Representative Madden.
Madam chair.
It.
I recall this but there was a
there in the not too.
What it is because.
Yes.
It is.
Vice chair yes madam chair yes.
Yes.
Thank you so.
Chairman thank you members of.
And we are adjourned for the
day.
I was.
These are built.
I hope we get to the.
Thank you Sir.
This one.
