What we're really trying to do
is set up in statute four eight
you know the authority so
there's get there's guidance
given what this kind of new
industries.
so Mister Mr chairman and
members we do have the bill in
front of you.
And we have had this working
group that has helped move this
along since it left house
transportation and public works.
And so what we would be asking
for is a is is the amendment to
the substitute.
So I'm not sure Mr chairman if
if you want me to talk about the
amendment next or if we would of
just continue with the
substituting I see traces on
there who can help describe the
mechanics of the bill.
Would you mind adding a few
comments.
The first five sessions of the
bill.
Are all definitions which we
have discussed already.
Sorry right section five of the
bill we previously discussed in
this talk about just making sure
that
operators of the vehicles.
And I should say that the Mr
chairman I work for the
legislative council service I'm
here for the sole purpose of
providing technical assistance
on the matter before the
committee and I do not appear in
support of or opposition the
matter before you.
Transaction I deal simply would
notice and the legislative
session of provisions that they
representative Thomas New Mexico
and now Thomas motor vehicle
operator must give immediate
notice and if the autonomous
vehicle does not have a human
driver then the owner of the
motor vehicle is responsible for
providing the notice in the
north the owner has to do it
himself or herself.
if if the company has certainly
a spokesman and attorney or
somebody else can make that the
make that notice.
Six new section
it was added that the at the
request of the department of
public safety I believe it is
simply a man's the following too
closely amendment specifically
so that vehicles that are dried
and part of a driver assistance
to are exempted from the
following too close
requirements except for the the
motor vehicle.
It had been requested that we
put that specific amended
section into the bill.
My my video locked up.
I think you're a freeze frame.
He's an undisclosed location
given the minute.
Too much information as Mr.
I will give them another minute.
And for folks at home J. son
Gordon belongs to Legislative
Council Service it's essentially
the law firm of the state
legislature and they are experts
in statutory construction and we
give them the ideas and they put
in the paper so he's here merely
to explain.
The the amendment not to
advocate one way or the other.
As you mentioned.
The substitute Mr chairman and
we may have the deal to staff in
the waiting room also
in that they are very familiar
also with what this bill this
bill is about.
Maybe they could be let in.
If you could mention their name
so they could raise their hands
Charles and Jerry are you out
there areas there's Jerry Valdez
the chairman assist madam
Lundstrom.
So.
Mr chairman Jerry is very
familiar with the history that
brought this bill forward if you
could just provide a little that
context.
Please do Sir.
Thank you madam Lundstrom and
thank you our involvement began
of course understand our
memorial three and so I'll pick
up where
K. sept often under section
seven it talks about the time to
vehicle and notification
requirements and if you will
chairman messes Charles Randy as
well has joined us and so I'm
gonna at child feel my I'm gonna
hand it off to use and set up
your little more well versed in
this section is I am so if you
don't mind madam chair over
Charles thank welcome.
Mr Chairman
my name's Charles Frankie I'm
actually for the I. TS
appropriations for New Mexico
department transportation and I.
TS is intelligent transportation
services
like autonomous vehicles were
very heavily laden and
information and data exchange
and the move toward autonomous
vehicles has been in place for
quite a few years
and as such I think last is
Senate bill three to two
thousand nineteen was put forth
by the late senator James White
and he.
I'm was basically putting and
recommendations that came off a
student what the moral
Senate Joint Memorial.
I'm gonna can't remember it's
two thousand eighteen but out of
that that became the autonomous
vehicle committee that too can
input from folks within the the
the Thomas vehicle committee
Mexico state police officers
of superintendent of insurance
as well as the folks with the
motor vehicle division which
Jerry came out of this bill
putting forth is really to bring
New Mexico up with the standards
that other states currently have
in place by and large it's to
adopt
ever macular that is consistent
with the industry those
definitions and sure that there
is a common understanding of
everyone within the state that
might be effected by Thomas
vehicles and it's adopting the
accepted standards through the
society of automotive engineers
J. two OO three OO to six I
believe
that said.
this bill also provides for the
use of technology for platooning
on commercial vehicles are so
quit when they have the wireless
Cape a capabilities state
essentially created geo fence
that will allow for the to the
commercial vehicles to be able
to operate in unison
and to all the vehicles will be
driven of course by are you
would have a person by within
the cap of each and then the
latter portion is really just
designed to ensure that the
responsibilities are incumbent
on any motorist that they're
involved in a crash that they
Antonov's vehicle would also
have to.
Work through those same
restrictions and those same laws
that are incumbent upon
motorized vehicles namely be
able provide notification and
certain information associated
with the crash.
and then lastly.
There's an element that just
identifies the.
Vehicle is operating on the
roadways are if the company is
twenty because excuse me testing
if the company is going to do
testing.
within the state that they
provide a level notification to
the DOT and as part of that
notification just identifying
where it's occurring want to
securing and ensuring that
They give us certain elements of
information to that end.
And yes anything else
Representative Lundstrom.
No as I say we've got the idea
to experts so we have chairs in
the room so we were ready Mr Mr
chairman if you'd like to ask
questions marvelous thank you so
much at this time of.
I'm on my phone so I can't see
the participants.
but I will try what we go with
those in favor of the bill those
in favor please go out and raise
your hand we have twenty two
attendees.
What and raise your hand if you
wish to address the committee in
favor of the bill.
Hands up chairman okay no good
good thank you all right great
will go to opposition those who
wish to address the committee in
opposition.
A good and raise your hands will
be a minute.
Those who wish to address the
committee in opposition.
I'm sorry.
Is to hop all right we have
twenty two folks an attendee.
By all means.
What we are go do this so what.
Amendment what we talk about the
amendment go back to public
comment.
I can I can address the
amendment or do you or by all
means Representative Lundstrom
you wish to address the
amendment.
Go ahead Mr chairman thank you
thank you center the at the
moment for us as a two seven
three point one two seven three
point one and it's it's deals
with the
With the bottom of page fourteen
top of page fifteen and this is
notification.
Of testing and the amendment
amends the title to notification
and regulation of testing.
And it just elaborate more
clearly and essentially deletes
lines three four and five of age
fifteen.
And it says you know that the
that the rulemaking has to
establish minimum standards and
requirements that shall be
satisfied by operators or or
tennis commercial motor vehicles
when testing and that the rules
of the deal to show promulgate
rules provided a process for
reviewing a notification of
intent to conduct testing so
so it just kind of puts a little
stricter requirements and more
specific guidance on P. O. T.
when it comes to rulemaking of
the notification regulation of.
of all operating and testing
these a motorist vehicles and
with that we'll go back to
committee are back to the
audience rather.
Back to the audiences and on
page two I have one hand raised
by Mr chairman.
Welcome Mr will.
Please.
Mr wolf.
Hi Mr chairman members can you
hear me.
We sure can welcome wonderful
thank you so much for this
opportunity I am general counsel
to the self driving coalition
for safer streets a coalition
represents fifteen of the
autonomous vehicle companies in
in the US and we've been engaged
in this process very
appreciative of the process
that's led to this point where
we are Mr chairman and members
the committee is
We reluctantly I do not support
the amendment we do we are
comfortable moving forward with
the substitute.
Mentor substitute bill for of
this mention very quickly for
reasons we have concerns about
the direction the amendment
would take with respect to
establishing these minimum
standards for industries that
continues to innovate and to
build out its it's technology
and feel less premature and for
the third you know the part
three that you and mention with
respect to reviewing the process
if concerns it would function as
a prior approval regime which is
wholly distinct from the
approach that's taken and any
other states that are
accommodating I'll just lastly
just mention the industry is
very much it is comfortable and
has had good a good record
success in working with the
state to deploy this technology
for make the road safer and more
efficient and and so we look
forward to doing that but
reluctantly we.
Have concerns about this
amendment would hope that this
can move for without adopting it
thank you.
Thank you for that anyone else
wish to speak in opposition or
have concerns with the
amendment.
All right great thank you will
not go back to members of the
committee.
COS their hand up
Representative set out the.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
appreciate this and thank you to
the sponsor the still a couple
quick questions I did notice and
so the materials you provided
which thank you so much for the
you had two pieces I was curious
about one do you have a rating
of how I Thomas a car can be and
I'm curious how these are
changes to the statutes would
address that as well.
Asked Mr chairman I'm gonna ask
Charles or Jerry to respond to
that please.
Mr chairman and
settlement of Lundstrom.
the ratings are associated with
a site's society of automotive
engineers standards and they're
accepted by the industry levels
zero it goes from level zero to
level five.
Level zero is essentially with
no level of automation if you
can just think of like your
fifty six Chevy to that end
do it level one has a.
At a minimal level of automation
which would be something like
cruise control level two would
probably be synonymous with like
clues to a cruise control and
lane and maintaining lane.
Alignments are the distance and
that you're following the
vehicle in front of you.
Lanes are at levels three four
and five are what's the industry
and the standards consider to be
autonomous in nature that
doesn't require the active
involvement of the driver level
three is it will take over all
of what's considered to be the
operational dynamic driving
functions which includes
steering braking making
decisions on the what's called
object event detection and
decision making how you would
respond to incidents as they
occur level four enhances and
improves upon that and that
these vehicles that have level
four technology would not need
to have a person in the car at
all and that is that they would
just be able to operate with the
specific geo fenced area and
then level I would say the full
level of economy which is they
can a vehicle would be able to
operate independent of a
of the driver no matter what the
conditions are the operational
design domain is basically no
restrictions such as.
Roadway conditions are hi time
and date.
G. fiscal location so level
three important fiber was
considered to be autonomous
vehicles by the standards J. two
three also.
Mr Chairman representative so
this legislation would would
apply just at three four and
five is that correct.
To the masses Representative
Serrato members of the committee
yes so in section H. and talks
about automated driving systems
you specifically describing
level three four and five Bribie
automation system as defined in
the society of automotive
engineers standards so
absolutely would only apply to
what we consider highly
economists vehicles in the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you and and thank you for
that and Representative and a
chairman and sponsor the bill
I'm also just kind of curious
where does this put the US on in
terms of the national road map
for a town is big driving
vehicles.
Charles Jerry can you help us
with that place.
Yes this is madam chair or Mr
Chairman Representative Serrato
this would.
We'll be bringing us up to a
level of comparable standards
set most other states have
already adopted.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative.
So I
you Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And madam chair
Thank you Mr rose who
Stated that there would be a
person in the state.
If so then what makes it a
Thomas is just the equipment.
Mr chair and Representative
Powdrell when I said a person in
each vehicle that was specific
to the tuning.
And for commercial vehicles and
and that was an explanation of
the following too close
provision is being reconsidered
as part of this bill.
Okay and with that.
What is the current law what's
being reconsidered.
Mr Chairman representative
Powdrell.
the current law requires
vehicles to not follow any
closer than three hundred feet.
Okay what's being reconsidered
as far as the footage is
concerned.
Mr Chairman representative
Powdrell there is no minimum
following distance has been
established that is typically
dependent upon the precision of
the platooning are the connected
technology that is associated
with the particular vehicles
that said.
the industry has adopted a
standard that would
the industry has accepted
standard non adopted that there
needs to be enough distance
between the following vehicles
to allow a vehicle if needed for
any kind of incidents.
To be able to slip between the
two following vehicles and at
that point just geo fence
connecting the two commercial
vehicles are broken.
And then they go back to the
standards which is not following
any closer than three hundred
feet.
Okay and madam chair and.
Chairman how many vehicles would
be in a single state I don't
know if I'm asking this properly
but how many vehicles would be
in a single.
Set up will tuning units.
We would be forced six units
would be ten units how many you
know what.
Would it be.
Mr Chairman representative
Powdrell a right now there it
hasn't been I think any more
than two vehicles that have been
working in a connected vehicle
percent.
Okay and that's nationwide.
I believe Matt Mr chair madam
outgrow yes ma'am I believe so.
Okay and madam chair Mister
chairman
Can you tell me how many states
this is a already been passed
in.
Mr chair madam chair and
representative outro I cannot
tell you exactly the number of
how many states have passed the
put turning that information can
be made available we can get
that to you but I I think.
This is not an uncommon practice
now as it currently stands New
Mexico is only one of fourteen
states that has not adopted any
legislation to date associated
with the Thomas we.
Okay okay thank you thank you Mr
chairman and and madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative and experts
I'm sorry gonna have to bear
with me my my my brain if if I
could I would still have a flip
phone
is forced to have a smartphone
and it's usually smarter than
me.
Why what what's.
Let me ask you a very basic
question what happens of this
bill doesn't pass.
I think Mr Chairman
representative of the bill
doesn't pass.
What is happening is I think
it's another year that the state
of New Mexico is behind the
power curve when it comes to
addressing this new technology
what we have is surrounding
states that have already adopted
legislation and have it in place
as to how they accommodate this
kind of transportation.
then in my discussions Mr
Chairman representative where
the state highway commission.
I've always suggested to them
that we need to be the leading
the way instead of following
what somebody else is doing so
that's the reason we have this
workgroup in place to try to
make sure that we're not missing
any the key components I think
there are some opportunities now
in New Mexico.
Most of this research is being
done in places that are
well I mean they haven't reached
out this far a lot of the
research is happening in the
Silicon Valley.
And when testing happens it
needs to be more than just
California so we're thinking of
some of the testing and
Development could happen here
that gives us an opportunity
looking at new industrial
development as well as kind as
funding our own course as as
opposed to being swept in to
what the surrounding states are
doing.
Very good thank you.
Mr chair on that point.
Please representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair Representative Martinez
what we're trying to do here Mr
chairman and representative is
to get ahead of this game.
Now that we have the opportunity
if we sit back and relax for
another year to going to be left
behind and that's going to be a
big issue because we're we're
going to speech and we should
have done this two years ago one
year ago and and I the
settlement chairman said you
know it's a perfect opportunity
for the state of New Mexico to
get ahead of everybody else and
it'll be a good economic driver
I think because you know
regardless of what we do Mr
chairman and Representative
Martinez if we don't know what
somebody else is going to do it
and then we'll be behind because
the main Avenue between
California and the east coast is
industry forty.
And we really need to address
these issues now that we have an
opportunity to instead of
lagging behind thank you Mr
chairman I'm here Representative
Martinez.
Thank Representative yeah I
appreciate that I appreciate
both those responses so so this
is this bill really is creating
a framework for New Mexico to.
Be able to allow for that
testing of these time as
vehicles is that correct.
Yes Mr Chairman yes Mr chairman
it is it allows for testing and
allows for rulemaking it allows
for more than just getting
permission by DOT to yes it is
it's more than than just
notifying DOTA.
Got it Mr chair and and and
madam chair
our economists vehicles
you you made it clear that
they're being tested elsewhere
where are they are they are they
can be goalie operating anywhere
are they already on the road.
Well under our current Mr
chairman under our current
statutes they're not illegally
operating because are receiving
the permission from D. O. T. to
do this but it's happening now
in our state.
Got it thank you Mr chair and
representative.
and these these self driving
vehicles there how are they are
they controlled by.
So are they controlled by
somebody in the vehicle
or somebody on site or they
controlled by a come here how
does that work Mr chairman Mr
chairman it it's a couple of
different ways I'm going to give
you the thirty thousand foot
view and then the experts can
and expand on my comments but
generally speaking
you know you've got to have the.
Telecommunication
telecommunications technology to
make this happen.
So through the back door one of
the benefits of course is
expanding up brought down and
our telecommunications
opportunity statewide where we
don't have very good connection
but I'd like I like to just
Charles to explain you know
depending on what it is it's
it's it's it's different with
each kind of vehicle Charles.
Madam chair Mister chairman
madam chair and Representative
Martinez
automated driving systems there
there's a difference between
economists vehicles in connected
vehicles.
Automated driving systems have
all the hardware necessary on
board to be able to act and make
decisions the way their driver
would call they are the dynamic
driving task and they use a
variety of different sensors
depending upon what is that the
manufacturer or the developer of
the particular system they can
use light are they can use right
are you can use optical sensors
it every developer has our own
proprietary proprietary way off
of which to take the information
that's for an economist or an
automated driving system I
connected vehicle is actively
exchanging information that is
pushing out and is actively
taking in information that is
being pulled from other connect
levels of connectivity and that
is that connectivity is either
called vehicle to vehicle or
vehicle to infrastructure R.
vehicle to everything and that
could be not just the roadway
infrastructure network but other
such it other users of the
network whether it's desperation
or whether it's a a bicyclist so
on the connected vehicle front
for example platooning uses
connected vehicle technology
because that relates to how one
vehicle communicates with
another vehicle you can exchange
control information that goes
passes between.
I hope that explains your
question Sir thank you that that
is helpful thank you
Mr ram kiss and and
Representative
I'm I'm assuming and this is
probably not the discussion
right now but
I have a bunch of questions with
regard to liability and.
how you insure the schools are
but but let me not go in there
because I think that'll take up
the rest of the day
As these vehicles are being
tested and and this bill allows
for that free work for companies
committed tats their vehicles in
anna sort of bake a land mass
rural state which I I think it's
it's the right thing to do we we
don't want these things to be
solely tested in urban settings
and us having to catch up with
what it wherever that technology
takes us in the next few years.
As far as as far as these
companies coming in and testing
their vehicles
Currently they can do that by
notifying deal T. is that
correct.
Yes go ahead Charles.
Mr Chairman madam chair and
representative Martinez
they have given us the courtesy
of letting us know where they
are testing there are two.
Major developers of autonomous
vehicle systems that are very
active within our state right
now one is Dahmer bands and they
have a facility in which they
are doing.
Was called level three testing
of their commercial vehicles
they still have a driver this
behind the wheel.
That is ready to take control
should there be any
interruption.
The automated driving system
from being able to perform in
what's called the dynamic
driving past they're making
daily runs from along the
interstate from Albuquerque to
the Texas state line.
Another company is making runs
through the state they're called
to simple and there they
actually have an active service
arrangement with you PS as well
as I think another carrier of
good school you just expressed
and they are located out of
Tucson Arizona and they are
making rounds for the state.
At least once a day and a seem
at some instances possibly up to
three times a day for us to el
Paso where there is basically
where they have a shipping
facilities that are in the
immediate vicinity of the
interstate.
Thank you Mr read guess and Mr
chair and and Representative.
If in terms of of this industry
in in terms of the testing that
they might be doing here in the
state.
How huh okay little our local
governments part of the
discussion so if you testing and
I've forty.
you are going through I mean
here you'd be going through the
City of Albuquerque can the
local government restrict the
testing under this bill.
Mr chair madam chair and
representative Martinez
specifics to the bill there is
an element that identifies set
local public entities and not
You Sir the state law in the
sense that they can not put any
more stringent requirements
associated that will be adopted
statewide it's my understanding
that the.
the testing that's being done
even by Dahmer bands that they
do not engage the automated
testing system until outside of
the city limits I believe that's
the case but I cannot speak to
that definitively that said.
Their operational design domain
where they are designed to do
that to be able to work within
the dynamic driving test is
limited to the inner states as
compared to what's considered to
be their last mile are ani the
arterial roadways so specific to
any roadway cell which is a
local jurisdiction have
authority they are not testing
on the.
But Mr Mr chair representative
just Representative is I mean
what what I what I heard you say
was that no local jurisdictions
cannot limit.
The testing of these autonomous
vehicles as they go surely there
on the highway there on the
interstate but they're still
going through and maybe that's
not such an issue you know when
you're driving but Kerry or or
or requests but if you're
driving through Albuquerque I
mean you have I don't know at
least a dozen exists between you
know line up a so that will
guidance and tramway.
and you will hit traffic from
the city depending on what time
of day obviously but it doesn't
sound it sounds from what your
response that local government
would not be able to restrict
that they've got bye bye
whatever the state framework is.
Mr chair and representative
thanks for bringing the bill
forward thanks for educating me
on on a ton of his vehicles and
the terminology that is used.
I look forward to the rest of
the discussion this is pretty
pretty darn fascinating thanks
for the time and and I
appreciate the opportunity Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative
Baldonado I ask the members to
put their hands down.
Their virtual hands unless
they must seek to speak a second
time Representative Baldonado
you have the floor thank you Mr
chairman thank you chairman
Lundstrom just a few questions
and then maybe the more on the
technical side.
this idea of platooning so I I'm
I'm understand that currently
that's not allowed in state law
for for I'm thinking that this
is this is semis following too
closely behind each others that
my understand that right Mr
chairman and.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Representative
Lundstrom had to leave the zoom
Representative Representative
Garcia is here and the experts
about me that the experts
project time and answer the
questions posed please.
Term as this Representative
Baldonado that is correct under
current state law because of the
three hundred foot restrictions
you can not put you in within
the state of New Mexico
currently so as these companies
are stopping at the New Mexico
border and having to separate
their little as the passed
through Mexico so Mr chairman
and and Representative Garcia
and and and and Mr Valdez so
that's allowable in other states
and then they had our state
money they have to.
He can figure and then continue
through is that correct.
Commences Representative
Baldonado that is absolutely
correct these these of.
Great companies who are bringing
freight through have to stop at
our borders in I get alternative
passed in separation of the
vehicles in order to pass to our
state so currently our state
does not allow it states around
us do you allow them to to
Mr chairman and and
representative Garcia Mister
bell this just to clarify we're
talking about multiple vehicles
following closely to each other
correct not one big long like a
train or anything of that sort
is that correct.
After the perspective that puts
you in what this bill does is it
allows for the vehicles that are
in a if what's considered a
flock HMM I assist
Representative Baldonado to be
able to follow closer than
otherwise required under state
law so it is multiple vehicles
within a flock of vehicles
passing through our state.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Garcia and and Mr
Valdez and Representative
Martinez just hit on a point
that I was going to bring up as
well as you know it is a Thomas
vehicle idea sounds very
plausible on I. forty or twenty
five between the lands a choral
wherever it may be but you know
in the city you know you you you
you get a lot of.
A variables that I think come
and obviously technology is
advancing on this on my argument
is that I don't know that we're
there yet on one question Mr
chairman and and representative
Garcia.
Are we talking semis that run on
diesel fuel or these electric
vehicles what it what's in a
times vehicle powered by.
Mr Chairman.
If I would.
For that the question to
struggle deserves reckons.
Mr chair and.
and
Representative Garcia and
Representative Baldonado it's
independent upon what the
propulsion system is whether
it's electric or diesel a Thomas
vehicles
can it can very on on on the
drive train.
So Mr Chairman representative
Garcia and Charles at least
being you too little deeper
question you had mentioned that
there's there are some
autonomous vehicles that
communicate with other vehicles
on the road and then there's
some that are I I assume using
cell phone technology or
something some kind of of data
transfer to to keep them driving
down the road is that is that
the main understanding that
correct Mr chairman.
Mr chair and representative
Sarinana
No that's not an accurate
portrayal of the autonomous
vehicles have all of the
processing equipment on board of
their respective vehicles they
do not need connectivity to the
environment around them they are
in essence taking the place of
the driver.
In that vehicle.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
representative Garcia and
Charles
So we just got a new truck this
weekend and it has this lane
departures deal that tells you
when you've gotten out of the
lane as soon that it somehow
looks at the white and yellow
lines on the road and tells you
when you've gone.
I I I would gather that times
vehicle he's some sort of
technology to State Street down
the road.
What happens when there's snow
and ice on the road covering
those lines but what happens
when it's you know of an old
road that doesn't have lines
that that are very visible
anymore how does that work Mr
chairman and Representative
Charles.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative on the line I
think that works on
this describing of the rolled
it's different stripe in math
mechanisms and I and I will
refer to the rest of the action
to install this you could
probably actually better show
all this Mr Chairman.
S. is representative Garcia
Representative Baldonado so
that's correct so part of the
technology that exists is that
the vehicle to infrastructure
capabilities re reacts
accordingly to its environments
and so course is ideal
environments but there's also
situations where the software
the capabilities of the vehicles
actually respond towards the
lack of of a striking it reacts
accordingly I even when it comes
to issues like potholes and so
that's the critical nature of
this technology is creating an
environment where they can
adequately yes these these
vehicles in a safe and efficient
way to promote Connery not only
within the state of New Mexico
but nationally as these
technology is emerging and so
definitely it is a testing
component of allowing them into
our state and making sure that
there are reacting to the
environment accordingly to the
testing process.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia and Representative about
in on I would like to add to
that in that autonomous vehicles
and their automated driving
systems work with what's called
the operational design domain
and that's specifically
establishes the parameters off
of which a system is designed to
work with ten for example it may
be that it does not include
roadways that are iced over and
they are may not it could be at
this particular point at night
time driving during this
developmental testing period at
that point the system knows it
is outside of its operational
design domain and it has what's
called a human machine interface
and that lets the driver know
that Hey I'm about to return to
was called the minimal risk
condition and that minimal risk
condition is a safe mechanism by
which the vehicle will for
example maybe pull over to the
shoulder.
And reduce speed and then allow.
The driver to take control R. it
will in some instances if it
doesn't have a driver in it it
will essentially.
Shut down if it's outside it's
designed to maintain all
legislative notification to
whoever the operating for
example in the case of
commercial vehicle the fleet
commander so that the system can
then at some point be brought
back into service.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Garcia
this is very interesting
technology I'm I'm very
impressed a couple more
questions so I I I noticed a
lack of support from the
trucking industry during this
bill presentation I didn't
didn't didn't hear any support
from you know the the big
freight haulers are they on
board with this Mr chairman or
the
you know looking for this
technology what's what's the
story with the with the trucking
industry Mr Chairman Mr chairman
of refer the question to Mister
Rinker wrist what this.
That's just this Representative
Baldonado.
Garcia the dissociation
Representative by Ariel and John
Johnston have been identical in
the part of this bill and they
are part of the stakeholder
group that meets to discuss this
as well
in regards to their lack of
support today in regards to the
bill is it's unknown to me but
definitely they've had a seat in
the development of this
legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
not just some some comments
then I'll I'll pass this on to
to the next member Mr Chairman
representative Garcia it occurs
to me we've we've had a bill in
the in the in the legislature
the last few years I believe
it's on the Senate side now and
it has to do with the railroad
industry has to do with
the locomotive you Association
whatever their name is I'm not
getting it right but the the
folks that represent the the the
men and women the drive train to
move freight all over this
country do a phenomenal job
it has to do with the two man
crew and their contention is
that on a closed system a
railroads a closed system much
unlike driving down the freeway
because if I'm not off I can be
you know in the bushes and that
in two seconds but in a in a
real world scenario you're
you're on a track obviously
there's dangers there's there's
derailments and things of that
nature but it's a lot more
controlled in terms of where
that locomotive goes and the
argument with those folks is
that you you simply couldn't
have a train you know be
autonomously driven you have to
have not just one but two men or
two people in a crew on and it
just strikes me funny that we're
talking about you know of of a
semi full full of of product had
barely down I. forty at seventy
five miles an hour with with no
driver
and and so I don't want to hear
the rest of the conversation
today I do have reservations
about the idea of of the entire
technology I don't know that
it's there yet but I do
appreciate the the idea of you
know I would say like Rep
Martinez said he wants a flip
phone you know twenty years ago
we were tethered to the wall or
maybe thirty now whatever it was
but technology moves and we have
to move with technology but you
know I just I just worry about
my teenage daughters you know
not being able to recognize not
on this vehicle that maybe isn't
doing what it's supposed to do
or is not functioned or things
of that nature so but the thank
you Mr chairman and and
Representative Garcia and Mr
Valdez and Mr room keys for all
of your great answers today
thank you.
Thank you Representative Garcia
before I go to other members of
the committee let me just kind
of clarify some for myself
because I.
We can talk about this industry
all day it's fascinating but I
just like to get to the to the
crux of the decision I support a
bill it's a cutting edge
industries I think you know
twenty thirty years from now but
Thomas vehicles may outnumber.
Driven vehicles which just goes
to show that those of us who
grew up in the eighties grew up
in the finest decade arguably it
is to the world so I'll leave
that there so but here's my
question with regards to notice
with regards to notice.
The language and substitute
he says you know that.
The department transportation
shall promulgate rules regarding
the notification process
provided you know in subsection
in the section including forms.
And then the amendment is
notification and regulation but
has two additional paragraphs
establishing minimum standards
and requirements and providing a
process for reviewing any
notification I know that let me
ask D. O. T. a question and then
Mr aerial who was joined us back
in the committee will.
My only a.
Well like a double wide right
you're driving up to pickles or
whatever that you're behind this
double wide and it takes a while
and got figure out how to get
past it safely or not
those when you carry a double
wide trailer on the highway you
have to get permission and I
don't know the process but I
would imagine you get permission
to DOT says no you can't can't
leave at three when you leave it
for and you know whatever.
Similar to this in terms of Hey
we're gonna yes these a part of
this vehicles.
You know from from Gallup
defining ten you know Friday
morning or whatever
how does how does a.
How does that work with that
with double wides if if if if
the DOT folks know what's the
process for me to move a double
wide trailer.
Across the roadway in the state
of New Mexico.
Mr chair the if you know.
The permitting process
associated with either
overweight or oversize loads are
designed to ensure that they're
not going to find themselves in
a situation off of which they
will not be able to proceed and
that could be based upon a
roadway with as well as height
restrictions as well as weight
and restrictions and one a
oversized or overweight permit
is issued a route is proposed
and it is compared against any
other restrictions that might
exist on the roadway.
As well as.
Other temporary restrictions
such as construction sites.
A specific to the the analogy to
the economists vehicles the
footprint of Anton in this
vehicle is essentially the same
as to that of any other roadway
be.
Right not an oversized over
those terms of vehicle Sir.
Thank you know I know the pop
the reasoning behind the
permitting I just wanted all the
permitting occurred and who made
that decision my point isn't
saying that is that I would
imagine that the but the statute
dealing with that permitting is
not any different than this
proposed statute in the the
subcommittee
and and the committee subs to
rather so my question Mr L. I
don't quite understand the
concern.
With this additional language in
the proposed amendment why would
this proposed amendment be
detrimental to the development
of this industry I what is your
argument as to why this event is
not a good idea.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee I'm
happy to explain that
very good discussion I I would
just say it again the substitute
is is of a tax that the industry
again fifteen companies
including those who are broader
than that we're invested in the
state I looked at and had a
little comfort with with that
management would if enacted
would put the state outside of
the mainstream of autonomous
vehicle regulatory frameworks
and as follows so the.
The requirement for the
department to and and promulgate
regulations that would establish
minimum performance standards
are minimum standards for
autonomous vehicles as something
that that we have not seen
typically what we see is a
holistic approach and this is an
accident in the the majority of
states that sets guidelines for
a lot of the concept concepts
the mystery piece was was laying
out anymore risk condition and
other types of parameters but
that leads to the the full
deployment the so the
establishing a minimum standards
is concerning because it's
premature for industries that
still developing of course this
industry in the the company's
invested in the state and have
been engaged in the state have
been providing data have been
working together this is as I've
been in touch with them with the
state in order to develop a very
healthy and and positive program
the the others piece of it which
in the third for part
for the review notification
prior approval of testing in the
state is again outside of the
mainstream we see the majority
of states have an approach where
technology can be deployed with
that again within safety
guidelines about safety and we
everyone wants everyone is
focused on safety it's also
about improving safety
technology that.
Events people from texting and
driving being drunk and
distracted and so forth is about
improving safety so within
certain guidelines can deploy
the technology without seeking a
prior approval which would
inhibit the deployment of
technology that will expand
mobility and and increase
efficiency and all that so that
is those are the chief concerns
of the amendment again absent
those changes the substitute
bill was something we had been
in touch with an including
working with law enforcement to
ensure that there is a good
dialogue and that ultimately in
the event of some sort of
incident there is a clear
understanding of autonomous
vehicles being notifying and and
being present for that so that I
think that's the bouncer trying
to strike now just say it and in
finality
the industry is committed to
working with everyone here all
of the stakeholders to get this
right we saw this ammendment
there it in short order trying
to process it those are some
initial thoughts if it's
possible to put a pause in some
way and try and work this out we
are more than willing to do that
we we certainly want to engage
and be productive and and trying
to achieve the objectives thank
you that thank thank you Mr
thank you representative Garcia
for the.
Allow me to ask about member
that is a question like that I
think
unfortunately in this old school
citizen legislature of sixty
days putting a pause is very
difficult for something that
must happen we must put this in
statute a dry attention to page
fourteen.
Hello I department of
transportation at least I
apologize in advance that's been
the substitute that's in the
substitutes so
so yeah I'll I'll I'll speak to
the chairwoman with rushed her
concerns.
The you know because it's a new
industry it's it's an industry
language but we certainly don't
want to be a dollar we had that
conversation tax this morning
three of us were in that
committee on being an out liar
we don't want other states to to
to thank for that particular
different but but you know there
there are some concerns with.
The concept of a vehicle driving
itself gonna be so with that I
think of.
with regards to the amendment
are representative of
Figueroa.
Mr chair representing in another
committee I assume you are under
discussion of the amendment.
Correct with the the committee
supper discussion on the
amendment for discussion.
And but the but your Lundstrom
and representative Garcia has
asked this committee to up to
move to a document.
I have no questions at this time
I just think what's in the
amendment is reasonable.
And I would look forward to
working with the sponsors and
with the industry to figure out
the details of how we're going
to do this because it's very
exciting.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you so any I notice a
Representative but your hand is
up in the zone did you want to
address the committee a second
time our yes Mr chairman and and
and.
My concern was the amendment and
the possible discussion
in regards to the.
Amendment and how quick they
could make that happen in order
to get this piece of
legislation.
On its way it sounds to me like
they're already you know that
they're almost there.
I like this piece of legislation
we heard it in transportation I
think it was last week.
And the trucking industry would
give us a ton of great
information so I'm just
wondering with industry and with
the two representatives as to
how quickly they think they
could get this whole issue
around this ammendment result.
Thank you Representative I think
it was I think it's going to be
resolved of.
I mean I could work with it now
but Representative Lundstrom is
not here
Mr will
Mr center on page fifteen.
Line one you know we could say
regarding the notification and
regulation process and see if
that satisfies the the
chairwoman Lundstrom but what
I'd suggest is that we.
That we act on the amendment.
And then regardless of whether
that is a doctor not we act on
the.
On the substitute bill and out.
And then the folks can stay
working on it.
as it winds as hopefully as it
gets to the governor's desk.
Okay then.
Is that we move to adopt the in
the language of the amendment
that's what you heard.
He's in the wholesalers.
The notice I say move move the
up move to adopt the language of
the amendment because you all
know we can't Amanda committee
so but if we adopt this language
then we can then we can decide
whether to
Move on a point six committee
sub so so the motion is I will
work on the paperwork result is
in terms of the procedure but
the motion is to adopt.
The the language in two seven
three point one.
Especially about the amendment
to the language of the
substitute bill if you don't you
can call the roll.
Representative will.
No.
Representative Dow.
Representative will.
Just.
Representative guided us.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Well Culbert yes.
Bill yes.
Representative well.
We
have stepped away.
Yes.
Yes.
Estes so what yes so we're
comfortable for now with this
language but we are confident
that that is going to be worked
on.
So I would suggest that we we we
now have eight point six of this
which is indicative of how hard
responsive worked on the same
page and work with the
stakeholders we now I'll be
sitting before us yes House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two seventy point
six version what's the pleasure
the committee.
Well the due process.
All righty once again my phone
is a little shaky here on the
west side of but what I heard
what I thought I heard was.
not fast.
On house bill two seventy and
eight to pass on house committee
and economic development
committee substitute for House
bill two seventy eight point six
version that is exactly what you
heard Mr chair and that we have
a second programs and set up
please call the roll.
Representative.
No.
Representative Dow.
Representative well yes.
Representative was.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Yes.
Bill yes.
Then we get a lot.
Yes.
Estes so I will yes
congratulations Representative
Garcia you have a committee so
point six version and bring into
the conversation if necessary.
We understand it's a the line
was a little different but we I
think that are probably
transportation is committed
committed to this technology and
will will facilitate those those
tests
To the industry satisfaction.
You know regardless of how
different the language may be so
thank you all for a great
discussion and thank you
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr chairman and now we will look
forward to working with all the
people involved in trying to
make everything right through
but he's happy with his members.
Because we we do not want to be
an out liar on this technology
thank you Sir well now go us
take a breather and one folks
all these folks leave the Rhone
we're let's so bring and
Representative brown and
representative Armstrong if they
could raise their hand in the
attendee list apologist operate
earlier right.
I'm I'm working on my phone so I
can see the names
So bring in a Representative
Brown and Representative Gail
Armstrong.
For
For House Bill three zero two.
We'll call take up take a quick
breather will take a thirty
second.
Representative Armstrong is not
in the attendees were okay
or bring in a Representative
Brown and.
Fifteen seconds this is the
governor.
Riding Representative running
with us yes Mr chairman and here
marvelous walk
we want to thank you for your
leadership on but I'm sure that
R. C. and high schools this is a
bill to mandate financial
literacy for as a graduation
requirement we heard
Representative a Madrid still
couple weeks back and we look
forward to your bill as well
because this committee is a big
fan of financial literacy with
that Representative said about
wanted to take it away you have
the floor yes thank you very
much Mr chairman I I can
certainly return the compliment
you didn't working on this area
for for a long time as well and
I think I'm kind of optimistic
rush going to get something
through this year so Mister
chairman and members of the
committee of this is house bill
three zero two and it proposes
to amend the graduation
requirements for high school
students would require them to
have one half unit of financial
literacy prior to graduation I
know you heard house bill sixty
three is the chairman just
referred to that and so I don't
know that I need to spend a lot
of time explaining why financial
literacy is so important but if
I could sum it up in a sentence
it would simply be that this is
information that people use on a
daily basis in life and it
covers so many areas and if we
can do anything to help people
to get ready for the real world
I think this is one of those
courses that students would look
back and praise the legislature
for saying you must take this
it's no longer just elected and
we know that not very many
students take it as an elective
but it's it can really be life
changing for those who get this
this learning so Mister chairman
and representative
Representative is on the
committee I do have an amendment
that I'd like to bring before
you first if if I may.
Members of the committee
regarding the amendment.
Discussion.
Thank you I'll second that go
out and discuss the amendment
arisen about thank you Mr
chairman so it's point two two
zero two.
Point one and what it does we
kind of parallelism error in the
in the language of the bill and
so what this amendment does is
clarify so it's very clear what
we're what we're talking about
so briefly on page six line
twenty we added a little bit of
language we added the words of
which and so it's a reference to
the math credit and then also
page six one twenty one we are
straight the word of and insert
in lieu thereof shall be so what
this does is essentially say
that and this is where my Bill
differs from house bill one
sixty three.
what I do in this bill is
Borrow half of the unit from the
electives category for high
school courses and take that
half unit and move it over to
the math category the reason I
did that is I when I was
contemplating working on this
bill I spoke with some teachers
and guidance counselors and they
cautioned me not to diminish the
math the the total math credits
that are needed for graduation
because we get a lot of helping
us for math teachers and and
counselors and so
Came upon the idea what if we
just take half out of the
electors categories shifted over
that way students are still
getting all the traditional math
learning which which is very
important but also adding a a
type of math course that you
know frankly could could be
taken from other in SB you put
in other categories that we
think it fits best in the math
category so that's the major
difference and that the so it
would be four point five units
of math and seven point zero for
electives and so that is with
that amendment does Mr chairman.
Thank you very much anything
else on the on the bill in the
oven for about a public comment.
And for me Mr chair yeah yes
okay so what are the differences
under point out between one
sixty three and and three zero
two is that one sixty three
would offer financial literacy
as an elective in basically the
junior high years and I think
that's a really great feature of
that bill I do not have that in
my bill I would just focus on
the the high school years
with that Mr chair I will stand
for questions.
And yes thank you very much will
now go to.
Members of the of the audience
there's twelve twelve attendees
with us in the virtual zoom
couldn't raise your hands if you
wish to address the committee
what we go to folks in favor of
the bill.
Folks in favor of the bill.
Mr we wanted to
welcome Sir what do you address
the committee you're the only
person with his handout okay
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Zamboni
on the field director for think
New Mexico last year we did a
report about predatory lending
and during our research we came
to really appreciate how
important it is for young people
to have an understanding of
financial matters and especially
how money works in their lives
currently financial literacy is
offered as an elective I want to
thank chairman my just for
checking that legislation to
make an option for students is
also working on to what make it
a requirement as well but
because financial literacy is
optional only eleven percent of
students chose to take financial
literacy courses last year
additionally we seen this
requirement work in other states
seventeen other states in the
last decade maybe financial
literacy requirement for high
school graduation which also
includes three of our
surrounding states of Arizona
Texas and Utah it's also a great
way to address poverty
understand by helping bridge the
gaps between lower income
students and their wealthier
counterparts in may have easier
access to financial literacy
courses and that type of
information home and with that
Mr chairman members of the
committee we're in strong
support and ask that you vote to
pass this legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr me welcome and for
thanks for all you do anyone
else wish to address the
committee.
Anyone else to which yes the
committee and in opposition.
Thank you attendees for for
being here and for all the folks
on the webcast will go back to
members of the committee.
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative brown for
bringing your bill
and don't have anything in front
of me that tells me what
committee stop goes next but I'm
guessing it's health education
is that correct Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr Chairman representative that
is correct so it Mr Chairman
representative and and just to
compliment the chairman again
you know he's worked on this
type of thing for years and
Representative Maestas Frankfurt
Education Committee many times
with this type of legislation
I think I like your creativity
on this one with the with the
credit restructuring the way
that you're posing that to do
for half math credits you have
we've had a bill even this year
in the house at that.
Mr chairman would proposed to
reduce required math credits
from four to three for
graduation requirements so
there there's all sorts of
different arguments on on how to
replace that what to do with
that but I think Mr chairman and
and and members and
Representative brown
most of us would say here in
agree that that our kids could
use some some guidance and
direction in the world of
finances I I practice real
estate sales for living and it's
amazing how many young couples
will come along and and want to
buy a house and you just very we
have to start it's grown some
folks just to the even grant
that so Mr chairman and
Representative brown I think
your efforts are are are are
great and I think that it's a
better conversation to have more
bills floating around to do the
same thing and get there in
different ways so I hope that we
can pass you on to the Education
Committee so we can hear what
those folks have to say in terms
of the the superintendents of
people that that playing the
game of education so thank you
Mr Chairman representative brown
I didn't have any actual
questions just wanted to
expressed my support and
encourage you along the way
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative whether it's
called financial literacy or or
financial management is a good
thing and our students needed so
I absolutely support this I'm
going to point you to page eight
a technical issue that you might
want to address and your next
committee perhaps page a line
for financial literacy shall be
offered as an elective your
bill's changes it from an
elected to requirement I think
you probably need to strike that
whole sentence.
Other than that I like the bill.
Thank you Representative that's
a really good catch thank you Mr
chair.
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair I'm moving to
pass.
If I may um did we adopt the
amendment.
Thank you before I take up
reserve Johnson's.
A motion.
We want to act on the amendment
as requested by the sponsor.
The amendment.
Okay I will take that motion and
I'll second it there there is a
motion by Representative
Figueroa a second by
Representative masses to adopt
the amendment
is there any opposition.
Any opposition by I voice by a
screen.
Note all those present voting
there for many of you have been
adopted bill Representative of
Johnson back to you.
Thank you to pass.
And did.
Representative.
All right great we have a motion
for a do pass as amended by
Representative Johnson have a
second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert before we take
action on the motion this one I
think I wrote Senator Browne for
bringing it forward it's and for
the for the for the memories in
two thousand seven we are as a
state required financial
literacy in high schools.
The other banks across the next
year some high schools were
quicker so my schools weren't
and we were exceptionally
patient with that process now
every single high school in
state has a financial literacy
course but some you know
depending on the champion in
that particular high school
could be tucked away in.
Freshman or sophomore curriculum
or what not and only eleven
percent of students are taking
the course we need a hundred
percent of New Mexicans to take
the course and normally it's a
practice in this committee if
there's built of the same
subject matter that only one
bill gets out this is the
exception to that this thank you
literacy in high schools are so
important
it
will arrive later to get out and
do cation I think everybody with
the discussion education whether
we for have seven or four seven
have.
but definitely up as you all may
know Representative of and
that's our medals Bill to redo
the entire curriculum was tabled
and Senate I want to go through
the interim and we work at but
his bill have this component in
it so it's very important we
move this fall so with that
thank you Representative
grounded you cannot call the
roll Representative.
Representative.
And if you commute their
devices.
If they're not talking about yes
thank you.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
All yes.
Yes.
Yes yes yes thank you
Representative wrong you have a
do passed as amended.
I will.
Good to see you.
Thank you very much appreciate
it.
Next we is representative Adam
on this Representative
Pettigrew.
In the attendee room.
Good and raise your hands in the
attendee room Representative and
on this.
Or Representative if I.
I'm using my phone for the video
so some.
Are there chairman.
Yes thank you so well we take a
rest for about thirty seconds
and if someone wants to text
representative Adam on this he's
probably in another committee
will give them a moment to to
walk on over.
If someone could do that for me
please.
Representative Dow got a text
Representative Dow as well
she's.
She's actually presenting
committees in other in other up.
Committee rooms but let her know
that she's up as well Mr
chairman I just text both of
them for you thank you forget
about thirty seconds let's just
a.
Keep the webcast on what will
this recess for about thirty
seconds.
The word Representative part of.
I haven't heard anything I'm
texting pedigree now thank you
another thirty seconds hello my.
Mr chairman he says he's in the
audience Josh.
Representative.
I haven't heard of
Representative regarding raise
your hand Representative and I'm
just going to raise your have to
we can find you and bring you
into the committee room.
Welcome.
Mr Chairman said not all get get
comfortable with that I mean
we're gonna all right wonderful
so with this is a house bill one
thirty four we had a great
hearing does what seems like a
lifetime ago you worked hard on
a committee substitute with
regard to the committee subs to
with the pleasure of the
committee.
Okay let's let's discuss it
first discussed I'm gonna move
the committee for discussion
thank you I'll second that so
now we have the committee so
before us what are you up.
Tell us about the bill in the
committee substitute
Representative Amman's welcome
to.
Thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
I'm Representative just run it
is
this bill one thirty four is
also sponsored by Representative
Dow Powdrell Culbert editor in
line as we spoke before house
bill one thirty four
appropriates money from the
general fund all talk about this
in a second because it's changed
to the workforce solutions
department to establish a family
friendly workplace incentive
program the purpose of the
program is to encourage small
business employers to adopt and
implement workplace policies
including those concerning paid
leave health support work
schedules and other economic
supports.
Small business employers with
fifty or fewer permanent full
and part time employees would be
eligible to receive an award of
up to fifty percent of the cost
to the employer for adopting and
implementing these family
friendly workplace policies as
the legislature continues to
find ways to support for small
businesses and employers house
bill one thirty four proposes an
innovative approach to support
both.
no let me if you would Mr chair
the meeting speak with you guys
about the changes to this.
so originally there was an
probation in this of eight
million dollars.
after working with
Vice chair Figueroa and a few
other people we have decided to
make this into more of a pilot
program and bring that
appropriation down to three
million dollars for the fiscal
years twenty two and twenty
three this is really to see if
the program would take off and
instead of giving a big chunk of
money and having a bunch left
over give a much smaller chunk
of money to see if anyone would
actually take advantage of this.
The other biggest portion is
that we did specify what family
friendly workplace policies
would be these include personal
leave including school
involvement a sick employee for
training and professional
development and education wave
also of maternity and paternity
leave family leave including
caring for aging parents your
child or domestic partner.
employees subsidized health or
dental insurance will miss
programs including wellness
assessments screenings education
health coaching organized
wellness activities on site
preventive care such as
immunizations interventions such
as smoking cessation and
incentives are paid off time for
wellness activities and then
employer subsidized training and
educational assistance employer
subsidized or on site childcare
dependent care.
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I stand
for questions.
Actually one second Mr chairman
my expert witness I believe is
in here as well is Jason
Espinoza of from.
NFIB.
Welcome Mr Senator was to set up
a few words.
Actually he's not here.
Okay Mr chairman I stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative let's
go briefly to the audience if
anybody
In the audience wishes to
address the committee
the new committee substitute one
thirty four.
Anyone in favor.
Great Carla and and what
introduce yourself and yourself.
Actually it's Leri Sonntag here
on we have just business
coalition.
NBC strongly supports this bill
appreciate the Sanchez efforts
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
There is a long list of bills
that have already been
introduced during the course of
the session that would provide
for paid time off we understand
the motivation to enact such
legislation however both
proposals our mandate.
And H. B. one thirty four is a
breath of fresh air the sponsors
not only recognized the need
help employers and employees but
they're providing a positive
path forward to address it bill
only applies to small employers
with fifty or less employees I
would provide fifty percent of
the cost to adopt new programs
this is a small investment for a
great benefit to all concerned
we encourage you to say yes and
support H. B. one thirty four.
Thank you Mr Sonntag anyone else
wish to address the committee.
Anyone else was to address the
committee.
yeah yes please mistrusting
also.
Followed by sherry dots.
Thanks for the opportunity to
speak in support and I just
really want to thank
Representative Hernandez and and
the members of the committee to
for working together to put
together the committee
substitute and try to find
resolution on a way to
potentially move this forward we
do believe that this is a good
test for double health workers
as well as small businesses
across the state thank you.
Thank you Mr spend also missed
option I'm Mr chairman and
members of the committee A. A.
R. P. supports house bill thirty
four and we encourage you to
pass it thank you.
Thank you anyone else wishes to
address the committee in favor
or in opposition.
Thank you thank you all for
being here we'll go to a.
Committee members Mr chairman
I move adoption of the committee
substitute.
We have a motion to adopt the
committee substitute.
Just a second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert there any
opposition to adoption of the
committee substitute.
Hearing none of the substitute
has been adopted Representative
Baldonado.
Mr Chairman a movie do not pass
on House Bill.
Thirty four and then to pass on
house.
House commerce and economic
developments one.
Second.
The motion for the motion for a
due pass on the committee
substitute a second by
Representative Powdell Culbert
any any
Any discussion and a discussion.
What I thank you Representative
for we're working on this.
Because.
Yeah we need any and all ideas
to get our economy back I know
that.
One of small businesses feel
tremendous tremendous stress I
know they built a lot of stress
two years ago when we raise the
minimum wage is.
A recession you're looking at
that monthly profit and loss
quicker ultimately what drives
businesses particularly small
businesses customers.
So this is a new style of these
to happen we appreciate you
working with the business
community and other members and
bringing it over Representative
R. Michelle but as would you
call the roll on the to pass on
a committee substitute.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Will.
Yes.
Representative was yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative bill yes.
Madam chair if you get off.
And this.
Yes.
Legislation you have a to pass
on a committee substitute thank
you for bringing it back.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Let's take a look at the
attendee list.
if we can us some over the
structure Taos with us take up
reader Representative and when
you're ready up what a house
bill three fifty who do you wish
to bring into the committee room
with.
Thank you Mr chairman I have two
expert witnesses I think that
is all have the list we look it
up real quick if you could say
their name so they could raise
their hands to get a grab some
quick wrestle Allen and Rick I
believe is the first name of the
second person I have not met.
If those two folks can raise
their hand within the within the
zone that way we can now see
your name and bring you into the
committee room.
John curry.
Okay.
Correct sorry about that.
Sorry Mr curry.
So when you're experts are
comfortably sitting next to in
the.
In the the well of the zoom that
please proceed.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee at Mexico over three
hundred the screens have been in
the dark for over a year and
they were only just recently
presented with the past three
opening they're not re open well
there's across the country have
reported a ninety percent drop
in their revenue.
It's even worse in New Mexico
the expedition industry employs
over twelve hundred Mexico and
throughout the state and that's
includes our large cinemas in
our metropolitan areas to
smaller single screen operations
in rural towns eaters are
important cultural institutions
the actors Business multipliers
driving foot traffic to other
businesses and main and the main
street district they face a very
long road to recovery.
Since Hollywood studios have
delayed many of their releases
theaters do not have you films
to attract customers even if
they were able to re open
compounding this problem is that
they still face mounting fixed
costs such as their property
taxes rent and mortgage payments
House Bill three fifty provides
a critical lifeline theatre's
during the reopening process the
majority of the proceeds from
the sales of movie tickets are
returned to studios leading
concession sales as the primary
revenue source for theaters
providing a gross receipts tax
deductions to the sales of movie
tickets and concession items
will give Peter cemex needed
boost to recover their operating
expenses related to returning
due to constitutional
restriction New Mexico theaters
were not able to access state
based grant funds provided by
many other states across the
country this legislation would
find something actually
something pretty major for New
Mexico struggling theaters and I
do have two expert witnesses.
Russell Allen is the president
of Alan Peters and John curry is
a vice president of food service
at regal cinemas.
The committee now.
Okay Sir welcome what do you
wish to Mr chair and members of
the committee this is Ron
Russell out with L. theaters my
family has been
in the movie business showing
movies to the citizens of New
Mexico since nineteen twelve.
Why for generation Y. for kids
the workforce are fifth
generation.
we've been entertaining and
hiring New Mexicans for over a
hundred years and quite frankly
until we has a March seventeenth
of last year we'd never shut our
doors
this is very
it's been a dramatic here
unfortunately I through our
family we were able to continue
to be ready to open we've saved
our money we've lived frugally
through our years and
The opportunity to hire
approximately three hundred
people were about thirty percent
of the industry and this we were
not eligible for any of the
grant process is like Rebecca
Dow Representative Dow was able
to to say because of the with no
staff we were not eligible for
any of the opportunities for
health this would be a very good
help for the next four years I
understand that this is going
trying to go through twenty
twenty five but this is been a
very devastating here we want to
get back open we want to start
hiring the sixteen year olds
again to teach them how to be
the.
The the the next employers great
employees we want to be able to.
Give us the mental release to
the citizens of all the
communities that were part of
it's been a very devastating
time and historically movies
have been something that people
been able to.
Get away from the real world and
through this this one crucial
crucial time they haven't been
able to do that and we just are
looking for this opportunity to
get a little bit of help from
the state and would afford vote
and would create anything that
you guys are able to do for us
and I'm available at for any
questions you might have.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir and what else
Representative Dow.
Yes Mister would you like to
get.
Yes ma'am thank you thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative down committee
members really appreciate your
time today to be able to speak
in support of house bill three
fifty
again my name is John Corona a
senior vice president with
Rachel and I had the pleasure an
opportunity to to work in the
state or industry for nearly
thirty years my anniversary
actually comes up here in July.
And we have I see years with
sixty screens in New Mexico to
which you're in Santa Fe and
three in Albuquerque and as
Representative down mentioned a
little earlier like other
operators we are anchor tenants
in lifestyle centers malls and
really Main street New Mexico we
drive much needed foot traffic
to nearby restaurants and cafes
and local shops and not to
mention you know would provide
employment opportunities and
regal in our five locations we
employed right at one hundred
seventy five team members also
very important post us and and
and we want to get them back to
work as quickly as possible now
the pandemic it's been
absolutely devastating to our
business and given that we are
anchor tenants in many of these
lifestyle centers malls etcetera
that has a cascading effect on
on our neighbors nearby
obviously with the millions of
people that buy tickets and go
through our doors collectively
on an annual basis you know
that's less foot traffic that
could stop in and and and eat at
the restaurant or grab a coffee
or what have you so I think
getting the movie theaters
reopened and successfully re
open is incredibly important to
the local economy.
So like Russell said we've been
closed nearly one year now been
closed with ongoing expenses
such as utilities friends
insurance property taxes
etcetera just to name a few they
didn't stop Revenue did over the
course of the year and you know
we've also had to make the very
painful and gut wrenching
decision to for all of the
majority of our team members
that's very painful and
obviously we're looking forward
to the day that we can get them
back to work so at the end of
the day we understand that we
have a long road to recovery our
goal is to stabilize the
industry bring our teams back to
work and then safely reopen
which will then of course help
drive businesses and the
communities that we serve so in
order to accomplish this we
truly need you to help by
passing house bill three fifty
this would provide long term
support that we need to help
ensure a very successful path to
recovery and to that end I'd
like to thank you for your time
and and I appreciate you guys.
Thank you Representative Dow
anyone else.
Thank you Mr chairman with that
will stand for questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Dow gentlemen.
Let's go to members of the
committee there's nine persons
and listed as attendees.
Folks who wish to speak in favor
of this bill.
Folks who wish to speak in favor
of the bill generate your hand
than the.
We have a couple folks
Jason Espinoza followed by art
more staff.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business we stand in strong
support of this legislation as
you know house bill three fifty
provides an important Avenue of
targeted financial relief from
movie theaters has been
mentioned before while the small
business cares relief grant
program created in the special
session last year was really
welcome relief for many small
business it's important to
remember that only six thousand
seven hundred and fifty six
businesses out of the more than
fourteen thousand that applied
receive grants and the average
grant size was fifteen thousand
dollars I'm I know there's been
a lot of back and forth in the
legislature about the loan
programs for grant programs or
tax relief programs in NFI these
opinion given the extent of our
economic crisis New Mexico does
not have the luxury of picking
just one option you must taken
all above all of the above
approach so we certainly support
and urge I do passed house bill
one fifty thank you.
Thank you our Northman followed
by Brian Mitchell.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
appreciate you taking some time
and allowed me to speak
my name is are more thought I
worked for century theaters and
we have to theaters in New
Mexico they are both in
Albuquerque
a pretty well known theaters the
Rio twenty four on the north
side of the city and then we
operate a theater downtown
Albuquerque.
when we're open in operating we
generally a employ approximately
a hundred twenty five people.
And just both Russell and John
mentioned in their their
speeches we've been closed since
March seventeenth of twenty
twenty.
And we are anxiously awaiting
the day to be able to re open to
bring our people back put him
back to work and start
entertaining the folks who live
in Albuquerque.
Sen mark is one of the larger
theater companies in the United
States we operate three hundred
thirty theaters across the
country in forty two different
states at present New Mexico is
the only state that we cannot
operate in.
we have seen no income it it
just like the other gentleman
said there's been no revenue
stream for nearly a year now and
our six costs have continued to
come in every single month rent
property taxes insurance all
continue to have to be paid.
I urge you to support this bill
it is a vital lifeline to our
industry to help exhibitors
large and small all across New
Mexico get back on their feet.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Brian Mitchell
followed by JT billing to.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee this is JD Bullington
the register lobbyist for the
national association of theatre
owners and I have to tell you
members of the committee there
is no segment of our economy
that has been closed longer are
hit harder by this pandemic they
in the movie theater industry
there been a few other sectors
that have been closed just as
long but nobody longer and I
have really been through some
difficult times and had some
really difficult conversations
over the last year doing
everything we possibly can to
help this industry we had
numerous conversations with the
governor's office it appeared
that there was we were very
close to getting them open again
in September and in the Labor
Day numbers came then COVID
spiked again and here we are
this is an industry that is
critical to our downtown areas
all throughout New Mexico in
rural areas we all know how
important movie theaters are and
this is an industry that
deserves some real help here
thank you very much.
Thank you Sir Brian Mitchell is
still with us.
Yes I'm here can you hear me OK
welcome thank you good afternoon
my name is Brian Mitchell I'm a
third generation can distort
farmer with an out of control
movie theater hobby our family
fear circuit has fifteen
locations in seven states we
have three locations New Mexico
Los Lunas Espinola and house
needless to say we were stunned
last Wednesday when house was
classified as level green and we
were allowed to re open the
twenty five percent capacity I
had not given it much thought
until we begin preparations last
week in to re open this Friday
as I was building show time for
Townsend I kept thinking we have
been closed fifty weeks over
fifty weeks I had forgotten the
lay out of the house theater
auditoriums over fifty weeks I'd
forgotten the size of each
auditorium in the C. counts over
fifty weeks I forgot the names
of many of our employees
unfortunately over the same
fifty weeks I wasn't able to
forget the property taxes the
utilities insurance mortgage
payments and other fixed cost if
a farming operation went fifty
weeks of being closed there
would be no crops or livestock
left to sail the true
devastation of what it meant to
be closed fifty weeks did not
hit me until last weekend.
And even re opening now it will
be months before any business
will fully recover.
I am truly afraid there are many
New Mexico businesses out there
the will not make it they just
have not had that realization
yet.
Any help such as house bill
three fifty is much needed and
will be greatly appreciated.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you anyone else wish to
address.
Committee in favor anyone in
opposition.
Anyone in opposition there's
eight persons in the attendee
row we'll go back to members of
the committee.
Representative about Martinez
followed by Representative part
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing the
bill Ford.
I'm I'm a big the movie theater
fan
That so those are hobby before
the pandemic kids every every
Friday.
we would be at one of you what
one of the all state leaders
well though the ones in
Albuquerque we we don't really
travel to go watch a movie in in
a rural community although I've
always been intrigued as we
travel the roads of New Mexico.
Senator drive by a theater and
I've always kind of thought that
that would be kind of fun you
know go check out other other
spaces.
Mr Mr chair and and
Representative
your bill would allow for a.
Is it a deduction is it a credit
what is it.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Mr chairman it is a
deduction.
Okay there will be a deduction
from gross receipts.
Yes Sir.
Okay.
And Mr chair and and
Representative is there a reason
why a deduction versus a credit.
In this.
No no Mr chairman I I but to to
be perfectly Frank when the when
we heard the relief packages
that were passed by the Senate
and the house and I realize that
the eaters were not included it
seemed urgent to get something
filed before the deadline.
No that's and that makes sense
and and and this is one of the
at industries that has been
hardest hit.
Mr chair and and Representative
So I'm I'm trying to I believe
it was Senate bill.
One I think it was Senate bill
one that provided it was a gross
receipts tax.
deduction.
He was for a period of March
until June.
Of this year.
Your bills would have the
deduction in the books until
July one of twenty twenty five
is that correct.
Mr Chairman yes it is.
And Mr chair representative what
why is that.
That Mr Chairman it.
Alright partially Mr chairman Mr
chairman thank you for that
question I'm partially because
we do not know how long it's
gonna take for people to start
going back for movies to be
available for them to stream and
just because they are not
eligible for so many of the
other and credit sin initiatives
that are out there this is the
school it's just a slow and
steady credit over time and
That's what we decide.
It is going to be a low us very
slow recovery for theaters
that's what's been projected.
Very good Mr Mr chairman and and
Representative.
What is the average.
To get prize I know here in
Albuquerque it depends on which
one you go to but I I think I
think for prime time is greatly
ten Bucks some like that
Do you have any of us Mr
chairman I'll answer for might
the the one screen in each of my
counties have one screen and
that for five dollars you also
get a bag of popcorn or a pickle
that's for the one screen
industry the consequences and
something very similar in
downtown Silver City and those
that fierce survive only because
of men main street historic
theater signing up but I'll let
the expert witnesses X. answer
those for their theaters.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative now so the
average ticket price would vary
depending on the particular
market so you could have you
know one prices adult price in
Albuquerque could be different
from Santa Fe or another rural
market and then obviously you
have then a ticket pricing you
have senior pricing et cetera so
it it's it's somewhat varies
across the board.
And and Mr chair and
representative and Mister curry
I I I'm I'm surprised some of
them in a what what movie
theaters open up and head down
to tier C. five Bucks back bag
popcorn in a pickle and the
movie that's pretty good deal
so just just doing some rough
math here so you know it
Albuquerque let's say more or
less it's about ten Bucks to get
in particular it so you'd be.
very deck so so yeah I guess you
could either do two things you
could offer a cheaper ticket.
Mr Mr chair representative
Or a.
Or I guess you could potentially
if if you basically the way we
did Senate bill one.
You could actually keep that
money and not have to related to
the state.
that's how Senate bill one was
structured right so restaurants
wouldn't necessarily not charge
the G. R. T. they just don't
have to be made it and and and I
I suppose the movie theaters
would probably have that same
choice but just doing the math
it seems like on a ten dollar
ticket it's eighty five cents
more less.
That you're charging and Tax.
I'm wondering you know I
certainly appreciate the
sentiment of trying to help the
theaters but how much help is is
truly going to provide you all
with and and I mean that in the
most sincere way you know I
guess if you have ten thousand
tickets they sell at any given
weekend that probably makes a
difference but if you've got you
know one screen
you know maybe a maybe eighty
seats hundred seats assuming
you're packing it
I I don't I don't see I I
appreciate the sentiment but I
don't see this is really helping
you all am I missing something
Mr chair and representative and
and experts.
Mr Mr chairman Mr chairman I'm
gonna go ahead and let the let
our our in state New Mexico
owner Russell Allen ensure that.
Representative yes
First thing I think most people
don't realize about it but about
sixty percent we pay film rental
about sixty percent.
Is what we pay on the tickets.
which is something a lot of
people don't quite understand
and and the others Mr curry
talked about all the different
pricing and the pricing usually
come to an average ticket price
around six Bucks
you know it depends on different
markets.
This.
And the other thing is Senate
bill one.
Is only good until June and lot
of us don't even think will be
open until may so there's
there's no benefit there at all
and.
Yes the ongoing thing.
Is since we're such a important
part of communities I personally
have theaters nine different
communities Farmington Los
crucis being our biggest ones
but galloping down the
southeastern part state were
basically the only thing for
people to do for entertainment.
and the the mental release the
people can get from doing that
Sometimes the numbers are.
And thousands it can be
substantial depended on the
picture.
But we paid sixty percent fell
rental on that stuff in and we
tried it we survive off of off
of the the coke in the popcorn
that's what we do that's really
what we do is we sell coke and
popcorn that's what pays the
bills that's what pays the rent
that's what pays the staff
that's what the no that's that's
really our business and and
over.
Over a four year period.
It will.
Be greatly helpful.
To recoup some of these costs
that we've incurred during this
year of being completely shut
down.
And you know we're talking you
know we were all out millions
and millions of dollars.
The theater Business this and
you know we just ask you to
support a little bit of a little
bit to get back Rediff I've been
doing this in the state for a
hundred years I think you know
would be nice to have a little
bit to get back because we give
back to community every
community we can't and you know
it's so we're just we're we're
asking Ripley.
We appreciate your support thank
you Mr chair representative in
New mistrial I I totally I
totally hear you
like I said I think that
you know we we we do.
So many communities who depend
on you all as as the only game
in town or or even in a place
like Albuquerque I mean I'm I'm
telling you all you know with
two young kids at home.
You know there still a lot of
stuff that you know they're just
not of age to do you know you
can go to.
You can't really go to a museum
park yet you know you can't
really go to
Of the many vent you know when
they're open I mean they're just
too young but movies that's
that's just something that's
much much different.
Mr chairman and and
Representative in experts the
state has a since the special
session in June and then in
November and then this session
there been a number of comment
economic recovery efforts that
have been spearheaded by
different members of the
legislature including a grant
program in November including a
a very very low interest loan
program and and I know it's
still alone but because of the
Commerce Clause of the
constitution we can do is give
money so it's a it's an
extremely low interest loan has
the industry in New Mexico being
able to tap into those
resources.
And what and you're you're not
you're you're saying no can you
explain why that is.
Chairman and representative in
Mr Allen.
almost all those programs were
based on the number of staff
that you have we don't have any
staff.
Because we had no staff because
we've laid everybody off we're
not eligible for any of those
funds.
And that's you know all all
those requests and stuff was to
keep up to keep businesses pay
and open and paying their people
and we we let everybody off we
and we're we can't be opened the
same way that the the Senate
bill one with we're for three
months for the four months of
their put in there's no there's
not nothing that we can
participate in because we are
closed.
And and so that's why we would
you know I applied for all those
things but we didn't we weren't
eligible for any of that stuff
because we don't have any staff
and that's that's the difference
between where everybody else was
where we're at no staff there's
no requests there's no way so.
Mr chair representative Mr Allen
I I I I understand that to be
the case with
With the PPP program right the
pair protection program
but I'll have to go back and
look at the of the of the loan
program I don't know that I know
that the requirements with
regard to.
Showing revenue decreases you
know over the course of a period
of time but the that the
staffing peas
seems seems a little bit
Little bit off to me.
let Mister chair and and and
Representative and and experts
I I want to find a way
To to help support this industry
I I really really.
I really really think you bring
a great deal of value to each
community that you're in
and and you certainly I think
help improve people's lives
through the arts of of field.
and and I cannot stress enough
how important it is I get a
little bit nervous when we use
the gross receipts tax code as a
way to do that you know I I I
was a little bit nervous when in
Senate bill one which I
cosponsored that was part of the
deal providing restaurants and
bars a you know three three
months
G. R. T. deduction
it made me feel a lot better
than it was three months
You know I I I don't
you know it should this bill
pass it goes to the to the
To the tax committee I believe
if I'm not mistaken.
and.
You know we're gonna look really
closely at it
from the perspective of the tax
code and I just tell you that
because
it's pretty difficult to get
consensus is
within that committee itself to
move things out that are that
are.
That are breaking another hole
in the gross receipts tax code
and that's no fault of your own
that would be very clear that's
that's forty years in the making
that's definitely before my
time.
but we get very nervous when we
when we start poking more holes
right because quite frankly
you know there are a lot of
other industries as well that
I've been that I've suffered the
the the the consequences of of
this pandemic
and you know if if if we give
one to this industry we probably
need to give it to the other
fifteen that show up
in all fairness you're the only
one so far so maybe the other
fifteen won't show up on time
before March twentieth.
That I just I need to let you
know that makes me very very
nervous I don't know how a vote
today I'm gonna listen to more
the conversation but was this
gets to the tax committee to
think
We're gonna.
Gonna be taking a real close
look at it I appreciate the
intent and and I wish we had a.
A different way to say here's
our movie theater industry.
They've been shut down one
hundred percent completely you
can't take out.
The viewing of the film you know
you you either go in you sit
with a bunch of people in an
enclosed space or you don't
and unfortunately for your
industry that cannot happen
right now.
Thank you for answering my
questions and thank you for what
you do truly and it's it's great
to actually put a face to the
people behind those theaters
that I've had the pleasure of
driving right past the freeway
and hopefully really soon I'll
be able to stop by and and catch
a movie for five Bucks with the
popcorn bucket and a pickle
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman.
Who is speaking now at
Representative Dow.
please please animal
Representative part of Mr
Chairman at Mr Chairman Martinez
I would love to take you to our
local theater and out to a
restaurant next door.
That set.
Representative are.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill forward I'm listening
to Representative Martinez
this is the got me that.
I'm asking more questions I'm
one of the things that I guess
one of my questions is we can't
tax rebates and tax incentives
to the film industry
Representative have we've been
can we continue to do that
throughout the pandemic.
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman yes yes
Representative Fajardo we have
continued to do that actually we
just gave him a hundred million
dollars in one fell swoop for
for one one company in
particular while we had every
small business in New Mexico
divided up among the at that
same amount one hundred million
for every small business in New
Mexico of which the average
receive fifteen thousand at the
same time we get a hundred
million to one film company.
So Representative so and this is
you know I'm you know in these
are questions these just want
more comments we've shut down
every industry in our state but
we've let the film industry
continue on there are certain
industries that have come up to
the governor have you have made
deals and you know that type
deals those are but they have
said if we follow the certain
protocols would you allow us to
stay open.
And the governor has said no to
hundreds of these industries she
said no to state parks.
When you're outdoors.
But she has led the film
industry continue in some of
these bills are being done
indoors inside these
I don't know that what they call
the the movie health things
wherever they feel most things
but yet you know we have these
this says we're not helping
we're helping out of state
businesses were helping
Hollywood's we don't help
ourselves one of the comments
that are Martinez made was that
you know we can't.
The in the theater right now and
that is not true we're only have
have one of I think we're the
only state that's not allowing
Peters we're one of the you know
few states you that have shut
down restaurants there's only
three states that that have shut
down restaurants to due to the
level that we have we're only a
few states that that have shut
down schools and yet our our our
rates are the same capacity and
then been at the same level as
every other state in the country
but yet we've been the most chat
now.
And so you know what we've done
to the small business we did
this.
As a governor as a as a as a
governing body we did this to
them and I own a small business
and we on a print business and
ninety to eighty percent of what
we do is is is events.
And you know I don't know if my
company is going to survive and
yet a lot of these tax breaks
and things like that aren't even
offered to me.
Or my son because of the type of
industry that were and
Representative company but they
don't understand that when you
cancel events across the board
when you don't allow people to
go to go out and do things the
domino effect that happens and
we've done that to our state and
so you know if if we can give
the film industry hundred
million dollars.
then then we can we can help our
help the the you know the small
business guys in our state so I
I support your bill thank you so
much for bringing this forward
and shout out to the I don't
know which one of your expert
witnesses is
owns the lesson is there but
thank you very much we go there
all the time and I know that
they've been trying very hard
during this time this time
popcorn on the weekends bye bye
popcorn's houses it's all they
can do all they can do I mean if
they have been hit so so hard
and so thank you Representative
down and something in this for a
Christian.
Thank you Representative set up
the.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the sponsor the bill Mr
chairman and Representative I
think this is more of a question
for Mr Allen I'm kind of curious
I do completely understand that
there have been serious economic
impacts specially to movie
theaters were shut down this
entire period but I'm curious
like in in the the.
In the real impact how will this
tax not tax credit it's a it's
a.
At U. S. bank.
Thank you I don't know why that
we're just.
For that.
But how this tax deduction be
used I mean you know and in the
real world I'm just gonna
carries from his experience.
Well we have ongoing expenses
that.
Will continue to happen whether
we're we're when we're open and.
This will help recoup and be
able to make improvements
because our industry I believe
is going to change dramatically
because of this
This incident that's happened to
us this last year and so the
opportunities that we're gonna
have to to show a profit to be
able to make improvements by
adding seats or better sound
systems or new new laser
projectors that are that are
down the pie
for the for those that did no I
know we're back to those that I
was going to build an
entertainment center sixteen
bowling lanes bar restaurant
gains the whole works for my
community here in Los crucis
and.
Probably the only reason why
we're still survives because we
save the money to do that and we
have now spent that money and so
would you just have your
outgoing expenses we're still
going to have to hire staff of
minimum wages getting hit again
next January and that's that
puts this you know happen to
come to pay a sixteen year old
who.
Under a lot of circumstances
only know how to use a broom so
we're teaching this this this
generation of workers and we're
having it imposed
Increase in our cost through
through the minimum wage and I'm
still going to be higher and
sixteen year olds because those
are the only ones that were
willing and wanting to do the
job that that's there and and
these are these are costs that
are just building up over time
and the tax deduction is always
a good thing to be able to make
investments back in your
business to support your
communities and then give them
the things that they're looking
for we tried we tried our small
towns tried to give the same
experience.
That the people in Roswell have
the same experience with those
in Albuquerque and that's always
been our goals in my family an
interesting little fact way back
in the day before there was
sound my great grandfather
invested in one of the.
Five thousand dollars in the
sound system at the very
beginning and we really like the
third one west of the
Mississippi and that was
installed in Farmington New
Mexico and so my family is
always strive to give the best
possible experience to our
customers in a tax deduct like
this will be crucial to being
able to continue to the standard
to our customers so that you
know they don't feel like
they're being left out as we
don't want our customers to feel
left out someone in the big city
and these costs there involved
us no laser projector now
seventy thousand dollars.
Film projector and a platter
system the whole works was about
ten.
And and so are costs are up
dramatically but we have to stay
up with that to give to give our
our customers the same
experience that they can
experience anywhere else and
then a little bit of help on a
on a tax deduct you know it's
going to be it'll be a you know
tens of thousands of dollars a
year but I guarantee you all the
best in the business and that's
been for our communities and
that's what we would do with any
kind of deduct that we can get.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Answer that you Mr Allen you
know I I understand I'm not a
big movie theater person going
but I'll tell you this I go
anytime there's like a Marvel
movie or like some action flick
I'm always there so that's one
thing about your industry that
is really complicated and soul
are I don't know how you'll do
it to be quite Frank because
technology changes so quickly
and you know like and and that
draws the people like me right
the the the the not weekly movie
theater goers that I'm sure do
make the difference right with
the yes I you would be surprised
the per capita movie going is
six movies a year.
That's it.
And our and our.
Our occupancies when we're busy
are about twenty two percent.
That's what our regular
occupancies are so there's a lot
of misunderstanding what happens
in our business.
you know Mr Mr Chairman
representative of I I really do
appreciate that I I think that
that makes a lot of sense
especially you know for the
newer generations that have you
know a lot of streaming
available and I I just want to
appreciate that and this is a
tough one for me I'll be honest
with you Mr chairman and and
Representative I think it's you
know it because I also think of
the other industries and also
been impacted I know we've
closed and a number of gems that
have been open you know during
the COVID for similar reasons
however many of those have been
able to come back in a very you
know much quicker when they can
they are ten ninety nine so a
lot of them are able to to take
advantage of the of the
opportunities that we afford it
so you know I I am This so but I
also don't compare to another
industry that's not fair you
know Mr Chairman representative
to look at this bill of sale
like I wish it had all these
other flavors on it is does this
work on so I I want to just put
that out there and and I'll be
praying and leaning towards this
bill at this moment I just I but
I want to put it out there that
you know I'm I'm I'm I'm still
looking as I don't want to.
This and work with the sponsor
the goal of better understanding
it but thank you Mr Allen for
answering those questions I
think that's really helpful to
have a better understanding but
what the uses are for you you're
welcome anyway to help any way
to help.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert Mr chairman I
Google do pass.
Thank you we have a to pass.
We have a due pass motion.
Do I hear a second.
Thank you.
All right thank you to have a
due process motion by
Representative Powdrell Culbert
a second by Representative guy
goes.
before we.
Take that bode us quick quick
comment thank you Mr curry
mistrial and this is the first
well hearing I believe we've had
on movie theaters
and so this is really cool I
think
I think it's a great to get an
update and I commit to if you
guys want to have a hearing
during the instructed to see how
it's going.
Because that the two things that
in my mind we're gonna open up
the latest are more sporting
events but I think leisure.
Are maybe the of the the last
ones to open up you know given
that the the chronology of the
health orders and things like
that so so you guys then you
guys were just taken out from
one day to the next
And so I so basically that I
really appreciate what
Representative does trying to do
is how do we get creative.
To give you guys a boost to to
make sure the state government
has your back to to make sure
you guys don't go out of
business in those towns don't
have maybe one or two theaters
that I've been to the theater
and most honest some friends of
mine live live right by there
and meet them there from time to
time so let's think creatively
on how to do this the judge G.
R. T. deduction is something
that we're just simply trying to
move away from as a state and
you'll hear in the papers or or
people talk that we that are and
Diana Representative Harper from
Rio Rancho kind of leads on
this.
On this dialogue that our tax
code is made of Swiss cheese and
we had a good firm block cheese
that we can lower taxes all
right you know.
In other areas and have a better
economy.
So I.
So I'm just trying to think
about how to get to the the
support obviously the best way
is just to write a check state
government quicker you know
forced you to close.
You know and if we had just a
cohesive federal government with
the national policy back in
March April we could have closed
written a check to everybody and
then try to open up you know
that that just didn't happen and
it's somebody's fault it's the
stuff rolls around once every
hundred years.
But how do we get you that you
know you don't qualify for the
PPP or other loans
Tax credits is the way to go I
mean that's the best way to go
just a good old fashioned tax
credit.
for two reasons one is that the
G. R. T. is very very
important to the small towns and
municipalities you know we we we
did away with taxing food so
which is a huge portion of the
city and and county revenues so
that cities and counties or the
cities and counties are getting
squeezed they have no budgets to
you know try to help the cops
get raises things like that
so the best way to do it is with
just check we can't do that as a
state where it's against the law
we you know we the state
government can just write a
check to a private company like
the federal government can.
The next best way to do it is
with credits or deductions of
the the the the least best way
to do it in my opinion is with
G. R. T. yeah we're G. R. T.
I'd like to point that
Representative Martinez said
it's like.
What you charge ten Bucks and
and eighty five cents for G. R.
T. the next so you charge ten
Bucks with no eight five cents
for G. R. T. is the same but I
think it will be different with
for you guys because I think I
just charged a set price and can
pull the G. R. T. into that
price maintain the price for the
consumer you're so you're
essentially like raising the
price and then keeping extra
revenue on the back and so so
let's figure it out
I don't think I need R. T. is is
gonna pass this gonna be my most
hurtful boat that I take this
this year because it's just such
a great idea and you guys
definitely need it is just
contrary to what we've been
doing historically.
As a state in terms of helping
particularly businesses but.
But I and obviously we want to
pick and choose what if we did
pick and choose industry are you
that you guys would be at the
top of the list but those are
just kind of my my thoughts I
think what we could do in the
future Representative dollars
maybe some some tax deductions
on on capital improvement you
know if you have speakers a new
concession stand things like
that let's work with the the
liquor control act and see if we
can get around that sixty
percent restaurant license and
we're gonna try to do a
restaurant be license which is
still tied up sixty percent food
and see if we can create like of
what we do our license obviously
you guys are free not to do that
but it's been twenty six years
since you know John Travolta
told told us in pulp fiction got
out of here with a movie and
here we are still not doing that
with the exception of maybe one
or two theaters so anyway we're
committed to to help your
business in your industry I
just.
This would just this but we just
contradict many votes uptick in
the past which we are subject to
deductions but I would just like
to share my thoughts
before the vote as opposed after
saying no see no one else we
have a.
Send a second yes Sir Madam.
I'm sorry Mr chairman I just
want to add a couple of things
if I may before the doctor.
Enrollment obviously from our
perspective you movie theaters
are are really America's pastime
and then huge baseball player
but if you look at the
attendance to goes to movie
theaters normal here obviously
it's it's been pretty
significant in New Mexico is is
no different with the folks that
want to go and go enjoy the more
movies like Black Widow was
you're gonna lose some your
order Sir you're gonna lose some
of your yes voters I hate to be
rude but I think it's in your
interest state about right now
our.
Please call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Hello yes.
Representative those yes no
explain my work.
Yes.
So.
This is.
So this is a new.
Okay I think you'll hear me now
but this is a no.
Okay I'm.
Well.
Representative.
Yes.
The yes.
This and and I am a very
reluctant no but congratulations
Representative Dow you have to
do passed representative
Gallegos to explainable.
I thank you Mr chair the
committee I just feel that we
need to give this industry of
have.
And these were my constituents
that we're talking to you today
and I just felt compelled even
though it has not been an
alignment with how usually vote
regarding tax
deductions I I am into I am
happy to vote yes on this I
suspect it'll have a bumpy road
but we need to continue this
dialogue because of that we do
need to get these businesses
back up and so I appreciate the
opportunity to explain more
about.
Absolutely thank you
Representative and before we go
some of our members had to jump
off and other storms side
project of John about before we
leave.
Your final thought sure you are
you are mention some things
regarding our industry but I
could.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate actually the guidance
that that certainly it worked
out to in our paper this
particular moment but again
thank you for this obviously I
think that the movies are
America's favorite pastime few
people looking forward to
getting back out to a Black
Widow or fast and furious you
know some of these these great
movies that are paying us this
year but the fact of the matter
is that we still are are at a
disadvantage as we get to the
year movies have been pushed we
are now competing more and more
with streaming services and so
forth so really getting back to
Representative Martinez comment
of how will this really help it
certainly gives us an
opportunity to put our best foot
forward to get safely reopened
and have that pathway for
recovery which is going to take
several years to to really
stabilize and get back to the
point to where we work and
obviously we we appreciate all
of you guys and thank you for
supporting us.
Thank you Sir and one final
thought I I.
You know the B. C. our kids with
the drive in movie I think all
the streaming of these beautiful
fifty in screens on our on our
house price was a detriment to
your industry but I think
hopefully COVID being in your
house for a year straight
hopefully fill bounce back and
bounce back incredibly strong
looking forty one the movies
more than I've ever had in the
past so hopefully that plays out
obviously there's gonna be that
ten or fifteen percent of folks
that are still afraid of the
virus but we look forward to a
big year for you and appreciate
the bill coming forward
congratulations we with that we
we're gonna be on the floor and
fourth at four thirty so be able
to grab a snack or a or a take a
break a quick nap we're gonna be
meeting of Wednesday at one
thirty and then Friday at one
thirty we'll see what the
referrals are like but it should
be relatively light the rest of
the week so thank you all and
with that we are adjourned.
