83.
Representative Ortiz, I see that
we have one amendment.
So, we're getting the 2nd 1 now,
OK.
All right, I want to make sure
everything is passed out.
Why we're doing that, Patrick,
why don't you take roll?
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz here.
Representative Hernandez
hereresentative Valente.
Representative Mason here
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy, here,
Represented Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam chair, here you have a m.
Thank you. All righty, uh,
Representative Ortiz, do you
want to start off by, um, well,
first, let's move the amendment
for discussion, can I have
somebody move the amendment,
please.
Some of Dela Cruz with the full
mouth is can then move the
amendment. Alrighty, thank you.
Um, and representative, if you'd
like to explain the amendments
and your bill, please. Madam
Chair, thank you. Would you like
me to, um, explain the bill
first and then the amendments,
what's that might be best and
there and there are two. So I'll
just start and I wanna thank you
for putting me on the calendar
first. I really appreciate that,
um, so house Bill 93 um is meant
to address one of the big
biggest problems that we have on
our electric grid right now,
which is congested transmission
lines, so we're talking about
transmission lines and not um.
Distribution lines, um, we have
incredible renewable energy and
energy resources uh here in this
state and some of that clean
energy, wind, solar, geothermal,
um, is, it's tough to get that
on the grid in a timely manner,
um, the reason why is that the
wires that carry that energy are
congested and there isn't enough
capacity to carry that
electricity from where it's
generated to where it's needed,
so this bill addresses that
problem um by allowing uh
utilities to.
take advantage of advanced grid
technologies that can unlock the
capacity uh of the grid that we
already have, um, and when you
think about these advanced grid
technologies, sometimes we call
them grid enhancing
technologies, um, really as kind
of like an energy efficiency for
the electric grid, um, they're
not new lines, uh, they, we
don't have to build any new
right of ways, they, they live
on the the lines that already
exist, uh on the polls that
already exist, so we don't have.
do any permits. We don't need
new lands, um, I, I'd like for
you to think about it in terms
of like, um, this was actually
presented to me in another
committee by a dear and trusted
friends. Uh think of um our grid
like an old house, right? And so
it has good bones, but sometimes
you need to make make updates to
that house, um, by redoing the
wiring or the plumbing, and
that's what this is. We're
keeping the old house with the
good bones, but we're making it
better and
more efficient.
Um, so, Madam Char does this
bill does this in two ways. We,
um, we ask utilities to include
advanced grid technologies in
their twenty-year planning
process called the integrated
Resource plans, and secondly,
the bill guidelines and
guardrails for the public
regulation commission to approve
the recovery of reasonable costs
for advanced grid technologies
under the grid modernization
Act. That's what the bill does.
And now I can explain the, Madam
Chair.
Let's start with the 202 number
that you are gonna explain
first. Thank you, Madam Chair,
um, 231-214.2.
OK.
We're with you.
OK
Great, thank you. So this
amendment uh cleans up uh some
language that we had in the
previous committee sub, um,
we're taking out uh advanced
technology plans and we're
talking we're we're saying
advanced technology projects, so
no plans, just projects all
throughout the bill, uh,
secondly, it adds some
specificity and clarity to the
kinds of advanced technology
projects at a utility may seek
cost recovery for that's at the
bottom of.
Page 7, section I. Um, we've
added some specificity.
Uh, so that those, um, those
projects are in line with the
state's grid modernization
planning and their goals
overall, um, and we've cleaned
up some of that language so that
we're not repeating advanced
grid technology in the
description of eligible
projects.
That's the first one.
Clean up and a little bit more
clarity.
Does anybody have any?
Questions on the amendment.
OK. uh, Madam Leader.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
can you just tell me why you
added I.
And, um,
Where can I find the plans of
the state's grid modernization.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative
Armstrong, I'd like to also
introduce my uh my expert
witness, Doctor Anna Lindon
Weller from Resources Western
Resource Advocates, um.
So your first question, Madam
Chair, Representative Armstrong,
um.
Why we did it
Um, so,
Let's see.
you go ahead and take this,
Madam Chair Representative
Armstrong. So we didn't add it
actually, we changed it. It was
there in the bill prior, um.
On page 7, section I is part of
the
A description that we've given
to the PRC of how to evaluate a
proposed project that a utility
might bring to them under the
grid modernization Act that
would use some of these advanced
grid technologies. Um, and the
reason that we made these
changes in this amendment.
Madam Chair, Representative is
because we wanted to make sure
that all of these projects fit
within other projects that were
related to other projects that.
are part of the grid
modernization Act, um, any grid
modernization plans that a
utility might file, there's like
an ongoing rulemaking at the PRC
right now about plans they might
have to file, um, and also when
the grid modernization Act was
placed into statute, which I
believe was back in 2020.
Um, Madam Chair, representative.
The act was included this
instruction to the state energy,
minerals and natural resources
department to kind of set up
like, OK, so what is grid
modernization anyway. And that
was a project that was completed
in, I believe 2021, um, and sets
out some really broad strokes.
Uh, about what those projects
and plans and ideas should look
like, so we just want any
projects this.
Bill
Enables to fit into that.
Um, OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm just, um,
It's just interesting that you
removed plans from everywhere
except for in there.
Where it says planning, and that
is contemplated.
A utility's most recent.
Integrated resource plan.
So I was just concerned that you
took out plan everywhere else,
but you left it in section I.
So, um, thank you, and, and the
other thing, you know, I just
don't know why it says doesn't
say with priorities of the
state's grid modernization Act.
Instead of planning, just a,
just.
Madam Chair representative, I
think that probably would have
been more artful.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Representative Matthews, uh,
Madam Chair, I'm, I'm just
confused because I've got 3
different pieces of paper with 3
different numbers on them, and I
just wanna be sure I know.
So
Understanding is that there's 2
amendments and the amendment
we're dealing with now.
Um
Would you read the number again
that we're dealing? Yes, ma'am,
chair, 231-214.22.
231214.2, OK, and Madam Chair
Representative, you're amending
230324.1.
And chair Representative. We are
amending the committee sub
230324.1, yes. OK, all right.
Thank you.
A representative Cerrado on the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and just to be
clear, this section I that
you're trading as you review
this with
Some of the utilities and they,
they agree with this language.
Adam Chery as representative.
Thank you. We have.
Anybody else on this particular
amendment.
Uh, do I have a motion for this
amendment?
Any opposition?
Just a second.
All righty.
Let's go to, there's no
opposition. Let's go ahead and
go to your 2nd Amendment. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, the, the
2nd Amendment does 3 things. Oh,
Madam Chair, I, I, I'll read
that out aloud, please 231080.1.
It's the, it's the one pager,
not the two pager.
Uh, so we're, Madam Chair,
we're, we're striking, uh, some
language and adding some
language, um, and I'll explain
what what we're doing with this,
um.
We, um, we worked with uh P&M
and and other utilities to um
To really sort of better
understand the requirements for
advanced grid technology
projects and their cost
effectiveness. So we want to be
able, we want those utilities to
be able to look forward in time
to reduce costs, not just at the
moment of cost recovery, but you
know, if they for their planning
so that they can, they can do it
later at a later time if they
needed to.
Secondly, we've moved, we've
removed some unnecessary uh
language relating to FERC, the
Federal Energy Regulation
Commission, uh, again, this is
in discussion with utilities and
uh and some of the advocates who
work in this field, inner west
and advanced energy united, um,
this language is not, it's not
needed um in state law.
Third, wait, 3rd, we fixed the
definition of advanced
conductors to make it more
accurate, uh, to the realities
of electrical engineering.
That's what this amendment does.
Thank you, Representative. Do we
have any questions on this
amendment?
From, from the committee.
What would the committee like to
do with this moment?
You have a second?
Um
Do we have any uh
Any objections?
OK.
And we mean it is amended.
All right.
back onto the bill.
Um, Madam Chair, um, with those
amendments, and thank you very
much for that. We stand for
questions.
So before we move on, let's go
to uh the audience, is anybody
here in favor of this bill?
Alright, you wanna get in line,
the attendant will hold the mic.
You have one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Rickie Lee
Chavez on behalf of Inner West
Energy Alliance, uh, in West
Energy Alliance is a regional
renewable trade association
headquartered here in New
Mexico, uh, we do stand in
support of HB 93 in addition to
our goals of building new
transmission lines to support
the clean energy transition.
This bill will help existing
transmission lines carry even
more electricity. We're excited
by the utility's consideration
of these advanced transmission
technologies and this bill will
clearly tie that.
consideration to the regular
integrated resource planning
process. Thank you for
consideration and support.
Thank you. Oh, thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair members, I just
want to thank the sponsor and
her experts for really working
closely with P&M. I've seen
Archuleta here on behalf of P&M.
Sorry, I forgot to say that
part. Um, I just want to say
that, uh, this bill we feel like
really helps us in advancing
grid modernization and working
with our customers to lower
their costs, so we really
appreciate.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam
Chairman of the committee. My
name is Sammy Cow. I'm the
policy director with Energy
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department, also known as Mnerd,
um, HB 93 is a very important
step in ensuring the
affordability, sustainability,
reliability, and resiliency of
New Mexico's electricity grid.
And by directing utilities to
incorporate advanced grid
technologies into system
planning. This bill promotes
greater system efficiency and
helps address the challenges of
unprecedented load growth.
Um, the use of these
technologies will not only
enhance the grid's performance,
but also contribute to
maintaining affordable ratepayer
rates for ratepayers, um, in the
long term. So we appreciate your
support. Thank you. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Carrie
Robin Bruder with Advanced
Energy United, we are also a
trade association with advanced
clean energy companies. We
support the legislation as
amended, uh, very simply, there
are poles in the ground right
now that hold up our
transmission lines. We can
choose to renovate and upgrade
those current poles so that they
can carry more electricity, or
we can have the choice to only
build new ones. We think it
makes sense to upgrade the
current infrastructure that we
have.
it makes sense for the
ratepayers, it makes sense for
the electrical generators and
for the utilities. And we think
that this bill is just common
sense and is a good one.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Rico Gonzalez, and I
work with El Paso Electric.
I first of all want to uh.
Acknowledge the fuchsia gavel.
And say that that thing is
excellent. Thank you, brings
color to the, to the entire
legislature.
But to that end of the bill, I
am, uh, we stand very much in
support of the bill. I think the
issues were covered, the ability
to grow our system in a cost,
uh, in a, in a, in a cost
structure that that not only
helps our uh uh utility, but
also helps customers to, to be
able to um continue to electrify
their own lives and um to to
affect um
Climate change as much as any of
us and all of us can at this
time. So thank you very much for
for your time and thanks for the
gavel.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Olmos, new
regent.
Alrighty. Anybody else?
OK, let's go on to Zoom or.
uh, in favor of the bill.
All righty. Anybody in
opposition?
In the room?
Anybody in Zoom.
No
All righty.
Uh, anything from the committee.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, for
your, uh, presentation. Um, how
does this affect co-ops?
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
co-ops don't need to do the
integrated resource planning,
um, but they do have to do an
annual report every year, so
they can put, um, they will.
Um, talk about what advanced
grid technologies, they're going
to projects that they're going
to be uh developing and
implementing in that annual
plan.
Would you like to add anything
else?
Madam Chair, Representative
Armstrong, this they really
doesn't require very much of co
ops, um, they don't have to
build any projects. They don't
have to use these technologies
at all, but when they do do that
annual report to the PRC.
If they have used them, they
need to tell the PRC what they
did.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. My other
question is, uh, I know in a,
I'm concerned about cos because
most of my district is co op.
Um, and I don't see the co ops
here in opposition or, or for
it. So I was just a little
surprised just because, you
know, we do want grid
modernization even in rural New
Mexico.
And so
One of the things is the co-ops
own those poles.
And when we tried to bring some
broadband in, you know, there
was an argument that I own the
pole, so now I'm gonna charge
you to put anything on the pole,
uh, some things like that. So I
just want to make sure that this
won't end up.
Um, not getting the whole grid
modern modernized.
And or
Um, leaving out part of New
Mexico.
And so
You see either one of those.
Happening in rural New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Armstrong.
I, I'm also in a co op area and
um I don't see, I see this bill
being additive to to what
they're doing, they're some co
ops, not all are uh using the
grid enhancing technologies uh
to make sure that their lines
have more efficiency, um, but I
don't see this being uh at all a
challenge for them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, representative and
presenters.
Um
I just have
But I'd like to be able to do is
say to my constituents.
That I voted for this.
Understanding what it was going
to look like.
For a residential ratepayer.
OK. So what I'd like you to do,
if you would.
I
Describe, if you would, any
physical changes. Well, right
now I live on a, actually my,
you took my uh my electricity is
underground.
Um, it has been forever.
Uh
Are you, is it gonna be like the
folks who have been out digging
up the streets to put in some
kind of a high speed something
or other.
Um, internet service.
And nobody knew what was going
on or why.
Um, so I, when I get home and
you start this project, let's
say.
I'm gonna look out my window.
What am I gonna see and what am
I going to hear, and then
ultimately, what is the cost
that I'm going to pay as the
ratepayer.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Matthews, that is a fantastic
question. I thank you for for
asking it, um, you're not gonna
see anything outside your home,
because we're not talking about
the distribution lines. Those
are the lines that go from the
transmission lines, uh, to, uh,
to your home and other people's
homes and businesses,
distribution lines. We are
talking about.
Uh, advanced technologies that
go on the transmission lines
where the energy is produced,
um, and then it, you know, we
can talk about the whole
electrical grid, but that's
really
Where you're gonna see that if
you go out to, you know, a rural
part of your of your district,
that's probably where you'll see
the transmission lines, um.
I'm gonna ask uh Doctor Weller
to expand on that and then I
want to answer your second
question about.
how costly it's gonna be.
of Representative Ortez pretty
much said what I'd say, um, but.
I do want to mention that, let's
say that you are in a rural part
of your district and you see a
transmission line, it's been
there for a long time. It
carries more um energy at higher
voltage than the lines that go
to your house.
Um, you might see a lineman
there replacing the wire, um,
that might be one of the
projects, but that wouldn't be a
big construction project where
they have to build a new slip
road or anything like that, it
would be sort of the regular
maintenance guy from your.
Utility or your co op who shows
up except he has or she has.
Way more advanced pieces of um
wiring then they used to.
And secondly, Madam Chair
Representative Matthews, um.
Advanced grid technologies.
Or
So much cheaper, 5 to 10% of the
cost of building new
transmission lines which are
costly in all kinds of ways,
including having to pay lawyers
to get the permitting through
PRC. They take a long time. Um,
it's much cheaper to buy the
technology to use on the
existing poles or the existing
lines in some cases, uh, then to
build a whole new transmission
line in a whole new area, um,
which is really what a lot of
utilities are faced with right
now as we, um, you know, build
new
renewable energy projects,
right? So, um, it's really uh a
much more efficient and low-cost
way of making sure the grid has
enough power on it to power the
state.
And for export as well of our
clean energy.
Uh
Thank you, thank you, uh, Madam
Sharon, thank you both for, for
your answers.
Um, that helps me. Let me ask
you one other question. So in my
district,
In addition to individual single
family homes there are a number
of um.
Apartments, but there are also
um a large manufactured housing
this area and the and the reason
I'm asking about it is because I
got to know everybody down there
when I was contacted because I
was a state rep because
electricity was going out.
Um, and it took quite some time
to get.
PM and other kinds of folks out
there to fix this problem, and
I'm told there's still
occasionally a problem.
So what impact, if any, would
your proposal have on
A
Looked a large.
Area
Uh, housing area like a a
manufactured home park.
Uh, would it be any different
than what you were describing to
me for my individual home. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Matthews. Uh,
it's not that different, but it
will improve the reliability of
that electricity that's being
delivered, so you improve the
efficiency and the reliability,
and there are lots of different
things that are advanced grid
technologies, we don't have to
like get into them, um, but you
know, if you put like dynamic
line readings like those are the
kinds of things that, you know,
allow utility to, you know, to.
Really understand what's
happening in real time and shut
down lines or turn on lines
based on weather, right? So
that, um, when there are
outages, um, that of course
affects reliability of delivery
of service, right? Like you're
just not going to have the
electricity, so improving the
lines, making them more
efficient by using these
advanced grid technologies will
improve the re reliability for
everybody, but I think
especially for
big energy users like
development. Um, thank you,
Madam Sharon, and you promise
it's not like a.
I where I start to type
something and it changes my
words.
Uh thinking that it is for sure
much smarter than I am, and I'm
sure it is.
Nevertheless, I really dislike
that, so nothing like that weird
is gonna happen.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, I, I know.
I don't think so.
I'm pretty sure now.
All right, thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
Um, representative, I appreciate
that you made the changes that I
had requested, I think um it's a
better bill because of it, so I,
I appreciate that that was done.
Uh, what is the desire of the
committee.
Move it do pass. We have a
second?
Right, Patrick take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
I'm gonna pass.
Representative De la Cruz? Yes.
Representative Hernandez. Yes.
Representative Lente, yes.
Representative Mason
Yes.
Representative Matthews,
Representative Murphy, yes,
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Representative Armstrong.
A little reluctant, yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair, final tally
for the DuPass as amended motion
is 11 votes. Yes, 0 votes, no.
Ready, you have an amended bill.
Already.
Let's go to HB 99.
As Amanda.
Alright, thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, House Bill 99.
is a bill that closes loopholes
and helps prevent fraud by
providing procedures and
requirements for salvage title
vehicles and includes steps for
obtaining non-repairable vehicle
certificates, so I have um an
expert with me, I'll let you
introduce yourself.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Scott
Scanlon, registered lobbyist for
Copart.
And um the salvage auction
industry.
Obtains possession of vehicles
brought to our yards by
insurance carriers, so in the
case of total losses in this
bill only applies to total
losses, the insured, the the
carrier will pay the claim and
uh at times they're unable.
To, to, uh, to get the necessary
title and documents from the
previous owner to transfer the
title into their name.
So in starting in 2016, the
state had a.
Uh, a process called uh a firm
affirmation certifying
ownership.
And we were
Cruising along just fine and
then in 2023, uh the state came
to us and said we can't we've
got to stop using this process.
We don't think that uh.
that the statute allows.
Um
This process, uh, and so stop
everything so uh now this the
insurance companies and frankly
the state has come to us and
said, let's fix this part of the
statute so that we can begin
that process again to to make
these title transfers, um.
Uh
S
So, um
So really that's it, uh, in the,
in the last committee um there
were some concerns from the
towing industry. Um, we worked
with them and if you'll notice
um there is uh an amendment to
the bill. We worked with Leader
Armstrong, uh, and got and got
the bill fixed, uh.
To their satisfaction and so we
urge your support.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, um, with
that we stand for questions.
Is anyone here in favor of this
bill?
Anybody on Zoom?
No, madam.
Uh, anybody in opposition of
this bill.
Anybody on Zoom?
No
Um, let's go to the committee.
Any questions from the
committee?
Uh, Representative Martin.
Madam Cha move would do pass on
House Bill 99 as amended.
Any opposition? All righty.
Patrick take the role.
Representative Armstrong, yes.
Representative de la Cruz. Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lee
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Yes. Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Parajon. Yes.
Representative Serrado, Madam
Vice Chair. Um, yes.
Madam Chair. Yes, Madam Chair,
final tally for the due pass
motion, 11 votes yes, 0 votes
no.
Representative, you have a due
pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
So HB 64.
Representative Chavez, I think
this is the bill everybody's
waiting for, so let's get you up
here.
Everybody seems quiet without.
Representative, if you'd like to
explain your bill. Yes.
Um, House Bill 64 is an apt
expanding the scope of
non-discrimination and
eligibility for education
benefits.
HB 64 would have manned NMSA
21-1-4.6, the state's
nondiscrimination and tuition.
Equity law passed in 2005 to
allow adult immigrant workers
and taxpayers access to in-state
tuition and financial aid.
Or credit and non-credit
training programs at community
colleges.
It would expand it would extend
eligibility to those who have
attended adult education
programs in New Mexico for at
least one year.
Worked in the state and filed
New Mexico income tax returns or
New Mexicans who are applying.
For special immigrant juvenile
status.
Economic facts on why we need to
pass this bill are as follows.
New Mexico has a big workforce
problem. We've all had
conversations about that during
the interim and again during
this session.
There are only
55 available workers for every
100 open jobs. There are
currently 65,000 available jobs
in New Mexico and not enough
residents of working age to fill
them.
Some of the most acute job
shortages are in childcare,
home-based healthcare,
construction and trades.
And broadband insulation.
12 % of New Mexico workers are
immigrants in key industries and
a significant percentage.
is of working age.
According to data from the
migration Policy Institute,
approximately 61.6% of foreign
born individuals aged 16 and
older are part of the civilian
labor force.
Despite working in critical
industries and paying taxes,
immigrant workers are often
excluded from crucial job
training programs.
Government subsidized
apprenticeships, wraparound
support services and tuition
assistance assistants for credit
and non-credit certification
programs at community colleges,
limiting their economic mobility
and contribution to critical
industries.
As our population ages, new
immigrants help keep our economy
growing at a sustainable rate.
Immigrant workers were most
numerous in the following
industries, construction.
accommodation and food services,
healthcare and healthcare
support such as home health care
aides, retail retail, and early
childhood education and
childcare and oil and gas.
OK, right, OK, uh, and with
that, madam, uh, Chair, I would
like my expert witnesses to
introduce themselves and um
speak a little bit more uh about
the importance of this spill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Marcela Diaz. I work for a
statewide immigrant based
workers rights organization
called Somos Pueblo Nido and
Somosaion and uh if would it be
appropriate for me to read this
now.
Um, in 2005, the legislature
expanded educational
opportunities for New Mexico,
New Mexican dreamers, enabling
hundreds if not thousands to
enter critical fields like
healthcare and education.
And for the past 3 years Somos
has been working to ensure
immigrant and low wage workers
can access workforce development
programs in high demand
industries. We've advocated for
increased funding for adult
education, for instance, as a
key pathway to better jobs.
However, a major barrier still
remains. Many in our community
cannot access in-state tuition
or financial aid, including last
year's Grounded tuition support
for non-credit career and
technical education programs.
And that is because they do not
currently qualify under the 2005
law that was passed.
I want to be clear because there
might be a lot of questions
about this that federal law
indeed allows states to grant
in-state tuition and financial
aid to undocumented students,
but there are restrictions about
how we go about doing it.
The, the benefit must be
explicitly authorized by
statute, which is what we're
trying to do today.
And immigrants not lawfully
present in the US shall not be
eligible on the basis of
residence in the state for any
post-secondary education benefit
unless a citizen or a national
of the US is also eligible for
that benefit without regard to
whether they live here or not.
So our current tuition equity
law for dreamers relies not on
residency but on attendance at a
middle or high school for at
least a year in our state.
House Bill 64 seeks to expand
this by allowing eligibility for
those who have attended an adult
education program for a year or
whoever earned income as a
representative has already said
and paid their taxes here for at
least 2 years. Aligning with the
state's existing residency
requirements for tuition
benefits.
Many of our community members
aspire to careers in health
care, HVAC, welding, broadband,
and other skilled trades, but
the high cost of credit programs
and non-credit programs remains
a barrier.
Additionally, many immigrants
without social security numbers
are in the process of obtaining
lawful permanent residency, a
process that as many of you can
know can take many, many years.
In the meantime, they would like
to have access to training
programs to become self-employed
workers, independent contractors
or small business owners. House
Bill 64 would remove a key
financial obstacle and would
provide hardworking New Mexicans
with a fair shot.
To gain the skills that they
need.
Thank you. And this is our other
ex witness who can introduce
herself. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gabriella
Ivania Guzman. I'm the staff
attorney at Somos in Pueblo
Nido, and I'm here to assist in
answering questions. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. All righty, um, is
anybody here in favor of this
bill?
Very good. OK, if we could get
maybe, how about if we just do
10 people. So if you guys decide
who and it's gonna be one
minute, the attendant will hold
the microphone and um I see that
we do have a translator.
Chair and community members.
My name is Marcos Carranza.
And I am proud of a member of
uhhomo's house. I currently in
house, New Mexico for over 180
years.
I am the head of my household
providing for my wife and my 4
children.
And I have worked in the oil gas
industry for over 3 years.
Deposit, uh, my experience and I
have been unable to advance in
my career because I cannot
afford.
To go back to school.
And I want to take a credit
course.
For uh technology on the.
Out of a stateitu Gods make,
make it possible to enroll me to
enroll.
HB 64 will change that.
This,
this be proud, uh a lot to my
pay in.
Carrying my cost by more than 5,
making education real facility.
For me and my many others like
me.
Investing workers like uh even
if it's to only families but
also to communities and
industries, they already
Skin it workforce, please vote
yes on HB 64.
Thank you. Thank you.
Hi, uh, my name is Becky Rowley.
I'm president of Santa Fe
Community College. I'm also
chair of the New Mexico
Independent Community Colleges,
and I'm speaking on behalf of
both groups to express our
collective support for HB 64,
um, we feel that, uh, this bill
would expand the opportunities
for immigrant students to
especially be able to take
advantage of workforce programs
which, um, has, has been noted,
um, are now available at for
free.
most of the time to, um, others
to citizens of New Mexico
through the growth funds that
were appropriated last year and
also uh through the opportunity
scholarship. This would um help
to ease a serious workforce need
that we have and um also we, we
think that the collective impact
uh physically will be pretty
minimal, so, thank you.
Thank you and if we could make
sure that all phones are put on
on silent, please.
Thank you.
I.
So organo Santa Fe, Lea,
Eddie Chavez and Juan Macai
Santa Fe no Mexico and
Santa Fe
osmos
gastronomia.
immigrantemos but uh practical
el oso.
Porqueto gasolina.
Yeah.
Parapagos.
But la proto de leche cuatro
studiosten uni gracias.
Uh, good afternoon. My name is
Rigoberto Hidalgo. I'm a member
of Somosum Pueblo Nido, a uh
organization in for workers'
rights, um, that organizes in
the entire state, including
Santa Fe, in the counties of
Santa Fe, Lee, Eddie, Chavez,
San Juan, and McKinley. I've
been living in Santa Fe for 24
years. I have worked as a chef
in various hotels and
restaurants, and as a worker I
contributed to I am part of the
11% of workers in the state. I
pay my taxes, contributing to
the economy and.
Santa Fe. Uh, I studied English
for 3 years as a, uh, to learn
it as a second language, and I
specialized in gastronomy, uh,
for 2 years, uh, working while I
worked at the same time I paid
it double because pay double in
tuition because I was an
immigrant.
Um, additionally, I had to pay
for the study materials that we
used to be able to practice,
which is very costly, uh,
because, uh, it's very costly.
Additionally, I still have I
still have to pay for my rent,
all my bills, gas, that there
was no financial help from the
state for me, uh, for tuition
payments. I was therefore I was
not able to continue with my
specialty studies because it
was, it was too expensive.
That's why I asked that you
approve a bill HB 64 because it
will help.
us to continue. It will help
people like me to continue with
my studies. Please vote yes.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Jessica Ynez Martinez,
and I'm an immigration attorney
and the director of policy and
coalition building at New Mexico
Immigrant Law Center. As one of
New Mexico's only organizations
providing legal services to
immigrant communities, we stand
in support of HB 64 and NMLC,
our work is grounded in the
belief that all individuals
regardless of an immigration
status, deserve the opportunity
to contribute to our communities
and the economy. I wanna thank
all of you for
passing the special immigrant
juvenile Classification Act in
2023, which expanded access for
immigrant youth who have been
abused, abandoned, and neglected
to qualify for special immigrant
juvenile status, a humanitarian
protection that offers a pathway
to legal status and even
citizenship. The law has created
generational change and has
improved the overall well-being
of qualifying immigrant youth in
the state. HB 64 would further
help qualifying youth that are
applying for special immigrant
juvenile status to be able to
expand their educational and
work opportunities.
We know that immigrants enhance
our state economically,
culturally and linguistically,
especially when we're allowed to
fully participate. New Mexico
has a significant opportunity to
better utilize their
contributions of skills of
newcomers and immigrants who
have been integral to our state.
Thank you so much.
Buena startedes president
members decay.
Ola hombres
Ola hombres monogo taxes
contribute pace.
SMEGDCNM is a chemist
certificado de roy infantille.
Bataeo porque resident.
Ore cert er residente.
This resident.
Solokiropia gracias.
Uh, for English. My name is
Cindy.
Caves, and today we'll read the
testimony for Ramon Dorado.
Hello, my name is Ramon Dorado,
and I am a member of E Centro de
Guala derechos. I have lived in
Albuquerque for more than 28
years. I own my own maintenance
business. I pay my taxes and I
contribute to this country's
economy, I obtained my GED,
studied at CNM, and obtained my
child development certificate. I
struggled a lot because back
then they told me that I was not
a resident because I did not
have a social security number.
They wanted us to pay us out of
pay as out of.
students, uh, paying out of
state tuition. Today, I want to
study to get my plumbing
certificate, but once again they
want, uh, they won't accept that
I am a resident. They say that I
need a social security number
and proof of legal residency. I
only, uh, all I want is to
improve myself. That's why I ask
that you vote yes on this bill.
Thank you.
Buenases estromo de la salud is
Uh, economic costs porque
nemosijos telefono esse Ramo and
la salud parapo there's no infer
this is.
Uh, honey, my name, my name is
Maria de Jesus. I'm a member of
El Centro de Guala derechos, uh,
which has, uh, members, which
has more than 5000 members. Um,
I am here to speak about a
health care as I am in HHA, uh,
and I also do not count with a
social security number.
I am also, uh, I'm here speaking
for all my colleagues, um, who
work in the healthcare industry,
uh, studying for healthcare is
very expensive, uh, it's all the
materials to study are very
expensive. We as adults have
more, uh, have more things, uh,
to cover financially or
economically we have to pay for
it. We have our children, we
have to pay for the rent, uh, or
electricity, water, all of our
other bills. Uh, therefore, it
is very difficult to continue
with our studies in healthcare.
We need to be a um for and we uh
we're important in this field
because we need to be able to,
for example, to be able to help,
uh, in health care for older
adults and so in order to be
able to do that, we need your
support. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody um
on Zoom?
No, madam. All righty. Do we
have anybody here in opposition?
Anybody on Zoom?
No manager. Alrighty, let's go
to the committee.
Uh leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, sorry
I'm asking a bunch of questions
today, but I, I just wanna
understand what
We're trying to do.
Um, Madam Chair, one of the
questions I have is, can you
give me an example of what
attended adult education courses
recognized that on on page 2
line 7.
Can you give me an example of
what that is.
Um, Madam Chair, we have um
additional.
Um, individuals who can answer
those kinds of technical
questions, um, and
Doctor Amber Gallop, uh, who is
the director of adult education
division, uh, from HED.
Madam Chair, um, a
representative, uh, the adult
education programs, um, are, uh,
they're, they're situated
throughout New Mexico. Uh, they
are mostly in community colleges
and some um branch campuses as
well as um community-based
organizations and uh the classes
are held throughout the year and
the um
The schedules of those vary
according to the different adult
education program. So some are
on a semester basis, some are on
a quarter basis.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
and thank you. I have another
question for you. So, um, if
we're trying to increase the
access for tuition and, and all
the other things that are
offered to uh residents of New
Mexico. Can you tell me the
dollar amount that is in the
budget for higher education.
For these types of programs.
Uh, the
The
uh Mr. Chair, um, Madam Chair,
um, representative, are you
asking for the HED budget
numbers currently for adult
education, or that's in HB 2
now?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, that was in
prior.
Um, numbers for prior and how
much of it was spent and and was
any of it reverted? OK. Um,
There currently, um,
Prior, there was $6,828,000 for
the adult education system, uh,
with an additional $3 million of
TAA funding. I don't have the
most of it, the vast majority of
it was spent. We have been
improving, um, the expenditures
of each individual program,
making sure that money doesn't
revert, um, quite a bit in the
last few years. However, the
exact numbers of rivers.
And I'll have to go back, get
that exact number, and then make
it available to the committee,
which I can do promptly. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
ma'am. Uh, the other question is
what, how much is in there this
year?
For these same programs. Uh,
the, it has added a million
dollars, so it's 7,828,000.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, the
reason I'm asking, uh, Madam
Chair and Representatives is to
see is it affordable? Can we
afford to do this? Is this first
come, first served. Are we
putting residents in New Mexico
that that.
out of
Uh, you know, are, are we not
going to be funding those
residents, or do we need to grow
the budget even more? So is it
creating competition basically
for this fund.
is what we would be doing,
which, you know, I'm not, it's
neither here nor there, but I'm
just saying.
Uh, I'm concerned that we would
be putting New Mexico residents.
Not being able to access this
money.
By growing
The people, the amount of people
that can apply for the money.
And for the assistance. So that,
that's a concern for me. Um,
Because a lot of those uh in
the, in the language in some of
those bills like when we did
free college, um, you had to be
in New Mexico resident. And I
don't know the other forms of
it, but I'm, I'm, it's a concern
for me that we're growing the
pool and not growing the money,
um, and so, and possibly New
Mexicans can't access this. So,
uh, it would be curious. I'm
sure there'll be some rule
making, um, and so that's always
scary to me as well because.
We never know what really
happens in rulemaking. So, um,
those are my concerns. Thank you
so much for answering my
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Serrado.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for the
bill. So, um, I'm curious, I
know the FIR has a, has an
estimate of how many students
this would affect. Do you all
have a different or your own
estimate of how many students
this would affect. and I'm
chairing representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
Serrato, members of the
committee, it's, you know, it's,
it's always hard when we don't
know.
We don't know how many people
would potentially qualify
because we don't know how many
people are being steered away
from getting this particular
benefit and continuing their
education. Um, today we heard
from folks who
Persevered and were able to
spend the extra money, and then
we heard from folks who were not
able to continue their workforce
development, education and
skills building as a result of
it. The FIR has a sort of a
maximum amount of folks who
could potentially qualify and um
and so you have that in your
FIRs, and so it's just very hard
for us to be able to know, um,
but we know that they did a very
thorough job and asked the
community colleges as well as
HED for this maximum amount.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
expert and also, um, and again,
pretty similar, do we have an
idea of what industries are
affected healthcare, I heard
hospitality, are there other
industries that we anticipate
will be affected.
Madam Chair, Representative
Serrato, members of the
committee.
We know that a lot of the folks
who are in our state in this
condition are not able to access
in-state tuition for credit
programs uh in the trades in
career technical education in
home health care, um.
was also testified today. We
also know that non-credit
programs in many of these key
industries, high demand
industries that are experiencing
major worker shortages are very
expensive. They're, they can be
short-term programs. They may
not be semester long, it may not
take you 2 years. It may be an
energy auditing program that,
you know, it's a short term
credentialing program that can
cost $600. There are other
programs that can cost up to
$1400. And without
access to that grow funding
tuition support or without
access to uh any other form of
financial aid. It's just people
cannot attend those programs and
so it really will focus on folks
who are
Immigrants who have been here
for a long time, who can show
that they are uh they've been
here at least a year because
they will have gone to an adult
education course or they will
have gone, um, they will have
paid their taxes and earned
income for at least a year here
in the state of New Mexico that
without this they will not be
able to attend some of those
really key certification
programs that could lead to them
becoming self-employed or
opening up small businesses in
these critical fields.
Madam Chair. Thank you expert.
And, and just to clarify for a
second, in here it says line 11,
page 2, an immediate preceding 2
years earning income in New
Mexico. So if they're just doing
it based on the income tax
aspect, that would be 2 years.
Is that correct, Madam Chair and
expert?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Serrato, members of the
committee.
Uh, we are trying to get as
close to one year of being in
the state as possible without it
actually being 12 consecutive
months of residency, uh, for the
reasons stated earlier uh to
closely adhere to strictly
adhere to the federal laws that
determine how we can do this.
And so, the reason why it's 2
years is because, you know,
potentially you could move to
the state and within 3 months,
file your New Mexico pit, um.
So we have 2 proceeding
consecutive years of not just
filing your PI but earning
income within the state. Madam
Cha Rexford, thank you for that,
that clarification, um,
representative as well. Um, I
appreciate this and, and, and
last question again, this does
not only affect adult basic
education. This is tuition for
higher ed. This is certification
programs. This is the benefits
that we have been investing in
as a body to ensure that we are
increasing that workforce, um,
for the businesses that are
coming in and as we heard from
EDD looking
at our workforce is a key
component to attracting
businesses to our state. And so
we know this, and if we can grow
the number of um uh individuals,
not just fresh out of high
school, but they're also grown
and have life experience that
can enhance our workforce. Um,
it seems that that would be
utilizing as much of the
investment as we've been putting
in over the past, I would argue
5 to 10 years. Would you agree
with that expert and, and
representative?
Matter chairs representative,
yes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Madam chair thank you
representatives for bringing
this forward.
Just a few questions, uh.
What
I have some problems with some
of this, uh.
It says
The first page
We got or
Public postsecondary
educational.
Institution did not deny
admission to a state student on
account of students' immigration
status.
Is there
What the
But just explained to me what.
What I mean
Don't that they have to have any
legal.
Documentation
chair representative that
currently is the law that was
enacted in 2005.
So
So Madam Chair, they don't.
They have to have a social
security number in order to
apply for this. What is the
criteria?
To apply for these.
These loans.
What criteria does a person
have?
Madame Chair, Mr. uh,
representative, um, it is
outlined.
Within the statute, uh,
currently?
And so they have to have
attended.
Um, at least one year of a New
Mexico high school or middle
school.
Is the current law.
That's the only criteria.
What about these people that
have not.
And here's that
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
they, they have to have attended
one year of middle school and
then graduated from New Mexico
High School.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, but uh.
I guess what I'm saying, so
those are the only people that
can apply for these loans or the
the students what.
But the older gentleman that
spoke earlier.
Or
They could not apply for this
funds.
Madam Chair, a representative,
that is correct.
Uh, Madam Chair representing, do
they?
Are they required to have a
social security number?
Madam Chair, Representative No.
Madam Chair Representative, you
know.
I own a business.
If I hire somebody today, I have
7 days to turn in.
Picture ID.
Documentation that they're legal
or I get fined legally they
don't, they don't.
That much, but how do we get
around that?
What are they gonna do? They
have no.
I can't
But what
How do we get around them?
That part of the law that says
they have to have some sort of
documentation.
Madam
Chair and representative Mason,
that's a very good question, so
federal law dictates who can be
hired with which status and so
it is true that as an employer,
you have 3 days, uh, to ask for
a person's uh documentation to
be able to work legally in the
state. This is a state law that
we are trying, that has one
passed in 2005 that would allow
undocumented students, dreamers
who went to middle school and
high.
school here and graduated from
New Mexico high school to be
able to improve their
educational opportunities and
subsequently, many of them
became residents of the state or
they got DACA, the Deferred
Action for Childhood Arrivals or
they eventually became lawful
permanent residents and are able
and US citizens and are able to
practice with the education that
they received as a result of
that state law. Now we are
trying to expand it so that
immigrant adults can
also do the same thing, even if
they did not go to middle school
or high school within the state.
This would allow them to be able
to train while they are
obtaining um their legal status,
or they can also take those
certificates and become
self-employed, independent
contractors, or start businesses
with some of these certification
programs and the perfect example
that we heard today, um, but
that I'll reiterate is that home
health care rates, for instance,
many home health care aides.
cannot get their certification,
um, but when they do, they often
don't work for other companies,
they work for themselves, and
they are independent contractors
and they start their own
businesses to service and to
help, um, older people who need
them, and so that's what we're
trying to do here. So the hiring
of undocumented immigrants is
different than providing
educational opportunities for
them to shore up their skills.
Thank you. Thank you, madam.
Adam
Last year, what uh I guess I'm a
little confused because I just
asked a minute ago what the
criteria was, you told me that
only students could apply for
this fund and I
I asked because I heard the
adults.
You know, so what criteria do
they have to provide to?
Apply for the fund.
Madam, Madam Chair, Madam vice
chair, Representative, correct,
we are trying to amend the law
that passed in 2005, so more um
New Mexicans, more individuals
would qualify.
in state tuition and access to
funds like the Growth Fund.
Uh, thank you.
Adam, what are the what are we
trying to put the
qualifications, I guess is where
I'm trying to get to.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair
Representative Mason, again,
thank you for the question. It
helps, gives us an opportunity
to to clarify so.
We would expand access to this
postsecondary education benefit
by allowing people who have
attended.
A one year of adult education in
our state or who have uh.
Cade uh earned income and paid
there or files their pit, their
state income tax for the
preceding 2 years, or they have
applied for special juvenile
immigrant status. Those are the
three new categories, um, that.
At least for the first two
closely mirror 1 year's
residency in our state, and they
would now qualify. Currently,
they do not qualify.
Um, only folks who attended
middle school or high school and
are undocumented qualify right
now.
school.
Uh
Madam Chair, uh,
That clears up a lot, but
Can you pay taxes with have a
social security number?
Madam Vice Chair Representative
Mason, yes, um.
Folks can either pay their taxes
within a social security number
or with something called an
I-10, an individual tax
identification number and in New
Mexico, we have about 15,000
folks who file their taxes using
an item.
Thank you, doctor, so.
Ah
Representative Adam Chair, so
they are documented in.
As residents.
Of Mexico.
It says resident, this is only
available to residents.
Madam Vice Chair Representative
Mason, this would be available
to people who
Satisfied one of those
requirements regardless of
residency, however.
Attending a adult education in
the state of New Mexico, of
course, for a year.
Or, um, earning income and
filing your New Mexico pit for 2
years.
Much guarantees.
I mean, it is likely that you
will have lived here for a year,
um, and you will have been a
resident, but because we're
talking about folks with who are
not lawfully present in the
country yet. Uh, we can't base
this law on residency, we must
base it on another.
proxy for residency or another
criteria, um, and so we, we are
closely hewing to the current
residency requirements without
it actually being residency.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm still a little
Confused here because on the
last line, page 125, it says,
Financial aid granted to
residents of New Mexico.
The last line of page one.
Uh
I take
While they expanded on the next.
OK,
I see that I didn't.
I read it, but I didn't
correlate the two.
Uh, one more question that
that I'll.
Not sure of
Got it all in my brain yet but
uh.
Oh
Uh
Or
Dale Armstrong, or minority
leaders, kind of hit on it.
Well, uh
What order?
You get applications for this.
Well
residents get the
Primary
And is there
Residency, visa, green card.
And others, I mean.
Or the
Are they gonna
The residents of New Mexico get
the first shot.
Good afternoon, um, I, uh, madam
chair, uh, vice chair, uh,
members of the committee. My
name is Heather Omero. I'm the
director of financial aid at the
New Mexico Higher Education
department, um, to answer that
specific question,
representative, um, so
individuals who are are resident
of New Mexico versus individuals
who, um, would apply for this
particular benefit, there is no
one or the other, so this will
be available to all individuals,
um, who would be eligible to
meet that criteria.
So it it's individuals who are,
uh, regardless of immigration
status, would have the same
benefit as a New Mexico
resident.
Thank you, thank you, Madams. So
first come, first serve that I
mean nobody will get ahead of
anybody else.
Madam Chair, Vice Chair, that is
correct, Representative.
The
You know, it, uh, I think the
first day we all want better
educated people and we need a
better workforce.
Uh
Not sure I had my mind wrapped
around this exactly yet.
You know, with, uh, I have.
You know, like the Social
Security card, I would like to
see.
People getting benefits but some
skin in the game to qualify.
You know, and not
Just to ask
be qualified without.
Some sort of documentation is to
be.
Yeah, uh
A good, I mean, we're all
immigrants at some point. Let's
get that straight to start with
everybody here.
Nobody, no buddy.
Popped out of the ground.
It, uh, so we want, we need
immigration.
And I guess I'm a little more on
the I think that.
We need to
And we want them all. I had a
girl last year, 2 years ago,
that works for me, she got her
citizenship.
I mean it's the happiest day of
our lives.
A lot of work I know that.
But
There should be some work for
me.
Thank you. That's all my
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you presenters, um.
I just
I don't really have any
questions, um.
I just kind of wanted to make a
comment. If you look back at
American history.
We have kind of had constant
labor shortages and the way we
have always built those
shortages have been, well, first
we brought in slaves.
That was one of the solutions.
Uh, and then, uh, we
We opened the gates to
immigration.
Um, and
An example of that, if you look
back, uh, are the people who
came here and built the
railroads across the west.
Um
My grandparents came here to
work.
Um
And um,
Most Americans seem, I don't
wanna say some Americans seem to
have forgotten the role that
immigrants play in the
Growth of our country and its
health and it's wealth, um.
But uh I I'm proud of what
you're doing.
And uh we absolutely support
you.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews, um, Chairman Monte.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you sponsor and thank you
experts for your presentation
this afternoon.
Couple of questions and I think
I want to go back to the higher
education department, adult
education expert.
You made mention that your
budget currently, or maybe it
was last year or this year, is
about $7.8 million.
Um
Madam Vice Chair, um,
Representative Lente, uh, yes,
last year, um, the state budget
was 6,828,000. This year, the
line in HB 2 is 7,828,000. OK,
so, so close enough, um, Madam
Chair and, and representatives.
So then in regards to what is
being requested here or the
potential impact should this
move forward is that the FIR as
I read it would cost an FY20.
6, 903,000 and then FY 27,
potentially 903,000, depending
obviously, of course, of who
applies.
Am I correct?
Uh, Madam Vice Chair, uh,
Representative Lente, um, I
didn't understand fully uh what
uh the representative was saying
earlier, just to be clear, this
funding is not coming out of our
budget.
Or this, uh, you know, out of
the adult education budget. We
provide our services for free
and would continue to provide
services without, I mean, this
wouldn't, uh,
We, we don't anticipate this
raising the number of people
that are seeking our services or
that are being served by our
programs, if that makes sense.
Just that those who do graduate
with their high school
equivalency may um benefit from
uh the, you know, in-state
tuition.
Understood. And so, Madam Chair
and representative and then so
on the fiscal impact report,
$903,000 in FY 26 and the
potential again for FY 27. What
does that number represent?
Mm
Madam Vice Chair and uh
Representative Lente, uh, it,
it.
Represents the maximum that has
been identified that would come
out of either the opportunity
scholarship or any other
funding, I think here that
number is actually from the
Opportunity scholarship. Again,
it is a maximum, and it would
assume that people would get
their high school equivalency,
since these are folks who did
not go to high school here in
the state of New Mexico, and
that they would want to continue
uh on a more academic track, uh,
or if they wanted to get.
For credit programs or non, I'm
sorry, non-credit programs um
that would allow for credit
programs, excuse me, 4 credit
programs, uh, so that is that
what that, that is what that
number is about. So it wouldn't
affect or impact adult education
because adult education provides
its integrated education
training programs and all of its
services for free, this would be
for folks who currently don't
have access to reduce tuition
rates or financial aid for
credit.
Programs and of course,
non-credit programs, which would
help be funded by the grow
tuition support dollars that was
passed last year, for instance.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative. And so going
then back to uh this expansion
of the DACA and would be for
those that are uh adults, and
according to the FIR, uh,
Would have to factor in.
2
Of, of, of three requirements to
participate in this program.
First one being attended state
recognized adult education
courses for 2 semesters.
And then the last two is a is a
or.
Either
Have an earned income in New
Mexico and filed tax returns in
the immediate preceding 2 years
or
Submitted an application to the
United States Secretary of
Homeland Security for a grant of
special immigration, juvenile
status, da da da da da, right?
And so I, I, I hear the
discussion.
Around the table today in
regards to um wanted to make
sure that we take care of our
residents first. And, and when I
think of, and I also heard made
mention that we need to have
people with skin in the game.
And when I think of skin in the
game, I, I, I can't see anyone
more invested, uh, I could, but
I, I can see how people that are
very much invested, having
worked in New Mexico for 2
years.
And and filing a tax return for
the
Past two years in terms of their
interest in being invested in
New Mexico.
And I can simply say that with
the turmoil going on with uh the
federal government today, mass
deportations are workforce is
going to be drastically cut.
In in many areas, namely and and
often on point, oil and gas, as
well as agriculture.
And I'm not saying that these
individuals would, that would
pursue this create tech
technical education or anything
that they would try to do to
better themselves, that have
that skin in the game.
could not be the people that
we're not creating this
competition or division of a,
well they're different than.
And then me.
I don't, I don't see that. And
so, Madam Chairwoman and, and
Representative, I, I thank you
for bringing this, this piece of
legislation because I think
it's, it's the right thing to
do. It's the right thing to do,
knowing that New Mexico.
Is that place, that beacon of
hope that, that I think many
come to to see that support,
recognizing that every morning
when we talk, when we stand on
that house floor that we make
that sloop to the state of
Mexico flag, we recognize the
diversity of the state. And so
it's not an either or in regards
to how they're different than
than me or how they're different
to me. It's a matter of
Skin in the game to me means
that they've been here, they're
paying taxes and they're doing
the work they want to better
themselves, not just for
theirselves, but for their
families and their children. So
thank you, Representative for
bringing this bill.
Thank you, Chairman Linte uh
Representative Murphy.
Thank you I share
representative, um.
Thank you for bringing the bill.
I agree with um Representative
Mason's comments about the need
for a skilled.
And dynamic workforce.
But I also share representative
and leader Armstrong's concerns
about um putting long time um
The Mexico residents at a
disadvantage and this is how I
kind of see it is that we've
seen within
The last 4 to 5 years.
Estimates on new immigrants
somewhere between 7 to 12
million people.
I would assume that a lot of
those folks are probably here.
So I think the competition
aspect is very real and um while
I certainly don't object to the
intent. I think that in a state
with limited resources, um, we
need to be careful about
spreading those too, too thin.
Um, next, I'll just have one
question, and that is the, the
other part of it um beyond the
competition, does this
incentivize
People, um,
To come to New Mexico perhaps to
take advantage of these programs
and and perhaps not stay, um,
it's, it's a short distance from
Texas and from adjoining states.
And whether incentive it creates
another incentive for
Or, um, uh, let me just say
immigration by undocumented
means. Are you concerned about
that at all?
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair
Representative, no.
Um, Madam Vice Chair and
Representative, uh, if not, why
not? Because it, it would seem
like a, a definitely an
incentive to me and could you
expand on your answer a little
bit, please, madam chair, vice
chair, representative. We don't
have any data to support your
assertion.
Um, Madam Vice share, um,
representative, but I, I think
common sense supports it, right?
Madam, madam, uh, chair, vice
chairs representative, no.
I had a vice chair, um, if, if
One area offers, um,
A number of programs, another
area doesn't, you don't believe
that.
That individuals would seek.
Those advantages in one state or
one city over another one?
Vice chairman.
Representative Murphy, I think
that we could.
We do have experience in the
state of New Mexico, expanding
educational opportunities for
undocumented students. We did it
in 2005.
Um, I don't
No
Where they were born, uh, if
they were born in the state of
New Mexico or not, but the vast
majority of the people, the
young people who are now in
critical industries in our state
industries that we need more
workers in.
We're born, were raised, not
born in the state of New Mexico
but raised.
by the parents that were trying
to allow the opportunity to
continue their education and
also enter this workforce. And
so this law in 2005 did not
greatly increase immigration or
undocumented immigration into
our state. In fact, we have seen
a steady rate of immigration to
our state that is not uh
overwhelmingly didn't grow
overwhelmingly because we
provided this law and this
opportunity in 2.
5, so we don't expect that
people are going to move to the
state because they can get in
state tuition and financial aid
after living here for a year or
more, just like any other
resident from any other part of
the state. What we expect is
that the people who have been
here, who are mature workers in
our workforce who do not qualify
under the current law will now
for the first time have an
opportunity to be able to
Improve their skills, get
certifications and credentials
in key industries where we do
not have enough US born workers
in.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative. I'm, I'm very
sensitive to the needs for
workers, especially in critical
industries in the state.
Um
I think I'll, I'll
I'll conclude with the fact that
Um
This great league, if I
understand this program, is it
greatly expands it from
basically
A student focused, basically a
high school equivalency or high
school graduation, more of an
adult program and we don't
really know what those numbers
look like at this point.
And back to Leader Armstrong's
point is we do know what the
revenue side of it looks like or
the budget side of it looks like
and but we don't know the
potential pool.
So that's when I come back to
competition, that's what
concerns me. I'll conclude my
remarks. Thank you, uh, Madam
Vice chair and representative.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy, Chairman de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I move a do pass and house Bill
64.
We have a do pass motion from
Representative de la Cruz and a
second from representative
Sarato uh Patrick's role.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative de la Cruz.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez? No.
Representative Lee, yes.
Representative Mason
Oh.
Representative Matthews? Yes.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair
And I'm sure the final tally for
the Du pass motion, 6 votes,
yes, 4 votes no.
Thank you, Representative. You
have a due pass. Thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
OK. If we could please exit the
room quietly. We still have
bills on the agenda. Thank you,
everyone.
Um, next up we have House Bill
335, Representative Barrego, if
you are in the room.
There she is.
Yeah
I
Just.
OK, represented Breed, whenever
you're ready.
Good afternoon.
Let me push this
I'll sit back.
Is, is that better?
OK.
My mom says sometimes use your
inside voice, Cynthia.
Yeah.
Um, good afternoon, everyone,
and I'm sure you're.
Getting tired. We've had a long
day.
But I'm here to present to you
House Bill 335.
And I want to introduce my
guests.
Rob Black Economic Development
Director, cabinet.
Secretary designate.
And Isaac Romero.
Um
Regulation
licensing.
Deputy.
So these are my expert witnesses
on this particular bill.
Um, this is relating to
administrative procedures
enacting the licensing time
frames, transparency Act,
requiring the construction
industry's division of the
regulation and licensing
department and local agencies
with expressive expressively
delegated authority for
licensing and permitting to
periodically.
Published a list of the time
frames in which building permits
or other regulatory approvals
have been finally acted upon or
have remained pending without
final agency action.
And Madam Chair, vice chair, um,
we are here to discuss this bill
and uh hopefully, um,
Have a positive outcome in terms
of um
How this information is obtained
and what it would be used for.
Thank you.
Adam sure members of the
committee, uh, Rob Black
Economic Development Department
is an honor to be here with you
today to have this conversation
about HB 335. The reason that we
wanted to do this is, is really
to start to provide some
regulatory transparency about
how long it takes for um
Building permits to go through
the process, so the bill is very
simple. There's no deadlines,
there's no requirements that if
you don't, if you don't do this,
this happens. It's just to
publish this data on a quarterly
basis, and it were, uh, those
entities under CID that do
building type permit work.
Uh, to publish that information
quarterly, uh, and do it on, on
CID or an adjacent uh agency's
website.
Um, the reason that we think
this is important.
I, and I've certainly learned
this firsthand now that I'm
administering the department.
I we have a lot of processes and
I'll use myself as an example.
We have, we administer the film
tax credit.
In partnership with TRD.
I cannot tell you today how long
it takes someone to go through
my process.
Uh, to go to get
their application done.
I should be able to tell you
that. So we are working to do
that.
But that's basic information
that on the customer service
side is really important, but it
also helps me identify, do I
have a deficiency in technology.
Which is one of the things we've
determined because we're still
using spreadsheets to go send
information back and forth.
Do I have a deficiency in the
number of people I need for to
process these permits.
That sort of data for a manager
is very important.
So what this bill is going to
give tools to those uh
departments whether in a city
planning department or CID that
here's 11 community might be
able to do it, do a particular
permit in 2 weeks, another might
take 12 weeks. Why is that
different?
And that helps provide better
information for those managers
to make those decisions. So
that's really the heart of what
we're trying to get to is just
that transparency about how long
these sort of building permits
take, um, so that from both the
developer side and from a
government management side, uh,
our folks have tools to to to
make that happen, uh,
representative, we also have
some amendments. Um, do you
wanna talk through that or would
you prefer that I do that and,
and I'll look to the chair and
see how she would like to
proceed.
believe that you have that the
revised bill in front of you,
you should have an amendment in
front of you, you do have the
amendment.
OK, I wasn't sure if they had
already incorporated it or not.
So,
You have
the proposed amendment, and can
you start with the 23 number?
Yes. Um, it is 2 31051.1. Is
that what you have? Excellent.
So would you like to explain the
amendment to,
well, I think it's pretty
simple. Um, there's a few ands
and ups that are um inserted or
or stricken and then the on page
4 between lines 18 and 19 insert
the total number of residential
dwelling units permitted by the
agency.
And that's, it's pretty simple.
OK. Do we have any committee
discussion on anybody like to
move to adopt the amendment.
Removed.
OK. All right, great. Thank you.
You have an amendment.
Thank you Madam Chair, and so
we're, I guess we're going back
to the bill as amended, um, I
just urge your support, I think
it's really, I think it's really
telling, um, having worked in
city planning for a long time
and I worked in processes so I
think it's really telling when
we see the the amount of time it
takes for anybody, be it a
developer or a neighborhood or
uh uh individual to see what the
time frame is that it takes to
get a
construct ion permit, so.
With that, I urge your support.
OK, thank you, Representative.
Do we have anybody in the room
in favor of this bill?
Anybody in the room opposed to
the bill.
Would you like to give public
comment?
OK, you have one minute.
Um,
thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
John Anderson. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Municipal League, uh, the
municipal League stands in
opposition to House Bill 335 as
we believe this is an unfunded
mandate for our municipalities,
and it punishes all 106
municipalities when there's, you
know, one or two that are having
this issue, uh, we believe that
our municipality should focus on
processing and passing permits
rather than reporting on them.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Do we have
anybody in on Zoom in favor?
Anyone opposed.
OK, we will take it to the
committee, Chairman de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
like this bill.
And I like this bill having been
a.
Uh
I'm in sense human being.
And also former county
commissioner, and I say that
because too often.
You have bureaucrats that
Really don't
Overly care about how long it
takes to get.
A
Commercial or residential.
And
As a former county commissioner,
I would hear all the.
I would say the two things I
heard the most members was from
public works issues and land use
planning issues.
And
Residents were so.
Very often and business people
were frustrated because it would
take an inornament amount of
time to get a permit.
And sometimes for what appeared
to be no good cause, and once an
elected official got involved,
it tended to move.
To unstick.
And I do believe that to get
better, you need information.
And information then we'll say,
well,
How long does it take?
And so, I believe that's the
first part of the bill that I
think matters is getting
information to get to the root
of the problem to fix something.
Secondly, one of my frustrations
as an electoral official was
that often the bureaucrats
didn't understand that they were
impacting negatively economic
development.
Because every day that that
shovel isn't in the ground.
Every day that somebody isn't
buying cement or lumber or metal
or whatever this construction
material was needed, it was
holding all of that up.
And typically your average
bureaucrat who's overseeing some
of these, they don't worry about
the economic development part.
Don't worry about if somebody's
working and getting paid because
of this. And so I really support
this and
For the municipal league or
association of counties, you
know.
They don't want to have to do
anything.
The the governments don't want
to have to do anything extra,
they call it unfunded mandate.
Unfunded what?
See how long something took.
I don't think that's a lot of
effort.
And I think it'll go a long way
for our cities and counties.
Towns
To be able to get better at
doing business with the public
who desperately needs their
services.
I could remembers I could tell
you stories. I literally have
stories where people would call
me.
One was a McDonald's one cause
he couldn't get the water
authority to give them a permit
on something that was done for
over a month.
I mean, I could go on and on,
but I do believe this is a good
first step.
To making things better for the
economy, for the community, and
ultimately for the, the folks
have to do the work.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Chairman de la Cruz.
Um, before we go to the rest of
the committee, we had one person
who came in late to speak in
favor.
Um, so one minute, Mr. Traynor.
time out, we'll get you a
microphone.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Randy
Trainor with the New Mexico
HomeBuilders Association. I want
to tell you the story of the
stapler here just uh two months
ago, a builder here in Santa Fe
applied for 4 building permits
and received an email from the
building department said the
application was incomplete
because they didn't staple the
documents. A construction worker
was sent over there to staple
the documents, uh, several hours
later, another email was sent,
and they were told that.
They didn't staple them in the
right.
You know, we just need some data
to uh highlight kind of what's
going on out there. We've all
been talking about the cost of
housing, and this is a very
important element in that
debate. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Trainer, um, now
we will go to Madam Leader
Armstrong.
Thank you, madam Chair and Vice
Chair. Thank you for your
presentation.
Um, do you know how many
different are you focusing only
on building residential or you
focusing on building as a whole.
Madame Leader, I'll let my um.
I witness.
Discuss that
Madam Leader, um, the, the idea
is that if it's if it's way you
would get to that is under the
definition of agency. It's those
CID responsibilities and then
sub subs um.
At the county and city level
that are within the CID purview.
Those are the types of things
that will be reported up.
So directly with building
construction.
That's what I needed the answer
to. Thank you. Building and
construction, so we're not
talking about air quality
control permits that take 2
years to get. We're not talking
about any other kind of permits
that take.
Many months and years to get,
we're talking about building.
Finally, that's correct. If it's
under CID's jurisdiction, that's
what we're talking about. Thank
you, uh, Madam Chair, and
Representative. I, I think
there's a lot of other
permitting issues across the
board that that we could talk
about, but I'll stick to this
one, just, just for the, the
time being.
So is this a permit just to
receive the permit and then get
a certificate of occupancy, is
it that whole form, or is it
just the permit?
How are you gauging it because
there's many different permits
or you.
Grouping it in as a whole.
Madam Chair, Madam Leader, uh, I
think um what we would want is
we want an inventory of of what
what's covered under that, under
that CID. So that's the first
part is understanding what those
permits and then there would be
a process that CID would create
a reporting form that would
align to that.
Um, so I think our intent is to
have these applications be from
time of a completed application
to determination of that
particular item, so that there
may be ones that bridge multiple
permits, but we would like to
see those individual permits as
well. How long does it take for
a particular type of.
I
Administered by CID or the local
planning, um, so that's, that's
again, we look to get an
inventory and then have a
reporting mechanism through CID
as to what those are.
Mm
met him later and if I can just
clarify that cause we had a lot
of discussions regarding this,
uh, with Mr. Romero.
Um, and it would be from the
time that they apply for
building permit to the time that
they get their occupancy
license.
Uh, thank you for that, um, I, I
just want to bring to, to
everyone's attention is there's
a lot of things that could go
wrong.
Or reasoning not having anything
to do with the permit, but maybe
waiting on a heat pump.
There was a 2-year wait list for
heat pumps, maybe waiting on an
inspection from uh um, you know,
plumbing inspection, maybe
waiting on an electrical
inspection. So there's a lot of
avenues, so that's, that's
concerning to me because I don't
really think you're gonna really
get the data.
Unless you're in the
construction business, which.
I happen to be
There's a lot of different
things that can determine that.
It took us, Madam Chair,
Representative, 2 years to build
a house.
Because of waiting on things and
so I don't know that you will
get.
Real usable data.
I personally think that the
problem, and I'll just say it,
is Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
Those are your problems. So why
are we not focusing, and some
people sat on those commissions.
I believe you were on one and
Representative De la Cruz
changed the process at the local
level.
To, to make sure that those,
the, the people who are in
charge.
Do the job. Socorro, New Mexico
doesn't need this.
We, we, we took 2 years because
of other reasons, not because of
permitting or anything else. So
it's a concern for me, mandating
a making a law mandating the
whole state to do this when we
know where the problem areas
are.
And so
Does the, does the, it really
does cost local entities.
Like my little town in Socorro,
it's going to cost them.
And so how do we
We don't have a lot of GRT. We,
we have other things that we
that are priorities for us at
the county level. So how do they
implement this, is there gonna
be a mandate of reporting? Are
they gonna have to buy a
computer system. How is this
gonna, how do you foresee this
working across the whole state
of New Mexico for these smaller
entities that aren't really the
problem.
Madam Chair, Madam Leader, I I
think um you articulated uh
better kind of the segmentation
than I did, um, you, you
mentioned the idea of electrical
permit that you're needing for
that would.
From application to
determination, how long did that
process take?
Because you're right, if it's,
if we just look at from to to
occupancy, it's too much
process. It's, it's too big,
there's too many variables, but
we do want to understand how
long does it take that
electrical contractor to be able
to do that work, to execute,
because in part, it may be that
um there's not enough inspectors
to do that work in in rural New
Mexico. And so is that a problem
with with our processes, uh,
because we do hear that, uh,
from folks who are working in
more smaller communities.
But it takes a long time for
inspections. Is that true or
not? This will help us
understand that.
Um, as, as it relates to um the
the cost, I think it can be done
as simply as over a spreadsheet
with a calculation, uh, every
quarter, how long you have a
list of the.
The 10 or 15 things that come
out of CID that we need to be
tracking.
How long did it take the folks
from their application to the
determination of that, that
request, and I think that's and
then what's the median on that?
So I don't think it has to be
too onerous to get that data.
And Madam Leader and Madam Chair
and Madam Leader, I think just
to add to that when this data is
obtained, um, there could be
some comparative analysis that's
done like a small community that
has, you know, 50,000 people or
a smaller community that has
they could compare and see why
is one community not, you know,
I mean, and I agree with you, I
think Albuquerque and Santa Fe
do have issues. I've worked in
them and I've seen them, um, but
I think that there can be some
real competit.
Some comparative analysis done
with that data to see why it
took 2 years, why, why doesn't
it only take, you know, 6 months
in another community, what is it
that the codes are not, um, or
they are implementing to too
severely. So I think um the
purpose of this really is to see
how we compete with other um
states that are maybe like
Arizona or what what is it that
New Mexico needs?
To do to make maybe and it's not
intended to be a negative. It's
really intended to to look at
data and a lot of these agencies
already track their data, so I
don't think it would take that
much to just report report those
numbers.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, I, I can tell you
how we can fix it. We can remove
regulations or regulated that,
you know, we have red tape
regulations out the wazoo and so
removing some of those
regulations would be a start,
uh, in, in my opinion.
Um
I, I really think that um.
Uh, you know
I, I.
But really encourage you to
Talk to the entities that are
the problem, first of all.
Second of all, is this bill
intended to target specific
cities or are you really looking
at
Um
The economic development of the
whole state.
Madam Cher, Madam Leader, um, it
really is looking at the whole
state and I think part of what
you will get out of this as you
will see jurisdictions that are
not efficient.
And you'll see jurisdictions
that move quickly.
And as a developer, that's going
to be important to me when I'm
looking for quick to market.
So I will invest where I have
more surety that I can get
through a process faster. I can
start selling my widget faster
or manufacturing that widget
versus a place where I have a
lot more regulatory uncertainty.
So I think it will actually help
uh drive investment to those.
Communities that are more
efficient and hopefully that
helps those communities that
aren't become more efficient.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and, and Representative
secretary designate.
So how are the metrics going to
be measured?
And chairman and leader it um
the measurement would be, again,
we would publish them on RLD's
website, uh, so that there it's
a public.
Transparency for how long these
take. So each entity that's
reporting back up.
Uh, would, that's where we would
display that in the data
dashboard kind of construct of
how long these various permits
take for these various
communities.
And, and Madam Chair and, and
representative and, and so who
would be defining
The, the metrics and could they
be used punitively.
And I'm sure at this stage, the
idea is not to be punitive, it's
just to create the access to the
information.
Um, it would be up to the
individual city council or the
mayor to say that's an
acceptable timeline for our
permitting process, or it's not.
Um, and I think
You know, the, the governor's
gonna have that same sort of
conversation at RLD level.
So I think it's, it's about
really just creating that
transparency. There aren't.
Punitive aspects to this,
hopefully what we're getting is
better data, better information,
so that we can improve
processes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
thank you for that. I just think
that we already know.
We already know where the
problems are, we already know.
where the issues are. We already
know that there's problems.
In certain areas and we're going
to pass a law.
mandate the whole state to give
us the information we already
know.
And so I, I really feel like
this is something that
Could be used
Against an entity.
Punitively
But I also think, Madam Chair
and Representative that.
We already have the answers.
And the local governments are
not doing anything about it, so
I don't know why they would do
anything about it.
Because we passed a lot to
collect the data. We already
have that information. And so,
uh, I think local entities can
take this, uh,
County commissions should be
directing city council should be
directing.
And if they're not willing to
direct now.
Collecting the data is not going
to encourage them to to correct.
Um, it's gonna be on a report.
We already know they're
terrible.
They're going to say that it's
terrible.
And nothing else is going to
happen. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you
Thank you madam chair. I started
to say, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, and thank you
presenters. Um,
Maybe I may have spent too much
of my life as a lawyer.
Um
Uh, but, um, and in the legal
system,
Um, the court, if you're doing
litigation, sets the time
limits.
And my job is to comply with
those time limits or have to
come in and ask for an extension
and justify why I didn't have
whatever it was done.
And
And
The advantage of that was that
the people, the person doing the
work, the lawyer.
Um
Had to figure out how to be
efficient enough to in most
cases meet the time limits
because you couldn't keep going
back time and time again.
And so, Madam Chair, when I read
this, I was thinking.
Uh, I was thinking that I've
read that real rancher was
really good on building permits.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair and representatives
that has been said. OK. And then
I, um, I'm not sure. OK, madam
chair.
Um
Representatives do
Mm
Uh, Mr. Black, do we know
Secretary Black, do we know how
long on average it takes Rio
Rancho to issue a building
permit for residential property.
Madam Chair, Representative, no,
but if we had this bill, we
would.
Well
Madam Chair Representative
Secretary Black, I mean, if you
want to just have somebody,
yeah.
Click it when it comes in and
then you click it when it goes
back out, you can find that
that's without all of this
detail you're asking for.
And
And, and so I'm, what I'm
tempted to say that somewhere in
this country, I assume that
there's somebody who has a
pretty good estimate of how long
it takes to prove residential
building plans, for example.
I mean, and commercial and so
forth would be different.
Why don't we say,
Find out what that figure is,
and then we say, you've got,
let's say it's 90 days. I'm just
make that up, Madam chair, why
don't we say you'll get this.
Now you'll get this out within
90 days, and if you don't.
The mayor and the city council
will pay for the, the extra cost
that you incur.
We do something like that to
really motivate people to do
things quicker and better.
Um, Madam Chair, and, and
representatives, I think that
we're not intending to be a
heavy hammer on this. I think
we're just wanting to get
information and data and, you
know, it does help planning
processes, especially in some of
in any of the communities
actually uh why is Albuquerque
and Rio Rancho, I mean, if you
compare the two, why is it
taking, you know, some place in
Denver faster. I mean, there's,
there's a lot of information
here that's
being requested and, and it can
be very useful to creating
better.
Zoning codes to amending our
zoning codes to making our
processes better. It's not
intended to be heavy-handed at
all.
OK.
Well, Madam Chair, um.
Representative Secretary Black,
I do think that
It's so detailed.
And
There's so much here that it
would be, I'm not sure who would
want this job.
And I do think that a great deal
of the difference or or whether
or not you're building.
Your, your plans are getting
Assuming that you have enough
workers, I mean, that's always a
a piece of this, but that
Um, setting some is is because
somebody is the boss or whoever
that is, is setting some
expectations and saying our
goal.
And if you can't get them out in
90 days, you can't get the
approvals down and let's figure
out.
is
And just collecting.
The data, I'm not sure, tells
you that.
Uh, anyway, just, um, like I
say, I come out of a background
where's my job.
To get stuff done within the
time I had.
And it
Doesn't always work, but it
works better than the billing
permits.
Thank you.
And I'm sure if I could, uh,
representative, um.
The idea around this actually
came, um, several years back,
uh, when I was still with the,
the Mexico Chamber of Commerce.
We had the gentleman whose
responsible was the COO and also
the secretary for the
environment in Arizona under
Governor Duoy.
But he was put in charge with
helping Arizona reduce their
regulatory time frames.
And we talked through exactly
what you were, because that's
kind of what we were advocating
for.
And his, his comments back to us
is you can't do that that way,
because when I was secretary
when he I'm speaking in his
voice, not mine. When I was
secretary, uh, we would always
toll the timelines, so you could
always stop the
clock
And that 90 day timeline became
180 and you had no way of really
telling how that happened.
Uh, and I, I will say I've been
doing this sort of work for
quite a while now, about 25
years. And what I've seen is you
can't regulate and you can't
legislate good management.
But you can't expose bad.
So part of what we want to do is
create a transparency so that
where there are systems that are
broken and it may be, and you
mentioned that maybe they don't
have enough staff. Maybe the IT
system's not working.
Um, by, by being able to compare
yourself to other jurisdictions,
you start to say, what are we
doing differently that's not
working?
And hopefully that's where the
managers get the tools to be
that better manager, and that's
really what we're trying to do.
That's all. Thank you, uh,
Representative Mason.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
representative. Thank you
Secretary.
uh.
Few questions
What and most of them have been
somewhat talked about already.
Uh
Who's bringing this?
Who wants this?
This legislation, who brought it
forward?
Madam Chair, our representative,
uh, this is uh an agency bill,
so the economic development
department, this is an agency
bill, uh the representative, uh,
we've worked well together in
the past and she was kind enough
and she appreciated the
importance of this bill, so it
is coming from the agency, and
it is, it is part of our overall
efforts around the site
readiness, identifying locations
where we can do development in
the state, utility
predeployment, and then thinking
about how long does it actually
take us to get the permitting
and regulatory side of this in.
Mexico. So it's part of the
broader comprehensive package
around economic development.
Uh, thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Chair,
representative.
Has there been
Complaints on the process as it
is now in any number from.
or are we just fighting this
problem.
So this complaints.
Um, Madam, Madam Chair,
representative, um.
I guess, uh, I'm not sure the
best way to answer that, but
what I will say is, is we here
and when I was both of them the
economic development side in my
past life as the chair of the
Mexico Chamber of Commerce.
Um, regulatory in certain time
to get through these sort of
processes.
Is one of the number one
complaints for businesses in New
Mexico.
So
As it relates to is it a
challenge, I think it is a
challenge that we're trying to
to get a better understanding of
and see where it's working,
where it's not working.
Um, there is no current
requirement for this sort of
reporting, so the compliance
issue is there's not a
compliance issue with it at this
point because there's not a
requirement for it.
If if that's what you're asking
for, sir. Oh, that'll that'll
work thank you, sir. Thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Chair
Representative.
Reason I ask, you know.
I focus on
We are
Everyone's sitting here
representative of a district of
the state.
Do I have
5 cities that fall within my.
By district, Hobbs Levington,
Carlsbad Artesia.
Part of Ross.
And
We have no problem.
You know, so to me by passing
this, I'm putting a band-aid on.
Is
That
I feel, don't, they don't feel
is.
A warranted
Man.
So
It, uh
Madam Chair, representative,
would you agree that
This
Baller the
Unit of government is
Like the city
County, states the largest.
That the
The lower end like the cities
are more responsive to their
citizens and.
ideas of
That is
And sure representative, I
think.
How I would um
I can't. I'm not sure how to
answer that question. I think
local is always more responsive.
Uh, what I would say, however,
that I appreciate what the
cities are saying to you.
What I would ask you to ask the
people who were trying to get
the permit.
And what they would say to you
because those individuals.
My guess is they're going to say
it's been, it's frustrating. It
takes a long time.
And that is a different set of
constituents that you have
within your district, but I
think that's the district,
those, those are the folks we're
trying to be responsive to those
folks who are trying to build
something, whether that's a
house or a business and are they
running into problems? I, I
don't disagree that, you know,
I've heard great things about
Hobbs. uh, and, and how quickly
they do go through their
planning process, um, but I
think it, it when the important
part is to also from a business
side and how long it takes from
that perspective.
Thank you.
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative,
I have talked to the local
contractor.
And uh
Nobody has
An isolated case of a problem,
but usually there's a reason.
Or something as, as
Representative Armstrong said,
you know.
problem, not a, not a licensing
or permit problem.
They, uh
They get their electrical.
Ready for inspection, they come
inspect.
It's not a process.
That has been a problem. So
It, uh
Uh
I did, I always have had a
problem.
At the state level is mandating
what people do in my cities.
I can
I'd rather leave it to their.
The discretion
You don't like the city's
government and you vote them out
and get more just the same as.
with us, they don't like the way
we.
I'll leave it at that thank you.
Thank you.
Um
Represented Hernandez to you on
or off the list.
OK. All righty. Any other
questions from the committee?
What's the desire of the
committee?
Madam Chair
pass.
The second
to take the role.
Representative Armstrong? No.
Representative de la Cruz, yes.
Representative Hernandez.
As
Representative Linte? No.
Representative Mason.
No
Representative Matthews.
No.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Man, I'm sorry, uh,
Representative Fernandez.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, No.
Madam Chair, final tally for the
Du pass motion.
Oops, 70
4 votes, yes, 7 votes no.
Uh
We're back on.
We're not done. We're not done.
The pass motion failed. The
motion failed, so we're back on
the bill.
That correct?
There's a.
We
You know, one more, so do we
need to make another motion,
would anybody like to make
another motion?
Should we table this bill?
No, but we need to, we need to.
the table.
OK, there's been a motion to
table. Do we have a second?
Patrick to take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes
Representative De la Cruz, not
the table.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason.
Yes
Representative Matthews to
table. Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Not a table.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair,
No.
Madam Chair, yes.
Man, uh, the table motion
tallies 8 votes. Yes, 3 votes
no.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives, um, just a
final comment, I think that
we'll be working on this a
little bit more, um, I just
As a city planner, and this is
something that I did for many,
many years, um, I think that,
you know, there can be some
tweaks to this bill that would
make it a little bit more
palatable.
I appreciate that. Thank you so
much.
Already, our final bill is HB
61.
Hello again, Madam Chair,
committee members, I will be
presenting House Bill 61, pinch
hitting for.
Chairwoman Chandler.
So just a brief introduction.
House Bill 61 makes some much
needed updates to the unfair
Trade Practices Act by expanding
definitions and clarifying and
broadening the scope of trade
and commerce to include real
property and other transactions
that impact consumers in
housing. This bill also
clarifies unconjugable practices
applied to price gouging. So for
New Mexicans, this means greater
protection against fraudulent or
misleading business practices
that are directly contributing
to our housing crisis and for
businesses, this will also
provide an even.
Playing field, um, in the
marketplace with stronger
deterrents for deceptive or
unfair trade practices, and I
would like my.
Um, expert witness, Julie to
introduce herself.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
me. My name is Julie Meade. I'm
general counsel at the New
Mexico Department of Justice.
Sorry.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
me. My name is Julie Meade. I'm
the general counsel for the New
Mexico Department of Justice.
Thank you.
All righty.
You ready to stand for
questions. Yes, we stand for
questions. Thank you. Thank you.
We do have a committee sub.
Yes, we do. OK.
Has it been passed out?
All righty.
So do we want to move the
committee sub for discussion.
OK
OK.
All right, if you could
If you would explain the.
The sun.
I will let my expert witness
handle those changes. Thank you.
Man chair members of the
committee, the committee sub was
um.
After meeting with constituents,
uh, medical association and
several other um.
stakeholders and interested
parties, um.
We remove
The purpose of the original bill
was to change and align the
definition of trade and
commerce, as well as unfair
practices.
As well as
Unconscionable acts, um.
Currently in the bill under
unconscionable as it applies to
professional.
In trying to align those
definitions, professional
services had been added under
unfair Practices Act, and after
meeting with several
stakeholders.
Uh, the concession and decision
was to go back to the original
language and professional
services is only included under.
unconscionable practices as
opposed to both unfair and
unconscionable.
Already.
OK, so, um.
What do we want to do with the
um.
The same.
I move adoption of the
committee subho Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 61.
a second.
OK, so now we're on, well, let
me, is there any help position?
OK.
All righty. So now we've got the
substitute bill. Now let's go on
to to the bill. So, um, is
anyone here in favor of this
bill?
Nobody in the room. How about
on?
Yeah.
Harry Robin Bruder.
Not a members of the committee,
Carrie Robin Bruder, I'm
representing the New Mexico
Medical Society. We wanted to
say thank you very much to the
Department of Justice and the
Attorney General and Julie for
listening to our concerns about
licensed professionals and how
they had been placed in the bill
as introduced, the committee
substitute resolves our
concerns, um, and we are very
happy with the language that is
now in the committee substitute,
so wanted to express that, that.
Uh, we've been taken care of.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Otamba.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Oambaumi,
advocacy director for AARP New
Mexico, and on behalf of our
240,000 members statewide, we
strongly support HB 61 to
safeguard and protect older New
Mexicans against fraud, scam,
and deception, as they are often
the target of these unfair
practices, this bill helps
prevent price gouging and
emergencies where seniors can be
vulnerable during natural
disasters, pandemics, and
economic crises, especially when
bad
s exploit shortages of
essentials like medications, uh,
supplies, and housing and
inflation is driving costs
higher for a lot of these
necessities, these price
increases affect older people
more deeply since they are more
likely to be retired and live on
fixed incomes. So this bill will
essentially expand the oversight
of professional services like
legal and medical guidance. It
will also strengthen
consequences for fraud. Old
service providers accountable by
creating higher penalties.
that will ultimately discourage
predatory businesses from
misleading older adults,
ultimately this bill helps
protect, preserve the financial
security of New Mexicans and we
respectfully urge you to pass
this bill. Thank you.
That is all. Thank you. Do we
have anybody here in opposition?
Anybody on Zoom in opposition.
No.
All right, let's go to the
committee.
Leader Armstrong.
I am exhausted, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um.
Thank you for, for, uh, your,
your presentation. One of the
key issues on this bill is a few
years ago, the homebuilders.
Um
I'll just read it. a source in
the home building industry,
homebuilders and the real estate
industry have previously been
protected from a egregious
lawsuits regarding faulty
housing conditions by 2023 right
to repair Act.
That bill created a
pre-litigation process for
handling faulty constructions.
They they expect this bill to
undo that process.
So I'm very concerned when we
are pushing really hard in the
state of New Mexico to grow the
housing market.
That we're undoing something
that was previously
Done. So, can you explain and
expand if you think that's going
to happen.
Madam Chair, Madam Leader.
Um, we did meet with
HomeBuilders Association
Realtors Association and
discussed their previous
concern, their concern really
was around the private right of
action that actually currently
exists in law.
The impetus of including um real
property as an amendment to the
uh UPA is New Mexico
unfortunately is only one of 3
states nationally that does not
include real property, so that
the Attorney general has the
enforcement to handle systemic
issues. This is not intended to
uh apply to the construction
defect and some of the um 2023.
Provisions um as we discussed
with both the homebuilders
Association and the Realtors
Association.
We anticipate that this gives
the AG enforcement authority
over circumstances such as the 3
mobile home parks in Alamogordo
that were without water and
without gas for several months
and systemic problems such as
the Lalus, I think it's the Law
Lose apartment complex in
Espanola.
So, Madam Chair, um,
representative.
And that's the only reason
you're bringing this forward or
for things like that or I'm, I'm
concerned about
As I stated before, we're
raising these penalties.
We're, we're giving more um
More rights of actions to force
the suing process.
And I think we have seen what
that's done in the medical
malpractice field in the state
of New Mexico.
And so I'm concerned about it,
of course, I want to protect
those people that have those
issues.
But again, I think it could be
come down to a local thing, the,
the local entity could.
Uh, the county commissions, the,
you know, find those people that
In the trailer parks where
there's no water, no what
they're doing it in Albuquerque
right now. And so I'm, I'm
concerned that we're just
creating another avenue.
For lawsuits, and so, um, and
possibly.
Not warranted lawsuits and
costing.
People tons of money. So I, I'm
not, I don't really
I didn't read the MIDI sub. I'm
gonna do that a little more, uh,
I'll yield my time for now.
Thank you, madam.
I'm sure, thank you and thank
you.
Um
Presenters and thanks to uh.
The Attorney General's office
for bringing this.
As as some of you know, I was a
um an associate.
Attorney General? No, assistant
attorney general.
the Deputy Attorney general
under a prior administration.
Um, I'm
have actually visited with the
current Attorney General about
this bill.
And uh I'm gonna disagree with
my
My, uh, colleague, um, I think
it's really important that we're
including real property in this.
Um
And
Overall, this.
The Attorney generals used this
kind of power or systemic
problems as opposed to some
individual issue.
Uh, there is
Uh
As a practical matter, um.
There the private parties can
bring actions.
Um, on this if they have an
individual problem like their
gas isn't.
Where the parks gas isn't
getting fixed or whatever.
Uh, but I think
This fills in some gaps.
Um, that, uh, the attorney
General as the chief consumer
advocate.
Of
State on behalf of the people.
Uh, fulfilled, so I will be
supporting it. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
I uh
Who have um.
Uh
Is Madam Chair represented? Is
it not already illegal?
The price scout in.
Current law that, well, I'll
just read it and Constable trade
practices unlawful.
And uh under this bill.
Could be met with the $25,000
fine if they arise out of a
disaster emergency.
If there's already a law against
this.
On as far as the
The disaster emergency goes, why
do we need another one?
Madame Chair representative
actually, New Mexico is one of
11 states that doesn't have a
specific price gouging law
currently it is contained under
the unconscionable trade
practices and this uh amendment
just specifies it to make it a
little clearer that it's
addressing uh price gouging as
far as the increase in
penalties, those have not been
increased since the 1970s, and
the idea of enhancing the
language of price gouging was
also to increase a penalty
during times of emergency or
natural disaster for those types
of unfair practices.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, back to one of the points
that uh
Or
Leader Armstrong did well this.
Undo the
What the right to repair Act
that's in.
Now we're
Just to increase litigation on
that part.
That doesn't do the right to
act.
Madam Chair representative, it
is the Department of Justice's
position that it will not undo
that.
For these for bringing actions
under the unfair Practices Act,
whether it's the Attorney
General or a private right of
action, you have to show that
the practices included a
misrepresentation or some kind
of fraud under the unfair
practices or under
unconscionable that uh it was
taken advantage of somebody with
less knowledge or capabilities,
and there was a gross sort of
disparity and so it is different
than what would be a breach of.
Contract or construction defect.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh.
Let him chair representative uh
There's a lot of
We don't think so.
Will this end up being
A litigant a process through
litigation that
Comes about that will the trial
lawyers, they can come up with.
increase the number of
litigation, what I'm saying.
With
In order to make the perimeters.
Clear
The courts make the perimeter
this laws I guess what I'm.
Yes
Madam Chair Representative, it
is our hope that our amendments
are clear enough, uh, that it
would not need the courts to
interpret um through litigation
what these mean.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair.
So, words like hope.
What, what bothered me.
Litigation, I mean, in, in
everything.
Maybe hope
Will
So I like the
cannot, will not.
But uh that's pretty much my
question, Madam chair. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um, I know that I
talked to the Attorney General
about um several of the uh
changes that were made, so I was
very pleased to see that he um
went ahead and made those
changes and, um.
With that, I will take a motion
from the committee.
Representative Madam, we do pass
on House Bill 61.
0, I'm sorry, we gotta do that.
I said I was gonna do it. OK. I
move but do not pass on House
Bill 61, but I do pass on house
commerce and economic
development Committee substitute
for House Bill 61.
Perfect.
All right.
Patrick to take the role.
Representative Armstrong?
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lente, yes.
Representative Mason.
No.
Representative Matthews. Yes.
Representative Murphy.
No.
Representative Parejon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Representative Armstrong.
Mm
No.
Representative Hernandez.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, final tally, 6
votes, yes, 4 votes no. You have
a
Lamented bill.
