Or madam secretary when we call
the roll.
Chair Maestas Representative
Baldonado.
I am here.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Representative will.
Thank you.
Here.
Representative Johnson.
President.
Representative.
Representative Colbert here.
Representative bill
Representative Dow.
Chair to get off.
I am here madam secretary thank
you and chair Maestas.
I am here thank you and so we
have a quorum welcome everyone
to house commerce committee.
We have our panelists are here
and we're leading in our expert
witnesses to be in the in the
committee room so to speak and
then we have.
Folks in the lobby at
approximately twenty eight
attendees.
On the attendees
We do go to public comment in a
few minutes we'll have those to
speak in a in favor and then
those to speak in opposition and
depend on how many folks want to
speak we may put a time limit
but will.
Will determine that here in the
next five ten minutes.
and then we see is
Representative Chandler with us.
All right we'll give
Representative Chandler minute
Representative dalam give a
minute to get in here as well.
So the expert witnesses
There's four of them.
There's for them so I will I'll
gonna text the I. T..
room now.
The expert witnesses our agency
Tracy McDaniel.
Terry Lynn Massey.
Susan Ragan and.
Jan Hamrick.
And then of course
Mr Chandler.
Is getting comfortable she
should she should be here in a
minute.
I thought she was here so.
Mr chairman.
Mr chairman.
Yes.
I had to use Representative link
to log in and don't see a future
lawyers can somebody do that for
me.
Yeah I know we'll change the
name of in the meantime get a
sharpie and.
Posted put it right here.
Welcome is welcome business
Masih.
welcome Daniel.
I think.
And we just need one more and
we'll get started.
It is somebody could text
Representative Chandler.
For up to thirty one attendees
Mr chair Representative Chandler
is on is the panelists now open
tested wonderful then we'll turn
it over to Representative
Chandler Representative Roybal
Caballero for house bill thirty
eight welcome.
thank you so much Mr chair I'm
very sorry I was having some
connectivity problems.
it's a pleasure to be here with
you and with by co sponsors
Representative Roybal Caballero
a and Representative Serato so
I'd like to share with you of a
few opening remarks and at the
close all introduce some experts
that are on the line with us Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members it's a pleasure to be
here with my colleagues.
At some point in the lives of
nearly all New Mexicans we know
that we will need to take time
away from work because of care
giving responsibilities health
care needs whether it be to
welcome a new born care for
elderly parents or a sick
partner.
Yet despite this universal need
neither the the United States
nor our state offers any sort of
paid family leave program.
It is notable that we are the
only wealthy country in the
world without a national paid
family and medical leave policy.
The paid family and medical
leave that leave act would
create such a program for New
Mexico residents administered by
the state to provide up to
twelve weeks of paid leave for
employees to welcome their to
address their own health care
needs or that of a loved one.
How does it work.
Beginning in twenty twenty three
the department of workforce
solutions will administer the
fate paid family medical leave
trust fund.
Employee and employer
contributions will fund
disbursements and
Administration.
Beginning in twenty twenty four
after contributing at least six
months and submitting an
application to the Department
employees will receive a
percentage of average weekly
wages for up to twelve weeks.
Self employed employees can opt
out of the program.
And some we have a delayed
implementation starting and two
to three years.
In addition in terms of funding
I just want to touch on the fact
that given the COVID of funding
opportunities out there we know
there will be we expect there
will be some federal funds to
help support this program as
well.
Employees and self employed
individuals will receive
payments directly from the trust
fund.
And during the employees leave
the employer will benefit from
wage savings which could be used
to pay for overtime wages for
its current employees or hire
temporary replacements or use
the funds and other ways to
support its business operations.
Nine states and the district of
Columbia have implemented rate
we've programs those states have
demonstrated outcomes reducing
infant mortality child abuse
injury injuries
it has lessened nursing home
usage.
In addition to supporting
workers and their families paid
family and medical leave support
small businesses businesses that
offer paid family and medical
leave have a competitive
advantage in recruiting and
retaining talent to their
companies.
Large corporations are
increasingly likely offer.
Private paid leave programs to
attract employee employees but
small businesses do not have the
resources to absorb the cost of
this type of program the program
we're proposing would help level
the previous playing field file
allowing small businesses to
give the to offer such an
opportunity to its employees.
Thank you for your attention and
interest or happy to answer any
questions Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative and did you want
to introduce your experts a yes
thank you very much.
So with me today is
Caroling Massey from southwest
women's Law Center along with
Tracy McDaniel southwest women's
Law Center very knowledgeable on
the subject area Susan.
one moment.
Susan Ragan who is with bureau
inch and Susan did some economic
analyses for us on the on the
cost and how how the program
would be implemented.
And Jean Hambrick is with a a RP
thank you Mr chair.
And Mr chair did you wished me
to touch a little bit on on on
the conversation we had about
hearing the bill and and yes and
or we go to the deer extras
which to say anything at this
time either they're just here to
answer questions.
I believe they may have some
opening remarks brief opening
remarks Mr chair with me that
now in good introducing one of
you madam
a Tracy McDaniel is prepared to
offer some additional
information Mr chair.
Welcome
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Tracy
McDaniel and I'm a policy
advocate with southwest women's
Law Center my focus with the Law
Center is really specifically on
policies that support economic
security and economic stability
for New Mexico women and their
families and paid family and
medical leave act as one of
those policies that fits
perfectly into that realm so as
Representative Chandler pointed
out you do makes a great point
one of those being that you that
the United States is the only
wealthy country in the world not
to have any paid leave program
but one of the things that was
really interesting that happened
last spring is that one of the
very first acts of Congress in
response to COVID nineteen was
to pass the first ever
legislation offering paid leave
protections to US workers in the
private sector so while
governments around the world
addressing all the very
impressive related the pandemic
US was debating this policy that
provide supports that workers
elsewhere have had for many
years so this was a remarkable
turn of events and it really
brought home how critical paid
leave policies are to economic
resilience in our country and in
our state.
however those protections were
temporary limited in scope and
they have already expired
expired at the end of twenty
twenty
and the other point that I'd
like to make as Representative
Chandler pointed out is that
businesses that have paid leave
policies really do have a
competitive advantage in the
market and I think that that is
also a critical needs to
consider as we're talking about
this policy for our state where
New Mexico so that the tech and
media industries have been at
the forefront of a paid leave
revolution large corporations
understand that they have an
advantage in recruiting and
retaining top talent if they
have strong paid leave policies
and that's why Facebook Netflix
NBC universal all offer
generous paid leave benefits
that our small businesses here
can't compete with and we're
bringing in our economic
development in the state we're
bringing in these
These corporations that should
be lauded for having family
friendly policies that how are
we going to
to create an infrastructure that
supports small businesses to be
able to compete for talent with
those large corporations also
worked to point out that
governmental entities including
Federal government now has paid
parental leave benefits as well
as employees of the state the
City of Albuquerque and UNM have
all created paid paid parental
leave programs within the last
couple of years so I'm open for
questions thank you so much for
your time today.
Mr chair I believe miss Massey
has a few a brief comments.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee staff my name is
Carolyn Massey I just wanted to
add in addition to Chris
Representative Chandler and to
Tracey's introduction that I.
Under the paid leave Grella
there are two types of paid
leave one area is the paid sick
leave sometimes they call it
paid sick and safe days and that
usually applies for
look minor issues right thanks
for a day two days the coal and
then it you'll see the plies for
the couple of days so what we're
talking about here today is the
and family medical leave which
is longer than you know that
three four days that you and
employee may need
So I just wanted to make that
clarification up front and
just just to let you know about
about which one we're talking
about the other is that we have
also met tempers and we've sent
their input on our bill this is
the third time that we are
introducing this a version of
this bill and we have made
considerations with the current
economic conditions in my so I
just wanted to point that out
and and we can talk about that
for their I just want to
highlight those thank you Mr
chair members of the committee.
Representative Chandler.
Mr chair if I may also
acknowledge my co sponsors a
Representative Roybal Caballero
and the Representative Serrato
and if they could have a few
moments to offer some comments
if they choose.
Welcome thank you.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
You may have seen she messed up
the way represents your sorority
want to say anything on your
bill.
I thank you Mr chairman I and
you know I I think the the
witnesses and the primary
sponsor to this bill is broken
already end up on it I'll be
happy to speak as a committee
member later in our committee
thank you.
Well Mr chair I just texted
wrote Representative Roybal
Caballero and I I don't know for
connection does it or not but
maybe we can get back to work at
an appropriate time Mr chair
I I'm not Mr chair and
representative she just got
promoted as a panelist.
Well
we missed on this committee but
welcome would you like to say a
few words on I'm not house bill
thirty eight thank you Mr
chairman and Ben all committee
members nice to see you again
and that yes I did want to see
just a few words because I think
it's important to make a
notation and thank you to the
presenters and thank you of
course Representative Chandler
we're joining together again as
we had in the past so I'm happy
to to be here today I wanted to
point out that in twenty twenty
the pandemic and racial justice
movement demonstrated the
urgency of action that's why
we're coming with this urgency
to you today as a global
outlined lacking paid leave the
U. S. workforce was especially
vulnerable to comment as we all
know.
one of one of the very first
acts of the US Congress in the
pandemic response was to pass
the first legislation offering
paid leave to private sector
workers this particular swift
action demonstrates the critical
role paid leave has an economic
resilience but the protections
were limited and temporary as
have been noted by the sponsor
and the experts.
Two states right now with
existing paid family medical
leave programs were better able
to respond to pandemic related
claims than those relying solely
on the and unemployment
insurance systems as we known
them so paid family and medical
leave as a racial and gender
justice issue is extremely
important in order for us to be
able to strengthen our economic
resilience and to continue on
the path of a promoting equity
and breaking down the barriers
of institutional racism and I
think it's important to know
this because as we've noticed in
our state communities of color
poor communities of color and
the poor communities of women
with of color have suffered
adversely beyond what we could
have well imagine under normal
circumstances during this
pandemic so I just wanted to say
those few words and express why
it's so urgent for us to take
action so urgent Mr chair for us
to come together and come up
with an extremely well thought
out and well discussed and well
implemented plan as you
mentioned we have a lot of huge
responsibility on our shoulders
to accomplish and I appreciate
you giving us Mr chair the time
to be able to work through some
changes and improvements and be
heard again I appreciate that
and thank you everyone thank
you.
Thank you and I think you have
one two more experts that they
wish to see if you were to miss
Reagan this hammock.
Yes thank you Mr chair and thank
you committee for taking the
time to listen to us today I'm
Susan Ragan I work with you in
in the of Business and Economic
Research where we have been
working hard with all the
developers on the
the bill to make sure that the
envision paid family medical
leave system would be
financially feasible that is
that the collections from
employees and employers would be
enough to cover individuals who
have a qualifying event and the
administration of the claims we
use many detailed datasets to
create a model these datasets
included UNM geospatial
population projections the I. H.
IHS Markit forecasts for
inflation and bureau is own
employment and wage forecast
among others
it is the intent the the system
from our understanding would be
very much employees supported so
we included into our
calculations seventy six million
dollars that in M. D. W. S. as
that they would need to be as a
nation additional starts and
initial set up costs we do more
ties that amount over ten years
in the calculations
the model was also built with a
lot of Christian in the numbers
I'd like to note that other ex
states who have set up have
experience less than a hundred
percent uptake during the
implementation years and not
every claim takes up to the full
twelve weeks alone the the
numbers I use were actually
eleven point four weeks but I
would note that we looked at New
Jersey and they showed that the
actually taken time taken
usually would be more close to
nine weeks in New Mexico.
So the numbers to work out on an
annual basis in the bill there
is a section that sets up the
administration of the Lee fund
at N. M. D. W. S. that includes
oversight keep an eye on the
fund to make sure that the
system stays financially stable
year after year so you know as
much as you can set up a model
you need to tweak it as it goes
on and you have reality hit.
Do the payouts work for
employees at the new minimum
wage of ten fifty an hour the
answer is yes replacement is set
up to be at a hundred percent
for minimum wage employees the
wage replacement is a guaranteed
at a minimum wage and then
skills down to sixty seven
percent of wages maybe that are
above the minimum wage.
with the wage gap of sixty
thousand that cap is necessary
to make sure the very high wage
earners don't deplete the fund.
This way to a place that works
in complicated employment
situations including in those
situations where people might
work more than one job multiple
job holders for example.
And then finally I just want to
take make a personal observation
I work very closely with U. S.
census bureau data and with us
poverty statistics over my
career.
The provision of twelve weeks of
paid sick leave for the birth of
a child or in the in the
institution of a serious medical
event is one of the policies
that could truly lead to better
family outcomes and medical
outcomes for New Mexicans alone
and when I look at it I think
this is a policy that can truly
move the needle on poverty in
New Mexico.
Primarily because it is a it
enables employees to be more
engaged in the work force and
less likely to have huge
employment gaps they're very
difficult to overcome
I really thank everybody for
your time for me to speak and
I'm open to any questions you
have on the model or the summary
of estimates for the paid family
medical leave fund thank you.
Thank you.
Welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
My name is Jane hammer and I'm
in a a RP New Mexico volunteer
advocate thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on
behalf of the A. R. P. New
Mexico Mexico.
As you may know A. A. R. P. is
the largest nonprofit
nonpartisan organization
representing the interests of
Americans age fifty and older
and their families key
priorities for our organization
this year include helping
support New Mexico's working
family caregivers we strongly
support HB thirty eight the paid
family and medical leave act the
COVID nineteen pandemic has
shone the spotlight on the need
for New Mexico workers to take
time away from work because of
their family care giving
responsibilities for their own
health care needs it is
imperative for New Mexicans to
have the ability to care for
themselves and their families.
Please note that A. A. R. P. New
Mexico has been part of the
broad based coalition that has
been working on this issue for
the past several years seeking
to ensure that we get it right
for New Mexico.
We believe that HBs thirty eight
delayed implementation timeline
and emerges amortization of
costs over a ten year period
show that our coalition has
worked to address the concerns
of New Mexico department of
workforce solutions we encourage
you to join us in supporting
that legislation again thank you
for your time and I stand for
questions.
What was thank you and
Representative before we go to
the members of the public up.
There was a house bill twenty I
believe you're the sponsor house
bill thirty seven that kind of
touch on this area do they up
tells about those bills if you
could do they conflict.
With war.
Thank you very much Mr chair
note house bill twenty is a
simple sick leave bill and it
offers five days or eight days
two employees to use per year
you know for the kind of routine
illnesses or child care needs
going to the doctor you know
those kinds of things this is a
program a lease program to
address longer term health care
needs and and the like house
Bill thirty seven I get my
numbers confuse house bill
thirty seven is sponsored by
Representative Rubio and others
and her bill is very similar to
my H. B. twenty which as I said
was what one would consider kind
of a straight sort of the simple
specifically bill.
Thank you for that and and then
the lastly just a couple quick
questions so that we that I kind
of grass the bill before we go
to public comment so that the
comments will be more impactful
I'm looking at the bill it's a
twenty six page bill but it's
it's all new material all brand
new brand new law.
Of so section one you know the
family medical leave so section
two is the definitions.
Thank you definitions are family
leave and family member.
Of section three of deals with
the trust fund so the the worker
pays up point five the employer
pays
Point four.
section four on page six is this
the start dates
The exemptions as to this was
exempt and
and privately run programs.
Your you like you said there
some businesses are you do this.
Section five is the leave
compensation calculation so
that's that's key.
kicks in our then let's see and
that's section five is actually
a big section.
And that's probably the crux of
the bill from up.
Implementation still not
mechanical standpoint in section
six of the claims you file a
claim so you follow so this is
essentially similar to
Unemployment correct in terms of
but instead of being like you
you're the best take care your
baby or a loved one Mr chair
exactly and frankly that's what
drew me to this model when I was
working with the with the
advocates on this particular
program it is a self funding
program and it spreads the cost
of the program across all the
contributors on like imposing
this kind of requirement on on a
business that who could not
absorb those kinds of costs
necessarily so we're spreading
the cost across more people more
people so that makes it more
cost effective for everyone
involved untested then up so
structured six those that claim
you file a claim similar similar
to an unemployment claim of.
In seven a notice to employer.
Of.
And then you return to
employment section eight.
And then we have a section line
interference and retaliation
prohibited.
That's that's good definitely
take a look at that section ten
is appeal procedures you can
appeal the decision if there's a
dispute as to whether you're
entitled to this this benefit or
not of course.
there's administrative penalties
section eleven ten thousand
dollars.
Private right of action by the
employees on section twelve
section thirteen collective
bargaining doesn't affect the
collective bargaining agreements
section fourteen the department
workforce solution to provide
promulgate rules and then
section fifteen as a as an
advisory committee so a twelve
member advisory committee.
Of finishes up the bill with
with with no appropriation so I
think I I think we got it we
will go to the members of the
committee up the numbers of the
audience rather we have thirty
six attendees so those folks who
wish to speak and support please
go out and raise your hand and
we'll let you in one of the time
of so far we have four six let's
give folks about ten seconds to
raise your hands we get an idea.
Anyone else was to speak up so
if you words and support.
All right great so we have
eleven folks twelve folks of you
can't see each other of
unfortunately but
But just to give you an idea of
what we ask is that you make
different points than other
folks
that you educators on the bill
everyone.
Knows that it's time for this
country to move in this
direction we are the last of the
major industrial countries that
don't have this is part of our
society but it's just a question
of of implementation and
organization so we want to get
the language right more so than
than yes or no so we ask you all
to just help us.
Are with the protocols in
addition to telling us that it's
a great idea what a let up so we
have a Jacob Vigil Craig o'hare
Lipshutz Phillip Aguirre
Jennifer gets Dr Meredith.
Make an.
A Joan Sanford Stephanie Strabo
James.
At Jacob Vigil you you can on
mute yourself all right so
there's about thirteen you what
it's going to take a few minutes
address the committee and
welcome.
Thank you can anyone hear me.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Jacob
Vigil I am with New Mexico
voices for children I think it's
an opportunity to speak today I
won't I won't go into great
detail on things that were
already covered but I I do I
just want to emphasize that from
the perspective of a children's
advocacy organization
we think this is a a critical
bill as as you said Mr chairman
long overdue and especially in a
time of COVID but we also want
to reiterate that this is a a
racial and gender equity policy
right so disproportionately it's
low income workers low wage
workers workers of color who
don't have access to paid family
medical leave and who don't have
the the the reserves of wealth
available to to Christian.
Major life events like the birth
of a child or having to to
provide care to to a loved one
so it really is sort of
addressing some structural
inequity we also know that in
terms of child development these
policies are huge right so they
they allow parents to to be off
to spend more bonding time with
their young infants which we as
we know is critical for
lifelong brain development
cognitive social emotional
development and health so
and you know again for that with
the racial impact
infant mortality as we know is
is really high a lot higher
among black women.
Women of color than that among
white women so having these
policies in place to allow for
women to be within in those
critical years with their
children and to which to attend
well child visits to get
immunizations we know the
research shows that more kids
get access to immunizations and
and much needed health care
for that reason we've strong
support the bill and and think
that this is
should be a pillar of not only
New Mexico's recovery but of
strengthening New Mexico's
economy and families moving
forward.
With that I conclude my remarks
thank you Mr chair.
Okay Mister crabill hair you can
and you yourself.
Great thank you can you hear me.
Can you hear me.
Yes Mr here we can all right
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Craig o'hare
representing myself I live in
Santa Fe want to give a quick
personal story about the merits
of this bill back in twenty ten
I encountered a medical
emergency that required me to
leave my place of employment for
two months I was able to take
advantage of the federal medical
family and medical leave act the
good news about that act is it
guaranteed me the right to my
job when I got back from my
medical emergency after two
months the bad news was I didn't
get any payments under the
federal family and medical leave
act because there are no
payments as this bill sponsor
suggested I have the advantage
of working for the state of New
Mexico the energy minerals and
natural resources department and
I had over two hundred and forty
hours of sick leave that I had
built up and so I basically
didn't leave a paycheck but if I
didn't have that benefit which I
think most citizens that are
employed not in government I
didn't have that built up pool
of sick leave I would have gone
without a paycheck for two
months I probably would have
lost my house by not making my
mortgage payments or my car
payments and so this bill is
critical to help people get
through a long term illness
period like that and haven't we
some payments some compensation
if you will to get through that
period thank you very much.
Okay our next speaker Mr John
Lynch it's you then you
yourself.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I John
with units with The New Mexico
federation of labor are your our
organization represents tens of
thousands of workers around the
state involves a number of our
our of our members I'd do you
have paid sick leave coverage
that they have collectively
bargained we recognize that
there are many workers that do
not including some of our front
line workers and for instance
some of our our grocery store
workers that are working so hard
during this pandemic self our
position as an entity has always
been that all workers deserve
this sick rights and being able
to I have paid sick leave is
certainly one of those self it
is for that reason that we are
very much thank the sponsors for
proposing this legislation and
we encourage the entire
committee to do so as well or to
support the legislation thank
you.
Thank you Sir.
This.
you may and you yourself.
Thank you can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members of for the opportunity
to speak with you all today my
name is for the big about a and
I am an attorney at the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
at the new at the N. M. C. L. P.
wi fi for social and economic
justice issues and we start
Senator strong support of
today's bill HB thirty eight all
of us at some point experience a
serious health condition or
extended care responsibilities
and faced the impossible choices
between our families well being
our financial security and our
jobs federally protection does
not apply to most employers in
New Mexico and even to covered
workers they provide only on
paid leave the state program
would help ensure that we can
take the time we need to meet
these health the family needs it
would support workers economic
security promote racial and
gender equity create a more
level playing field for
businesses of all sizes and
strengthen our economy thank you
for your tax.
Thank you.
Miss Jennifer gets just on mute
and speak when you're when
you're in the in the room.
Welcome is Jennifer gets.
Just go ahead not on mute
yourself once you're up thank
you want to become a panelist.
Sorry can you hear me now.
Yes thank you great thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
good afternoon my name is
Jennifer gaps I live in
Albuquerque and I'd like to
speak today about why the paid
family medical leave Act would
be and it is so important in the
care of our elder community I'm
want to speak about a personal
situation in two thousand
eighteen when my mother was in
her last months before her death
from breast cancer and I needed
to take time off to be able to
care for her
I was lucky in some ways and and
not in others I was lucky
because I worked for a large
enough company that I was able
to take
at leave without losing my job
however it wasn't paid I'm again
I'm lucky
You know in relation to a lot of
people in that my household has
two incomes and so during the
time that I was unpaid which
ended up being six months that I
took off to care for my mother
during that time you know we did
have one income coming in it was
a challenge it was certainly not
the ideal situation but what
worries me in the state in a
state like New Mexico are the
number of
people who work jobs that don't
give them the option of taking
time off without losing their
job and and families that are
Rendite single mothers where
they don't have a second income
I I think that the
inequity associated with our
current job situation and our
ability to maintain our jobs and
maintain our wages is really a
problem in our state with that I
conclude my remarks thank you.
Thank you madam.
Matt
Holliday's gin Meijin thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm more madam I'm
speaking today for the league of
women voters of New Mexico and
for Santa Fe now and we stand in
strong support of this bill and
thank the spot search for
working on it it's so much
better than it was before and I
think I do I don't want to
repeat what was done what's been
set so please committee to
support this I think it is long
overdue for New Mexicans and we
we have to see how important it
is to support people who aren't
working for state and
corporations that can see you
can pay for family medical leave
this is a very innovative
solution and one that is very
much appreciated thank you very
much.
Miss Stephanie straw you ma'am
you yourself.
Thank you.
Yes we can.
You I'm good afternoon Mister
chairman and committee members
my name is stepping Straley I'm
an intern with the New Mexico
Public Health Association Health
association press the port for
the paid family and medical
leave act the mission Amanda
PTA's from all public health
practice policies and systems
that support health equity in
New Mexico and as heard earlier
this bill is critical to
cheating that health equity.
The reality is that most workers
can't afford to take unpaid
leave even when they are
eligible.
That means nationally one in
four new mothers returns to work
within ten days of giving birth
and thanks to take family
medical leave are more likely to
be white highly educated and
married
and while this is well
intentioned it tends to
exacerbate longstanding economic
and health disparities so we
urge you to consider supporting
this bill's passage thank you.
Mister James poll.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am James pope
you on and I am the policy
director for the center for
civic policy we stand in strong
support of HB thirty eight paid
family medical leave.
This legislation is important
because it is a worker and
employer centered economic
recovery for our state and.
In that it will help to attract
and retain more workers to make
New Mexico and creates a pathway
for low wage workers are more
likely not to have access to
paid family medical leave to be
covered by this self funding
program.
I also want to elevate that as
has been mentioned paid sick
leave is also being addressed by
other legislation during this
legislative session which is
also very important and we
strongly believe that paid
family and medical leave and
paid sick leave our policies
that complement each other in
that paid sick leave deals with
the short term events in the and
paid family medical leave will
address long term events in the
lives of workers thank you to
sponsors especially
Representative Chandler where
Roybal Caballero
For their hard work on this bill
and to the south with excuse me
southwest women's Law Center as
a leader on this issue and with
that and conclude my remarks and
urged committee members to
support this initiative thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr public.
This.
You may madam yourself please.
I myself can you hear me yes
thank you I'm Susan Loubet a and
I'm the director of the New
Mexico women's agenda we've been
working on this issue since two
thousand and two with the task
force that was sponsored by Mimi
Stewart who was then
Representative I think the store
of Now Senator Mimi Stewart and
during that time we've been able
to work out the issues but also
take advantage of the experience
of other states that have
instituted that and so this is
really the time that we need to
get going in New Mexico and pass
this legislation that's two
thousand and two when we started
working on this thank you very
much.
Please send me your self.
Morning I'm more of an alley
Beaumont organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico we support this for I
want to thank the coalition for
the excellent job they did we
support this bill because it is
simply humane and it also
acknowledges that the very the
most valuable resource for any
business any employer are their
employees and this moves us
towards an understanding of that
relationship as being mutual
rather than at the serial and it
keeps good workers in New Mexico
and attracts more good works our
workers to New Mexico therefore
it benefits all of New Mexico so
we do support this bill.
Thank you Mr mon no well show of
hands those folks who wish to
speak in opposition or have
concerns with the the language
of the bill could not raise your
hands.
Raise your hands raise your
hands.
And
All right great.
So we have a five folks so far
This Wagner Mr Billington was
son tag Mr weeks Mr Espinoza up
there maybe a few more so
governable.
Manage this portion of the
meeting and let you in as a
panelist thank you and welcome.
Good and take a you know two
three minutes to address the
committee.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy at the New Mexico chamber
of commerce last spring
Representative Chandler reached
out to the chamber about the
FMLA bill she was drafting which
we very much appreciate it and
we had some great thoughtful
discussions and provided her
with a set of principles that
the chamber could support and be
a positive partner on and in
fact we even got our membership
to endorse a set of principles
we provided to the
representative which were based
on successful family medical
leave programs in California and
Colorado
unfortunately we've been left
out of any further conversations
on FMLA since last summer.
So we understand the importance
of this bill and we do not wish
to stand in opposition
but there are few concerns that
we have that we're willing to
work with the Sanchez on to
address and we stand ready to
work with them and we hope that
we can come to a bill that we
can happily support that works
for the business community and
its employees such as the
California models thank you so
much.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name was Carlos
contact I'm the president of the
New Mexico business coalition we
represent hundreds of businesses
and thousands of New Mexicans.
We appreciate what the sponsors
are trying to do with this
legislation but we respectfully
oppose at this time.
The costs are very high for
employees employers and the self
employed especially in light of
the pandemic lock down that we
are still under.
It's very difficult to look at
putting more requirements on
businesses.
That are operating only
partially.
And even looking at those
businesses that have never been
allowed to vote they have been
closed since last March with no
revenue income and we're talking
about putting more requirements
on them.
In addition it seems unfair that
some employees by the formula
being used.
Will receive a lower benefit
them what they're earning or the
percentage that they are paying
and while others receive a
bigger benefit than they are
contributing.
I urge you to consider the
situation that businesses are
and we stand ready to join in
the conversation to work with
anybody that wants to talk with
us about these policies we think
the timing is really poor right
now.
And we also would like to see
business included in the
decision making process as you
go forward so this time we urge
the committee to say no to this
legislation thank you.
Thank you us on television.
Mention what organizations you
represent.
Mr weeks welcomed.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Jason
Weaks Representative The New
Mexico hospitality association
the brewers and distillers guild
was in the Albuquerque Hispanic
chamber of commerce you know
these bills are not it's not
about the initiative being that
it's not about paid family leave
or some of these employment
benefits issues being bad
initiatives certainly I think
there are ways to adopt them
that don't you know completely
negatively impact.
Industry in the businesses that
employ these individuals
unfortunately you know we've
gone through a pandemic that's
been pretty significant and a
lot of small businesses
amendment absolutely destroyed
you know hospitality industry is
essentially been shut down
Representative distillers have
manufacturing but their outward
facing retail shops or food and
beverage you know retail has
been basically closed I mean
they're hanging on by a thread
the timing is is very
challenging as it relates to
implementing these pieces of
legislation if they become
statewide mandates particularly
in the form that they've
currently been presented in we
stand in opposition of all of
these initiatives as they're
currently drafted we really
would like to be brought to the
table so that we can talk about
what business can adopt and how
these things can be implemented
in a in a way that's not just
it's not just going to cause
businesses to be closed down
unfortunately you know from the
perspective of each one of those
clients that I represent them
and talk to you bye you know
labor or any of the advocates of
gonna certainly appreciate what
Representative is trying to do
and I think it's a good effort
and I think the paid sick leave
bills you know have have some
very good components and then to
but as they're currently drafted
we stand opposition of this and
others currently this bill in
particular just for like an
additional payroll tax observing
these costs in in this current
environment is basically going
to be maybe the straw that
breaks the camel's back and it's
just it's just closed down and
then the job goes away we have
to protect the underlying
economic vibrancy of our
community in a time when when
calling out of the hole that we
are in is going to be the first
initiative so for those reasons
we stand currently opposed to
the bills drafted thank you.
Mr.
I want to meet yourself please.
Thank you Giselle thank you
chair members of the committee
Jason Espinoza on the New Mexico
state director with the national
federation of independent
business
and we do you know getting
sympathetic to the intentions
and the goal of the legislation
but we do have to at this time
stand in opposition to the
legislation
you know I think is the the
representative and and the
witnesses testified I'm
certainly the challenges that
small businesses face are much
different than those of large
businesses large or small
businesses are already at a
disadvantage we look at the
relative burdens on taxes on
administrative costs and others
and when we do look at this
essentially as Mr extended at it
is a payroll tax that will
affect the in the employ the
small businesses across the
state and we do appreciate and
the the sort of delayed
implementation one of the things
about COVID though is even if
the health orders are lifted
later this year we're looking at
a long recovery and will
certainly still be in the midst
of the recovery with this does
if it does pass when this would
be implemented and so we're
worried about the cost of the
small employers additionally you
know when I look through the F.
I. R. you know there's several
questions and points raised by
HSD and workforce solutions one
of the other disadvantages that
many small businesses have is we
don't have a team of lawyers you
don't have a team of accountants
and so making sure that all
those questions are addressed in
terms of how does this interact
with the federal FMLA with other
things I certainly need to be
crystal clear the last thing a
small business wants to do is be
in violation of anything but as
of right now there there seems
to be a lot of questions the
last one I just want to make too
is reading the definition of
employer it's anyone with an
employee in New.
Mexico.
One of the things that's
interesting as an economic
development we've heard a lot of
conversation around attracting a
remote workforce the way this is
right and if we attracted a
remote workforce we would be
point in that is the company's
into this payroll tax and be
interesting how that may
negatively impact our ability to
attract the remote workers I
thank you for your time chair.
Thank you very much Mr Espinoza
thanks all the attendees and the
folks watching on as soon as
this impacts.
Everyone impacts everyone and
it's a.
You know if we had given frankly
if this country would have
progressed along with the rest
of the.
The world it would be such a big
leap and our state in particular
these things are a big leap so
we wanna.
Want to make sure we leave
responsibly so I think it was
mentioned earlier we're not
gonna take action on this bill
today we want to learn as much
about as possible of the.
The Sanchez gonna work on some
language and hopefully speak to
to some of those folks with some
concerns but that's still have a
robust hearing today so with
that I will turn over to the
ranking member Representative
Powdrell Culbert thank you Mr
chairman and and I really
appreciate the opportunity to
address this issue many of you
may not know that when paid
family leave act first appeared
on the scene I was directed to
commission on the status of
women and lobbying in Washington
D. C. report ever became a law.
And have watched this change
over the years.
And I was Republican then just
like Republican now and it was
not a racial issue and and you
know
Members and yes.
I resent that I presented a
great deal that everything is
being addressed is a racial
issue this is a people's issue.
And it's a people's issue
because we need a job you're
looking for a job it's not
because you're black is not
because you're Hispanic.
Is not because you native.
Is because you need a job to
take care of you your family so
I have some issues with
everything having it's because
of the racial overtone is
because it's black women are is
because and as Hispanic women
it's about people yes about
families.
And when I look at this piece of
legislation I see that there was
no discussion which some have
already mentioned with the small
business community.
There was no discussion with the
African American or Hispanic
chambers thanks to to have some
input.
And I did not calculate but when
you look at the average income
right now is been said that is
twenty five.
fifty thousand a year for a two
income family with these
individuals are already paying
for unemployment.
They're paying for federal and
state taxes now we're going to
start with another.
Deduction.
Out of their take home so I have
some major concerns.
About that.
The bill was never ever even
from the federal level design in
a way to penalize.
Both the employer or the
employee.
And so needless to say I'm not
in support of this legislation
as it is written.
I think we need to have more
voices.
At the table.
And I think it needs to be very
clear that this is a not this is
not about ethnicity.
We need to come up with a way to
help take care of these
individuals and everybody not be
penalized as many of you know my
family.
Has the Padres barbecue which is
a very small business this fifty
three years ago that has to that
has had to indoor all the peaks
and valleys around trying to
make their business in me but
yet take care of the employees.
That they've had.
And they've had one employee
that has been with them.
Most of the fifty three years
that they've been in business we
started out with them as a young
lady.
And they were able which you had
our families to work something
out.
She came back to work.
And so I believe that if we
bring the small business
community.
To the table to sit down and
have some real discussion as to
how this can be done that it can
have.
But I just don't think it can
happen and happen fairly.
With.
A third.
Of the interest from the
community being at the table
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative in.
And there was some folks in the
lobby that that had their hand
raised.
Also gonna go back to public
comment and we'll go back to the
committee of colleges to those
folks so we have a.
Others to folks with their hand
raised in public comment what
are you gonna.
Introduced in Gloria.
Find yourself.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
hear me OK.
We sure can Mr Clinton thanks
for the opportunity to speak
appreciated this is JD ball
intent on behalf of the greater
Abakaliki chamber of commerce we
wish to join with the other
business organizations in urging
the legislature to adopt a more
balanced approach to family
leave requirements that is
currently set forth in this
legislation.
Again we also reference
California's family we've
statute that requires employees
to make small contributions to
pay for its family leave program
and requires businesses to
adjust their operations and
staffing to fully accommodate
those family leave requests we
also of course believe that a
state family leave policy should
preempt local ordinances so that
we don't have a patchwork of
family leave ordinances that are
different throughout the state
and many companies have
locations throughout the state
so those are just a few of our
concerns Mr chairman members of
the committee and the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
is ready to work with the
Sanchez this legislation and
other business organizations to
help improve this bill thank
you.
Thank you Mr Clinton.
And miss Ashley.
How do you pronounce your last
name you wish to a welcome.
yes Mr actually blow thank you I
appreciate your time.
Welcome Sir chair
So yes my name's Ashley blown
the small business owner
Here in Rio Rancho actually and
I just wanted to
you know I think the testimony
of I apologize have forgotten
the expert witness from Bieber's
name here but.
I did see someone else's work
that they've done and wants to
address some of the comments
from the business community
about the outsized costs
importers for this bill.
And I think it's important that
the calculations that I've seen
from bureau
Would be that.
For an average we the employer
contribution to this bill would
be one hundred eighty eight
dollars and sixteen cents
annually.
Which I think.
It's pretty reasonable
expectation for employer to
make.
And cool I would expect that
the.
Minimal kind of negligible
contributions that any
individual employer makes this
trust fund is.
No significant benefit.
To those workers and would allow
a small business to compete with
the benefits that some is larger
corporations at our are able to
offer so I just I I I just want
to put that on the record that I
think we talked about those
costs are.
To actually quantify.
What this amounts are and and
and and it makes it a little
easier to understand if it's in
fact a burdensome right now I
think it's I think.
Pretty clear
On a per employee basis as it's
quite a reasonable ask for for
small business to make thank you
for your time.
Thank you and now we'll go back
to the committee of but just for
the sake of the the public in
the attendees we want to welcome
sitting behind the virtual Dyess
with those as a secretary bill
mccamley secretary workforce
solutions solutions.
Former Rep welcome secretary of
Representative Pettigrew welcome
Sir welcome to our committee but
and sit behind us on the Dyess
and
And Representative added on this
is also joined us welcome
members of the committee to have
any questions
We have we have plenty of time
Representative Dow thank you
have questions as well but
Representative Dow you have the
floor.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative for the bill
hi.
What
the F. twenty nineteen.
And this FIR is significantly
different the portion of the FIR
twenty nineteen but I would like
to apple ask Google questions
maybe secretary can we can
answer them is the
administration of the requests
in that in twenty nineteen are
it.
A estimated cost for
implementing the project
planning activities rulemaking
assessment secretary of a
million dollars I T. systems for
the PS PS in your bills thirty
two million appropriations would
help build one point five
million facilities and
infrastructure bill one point
five million so the basics start
at sixty six thirty six million
dollars in the ongoing costs
recurring costs Ingle to state
governments administer the
program was I. T. budget and
operations which was around
twenty million Mr chairman Terry
McKinley this bill includes
appropriation can you tell me
where these costs are going to
be covered whose property awards
from.
So Mr chair Representative Dow I
appreciate the question let me
let me start by saying that the
model that is being given here
is actually based on pretty
successful rollouts that
happened in in Washington I
always say that because I'm
gonna start referencing that in
answer to your question
I actually spoke with my
counterparts Susie Levine who
oversaw the roll out in
Washington over the last few
years yesterday and the nasco
spoke
with my counterpart in Colorado
who is overseeing a similar type
of roll out there there about a
year in us about half a year and
they just had a
A ballot measure passed last
year in their start to roll that
out so generally those are the
two states that we're looking
that if we're going to start
rolling something like this out
because they're doing it from
scratch or as other states like
California Ryland they were
building on top of already
existing in place disability
insurance programs of those are
the two places we're looking at
this account look out to it to
make it work in Washington that
it has worked at the time I was
also very similar to what they
have here there's a couple of
small differences
administratively for instance
and.
The bill you have now it's about
a fifty five forty five split
between employees and and
workers in Washington it was
about two thirds one third so
it's pretty similar
the differences in Washington
what they did was they took out
a loan of eighty two million
dollars from the general fund
initially it off within that
paid for the expenses to roll
out the programs a plus an
initial put into the trust and
what they started doing is when
they started collecting there
are their payments for the
system they started using that
to pay it off once the loan is
paid off then they started the
plan as a whole that that's not
here in frankly though we
actually you know the governor
does support this concept pretty
strongly about I personally also
agree with Representative my
asked us and and Sanchez that
this is a really neat program
this is one of the issues we
have with that though in that if
we're supposed to start working
on this thing there's no
monetary appropriation that we
would be able to get in this
bill until the twenty twenty
twenty three when a portion of
the payments that would be
coming in could be used for
administrative expenses we just
don't know where we we get the
money to start these programs
and that that thirty to thirty
five thirty six million dollars
set up is something that that
that Colorado as is having
that's a day estimate and
something that Washington had so
might be a little less than that
but that's that is roughly the
ballpark that we're looking at
however the model does work in
that once you get it going.
Once again that sixteen million
dollars.
Probably a little high we're
going to talk about thirteen
million thirteen million was
about what we were laying out
for our entire unemployment
staff budget a pre COVID and
this is a program that is very
analogous to unemployment you
have to have people running a
call center yes of educators
administrators an appeals
tribunal that sort of thing so
that would be taken out of the
premiums that we would be
bringing in I don't think that's
as much as concern once it gets
going for us as the initial
start up costs the NMAA consents
yes yes Mr chair thank you
Secretary yes Sir.
Yes.
We just don't have any place
right now to be able to start
the ball rolling in this bill it
we would either need an
appropriation for the Colorado
and.
Washington and.
Models both had some kind of
loan so in Colorado they're
going to set up a bond in
Washington they're they're
actually did a loan from the
general fund and they paid off
once they started doing premiums
but they used the beginning
parts of that loan to do the the
the startup costs moving
forward.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you secretary Kelly.
I have to say.
Just take a moment here to thank
secretary can reverse hard work
during the COVID I I should have
started off by saying that you
have been so tremendous you've
been so responsive to my
constituent needs and your team
has worked tirelessly and I you
probably impact you know there
were department of health one of
the hardest task I want to take
this opportunity public thank
thank you thank you said you
have received personally handle
probably ten thousand calls I
think jokingly said to you I
must identify thousand those but
I cannot imagine the burning and
use continue treating patients
you have been responsive and I
truly appreciate Representative
we really really appreciate that
one of the things had a our
department has learned over the
course of the last year we've
been asked to implement a bunch
of new unemployment programs is
we can do things we we have the
ability to implement new
programs like the one that's
before you today I I I really
appreciate the Sanchez time
frame on that slick if we have
the time and resources we can
watch one we just we just need
to be able to hire the people to
do it and and get the time and
place to be able to lay stuff
out.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary on I am reading this
bill applies to both public and
private.
Thank the legislative education
study committee did choose to
carry on I know there's over two
hundred fifty agencies our state
but just with the legislative
education study committee they
are also making implementing
this this Representative with
the five percent of the
employees contribute represents
four point eight million dollars
from the existing budget and
there are for school districts
working for our school districts
do you have an estimate of what
it will cost statewide for each
of these agencies to take this
out of their state agencies.
Contribute.
Present we would just be reduced
from there on.
Paychecks.
And to make up for.
Mr chair is that question
directed at me.
thank you Mr chair
Representative Dow I'd like to
step back a little bit before we
ask answer that question
Ms Regan could you respond to
secretary Terry mccamley supply
and then we can address the
point that Representative Dow
just raise their all financial
issues and before I do that I
would like to expressed to the
committee and Mr chair that our
team did work very closely with
secretary mccamley and scoping
out the financial
needs to set up the program and
the number that he gave us was
one million dollars and actually
we also saw a budget that
identified that amount of money
as what was necessary to stand
the program up but I think is
Reagan couldn't speak in detail
as to how we cost of this
program what that Cook program
will pay for and so on and then
she can also address the second
question that Representative Dow
race thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee and thank you
bill mccamley because you have
done a wonderful job with New
Mexico department work for
solutions and all the work
they're doing first we did look
at home what would it cost and
I'll just tell you for the model
that we put together we made it
more expensive it includes both
state employees local government
employees tribal employees we
look at all employees within the
state of New Mexico to determine
and we stepped it broader than
just what is covered under you
why we looked at people who
don't qualify for you why and
included them in the
calculations just in the you
know that it is very
comprehensive for all employees
the other thing we did it
looking at the cost structures
we took in your numbers into
account but we also saw
somewhere along the line or
somebody said it be seventy six
million dollars to set start the
funds so we put in and more ties
ation of fixed costs for DWI DWS
over ten years because we knew
we couldn't collect all that
amount of money right at the
first year that we would be
collecting these funds from
people so we didn't put that
into the the calculations to
make sure that we can pay this
back I knew that there was a lot
of discussion do we do
appropriations do we not I'm
gonna let somebody else address
that but it certainly would
looking at total collections we
included into the cost that we
pulled out of those collection
anymore ties the amount of
seventy six million dollars over
ten years.
Is there any did I answer the
question if you need.
That was very helpful Mr
chairman Representative and
thank you for that I was very
helpful it wasn't a question
like this in the budgets.
R. F. I. R. this time I don't
see that changing for the cost
to say to provide.
Percent of the employees will
not be less take home pay less
disposable income for families
until more and less than this.
Mr chair so there's I'm I Mr
chair there's a point for every
employees that's must contact
the point I we were contributed
liter in this case the state of
New Mexico is an employer and
would have to contribute that
point.
That so is reflected in the
probation budget that point four
percent employers must
contribute.
The cost.
Mr chair of I can't I can't
account for what was in the FIR
not in the FIR I think it's
reasonable to say the state will
be obligated to pay its
appropriate employer share to
the into this program just as
any other employer would
the program does not start for
two to three years from now so
certainly there is not an
appropriation and this coming
years budget for a program that
it will not be in place for a
couple to three years.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Representative Chandler so the
point four percent that the
employers have to pay the
employer portion just for New
Mexico PED in the LFC report
estimated eight point four
million per year that's one of
over two hundred fifty agencies
I'm so are we obligating are
appropriation committee to a
future cost and are we allowed
to do that in this school year
are we allowed to to all right
the state to a cost of tens of
millions of dollars new employee
contributions and are required
to do that.
Mr chair we enact public policy
all the time that impacts.
R. for the state's fiscal
situation.
Those actions do not.
Necessarily required
appropriation this year when in
fact the need for the funds are
three years from now or two
years from now so I guess the
answer is no Representative Mr
chair and representative.
Mr chair.
Chandler is the next question
these are still logistical it is
that this is this was not
referred to appropriations or
four to tax revenue and would
pass the house without without
those folks considering for us
being aware of other
appropriations you're obligating
to now we're into the future I'm
just wondering Mr chair is there
that this committee is being.
Thanks committee or talk to be
prudent in long.
Of of of of of of of of of of of
of of of of the.
Representative general
Representative doll I'm not sure
where this bill goes next to the
obviously the speaker of the
house the signs bills we getting
we can encourage that but like
Representative Chandler said we
do work with crime bills that
when we increased penalties from
nine to fifteen literally kick
and that only affect the budget
to your ten but we definitely
need to be cognizant of those
costs but they're they're not
reflected in this year's budget
request thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative the
reason why I'm asking I think
I've been this will be my third
time hearing impaired act and
acts talks about the contracts
that we enter into state New
Mexico with third party vendors
these are public health
providers hospice care homeless
shelter senior male science
childcare centers these folks.
Operated by the reinforced we
provide them.
Just the one dollar an hour
minimum wage increase the year
is two hundred twenty million
dollar increase to the cost of
those folks doing business we've
now raised the minimum wage by
over three dollars rate
increases to all but one of
those providers are home health
providers personal care
providers receive something like
thirty six cents increase in the
rate so we are now at six
hundred and sixty million
dollars unfunded mandates to the
third party contractors to
provide services on behalf of
our most vulnerable population
and now we are going to get.
Eight four percent.
Education.
And so I'm being very hot
especially in rural communities
where the scale of operation is
not enough to keep up with the
cost of living alone.
Less rising liability insurance
consider the civil rights bill
that's coming.
In
one lawsuit and these the
single.
Hospice provider in.
In my counties will close just
like what happened and I'll go
at a nursing home there is no
more assisted living for elderly
dog County.
And now these additional
unfunded mandates not this one
because this is the only one
this is one of many.
The idea of weight savings is a
nice idea it might work for many
programs but none of the
programs that I just mentioned
where there is a.
Teacher child ratios that must
be maintained with specified
teacher qualifications and they
must have very specific
background checks and licensing
certifications before they can
work there is no sub for them I
think would be the case you
can't you can't wait stating
when you're dealing with period
care for an elderly person in
the system living home that we
must be replaced and so it's and
it's a nice idea but I don't
think it applies to any of our
programs that we set standards
for serving the populations on
another an unfunded mandate in
which the state is not properly
compensating.
This in which case appropriation
should be on record
example of large corporations
these billion dollar
corporations I think I heard
something that will Amazon's
making.
In some million dollars of
equipment versus our restaurants
and we have a four percent
margin profit margin right now
much less than that because they
can't even sell alcohol
but.
Your we should be increasing our
contract payments for the
service providers.
And.
A lot of questions I definitely
think you guys are working on
this to bring it back for about
I will be going forward unless
the lines with the Economic
employee eligibility there has
to be some sort of work
contributed works I don't see
anything in here that they have
to work like a minimum of twelve
hundred fifty hours to be
eligible for the.
And we also need a definition of
a family member I mean these are
basic things that we need in
order to make sure that someone
is coming work five hours twelve
weeks of.
We I'm.
And I do appreciate the fact
that there's time to roll this
out as secretary mccamly St
these things take time
intentionality and it's only
fair that we provide to our
businesses what we act our own
health orders.
It from being open or I will it
seems like we've got to give
enough time for them to
implement it you Mr chair.
Thank you would have up.
If you get a chance the email
that to the US to the sponsors
as well because I'm not.
I'm not privy to to to all
without all would entail but
thank you for that
Representative cerrado.
Thank you Mr chair for that and
I appreciate that I I did a
quick question I think for the
firm's Reagan from the work on I
know the state has already
implemented a paid family leave.
Program is not a program that
the state employees already pay
into.
Thanks for the question of not a
state employee anymore I used to
watch that stuff really close
the answer is is that.
That's part of compensation to
the employee and so yes this the
employee doesn't pay that the
employer the state of New Mexico
pays that a hundred percent and
then I just wanted to make a
quick comment total premium cost
between the employer and the
employee per year in twenty
twenty two would be about two
hundred dollars per employee so
it's not an outrageous costs
that we're asking businesses and
employees to pay per year and
then finally employees are
actually required by the act to
work for six months and pay into
the fund for six months before
they can take funds out
in the state I think the state
implementation of.
believe that they're doing is
already in place and I thought
you NM also participated in that
but it is that's a hundred
percent funded by the employer.
You Mr chairman thank you miss
Reagan I appreciate that I'm
just wondering how that would
kind of factor into you know
what are the costs that are
there and why that might have
you know been different but I
you know in the last thing I do
when I might I know a lot of
folks mentioned the impact that
this would have to businesses
during you know this very
difficult comment period I just
remind this would be implemented
about a year and a half from now
which is a pretty conservative
estimate and I think we all
anticipate we should be out of
at least a significant portion
of these public health emergency
that we are in right now but I I
really do look at COVID I think
because what are some of our
witnesses was mentioned earlier
is that how well other states
were able to survive this
pandemic and how they're small
businesses were able to utilize
and their employees were able to
utilize this paid family leave
program so it makes me just
think and I think the the chair
mention this as well Mr chairman
you did you know you we keep in
waiting on these it becomes a
larger hurdle to overcome you
know we know that small
businesses have have have narrow
margins on you know as
Representative out you know in
in indicated four percent is not
a huge margin but it remember
that when a small business loses
an employee that cost them
thirty three percent more than
retaining an employee and I'll
tell you from my own experience
having worked for an
organization with less than ten
people when I did get pregnant
and I had to make a decision
when I would not receive a
family rate during my family
which is understandable for that
period I decided to leave and I
had no choice because I had a
family now to take care of and
that was a decision to make so I
wonder and I think it's and it's
very difficult to calculate and
I think although I'm sure
recruiters agree you know how
many employees leave
particularly for this issue that
now we have the responsibility
to look at that on and and I
think as as mentioned you know
you know two hundred dollars a
hundred eighty eight dollars you
know we teachers paid nearly
that to get recertified every
year and we expect them to pay
them out of their own time we
don't think twice about it there
some scholarships for that
sometimes but you know that's an
expense that you know many other
employees are expected.
You so I see this from the
employer side as a benefit in
that way I see from the police
side is very beneficial coming
in to comment more than half of
would have a Latino households
have lesson thousand dollars in
savings and that matters in the
state like New Mexico with the
Tino that Hispanics are majority
in our state and so that really
impacts us we're looking at
unemployment costs we're looking
at losing employees were looking
all these different things
factor in our folks want to work
we want to make sure that there
is an equal respect in that way
I see this is putting our small
businesses on the same footing
as big as thank you for these
amazing and we're not sure that
is incredible packages you can
get from Facebook you can get
from all these different
companies or do this our small
businesses deserve to have
access to good employees and we
should be helping them do that
with those again Senator I see
your import pursuit to make it
also ensures that when this
employee takes time off for
their family Mr chair they're
able to that that money that
they're they're utilizing comes
from the state so that allow
small businesses to hire a temp
to hire its short term
replacements for them to keep
their business running this is
incredibly important our
hospitality industry all of our
different industries that are
really saying.
It's when you lose employer for
one day and I worked in service
before that everybody so having
the ability to hire a temp
really makes a difference and it
makes it affordable get two
hundred dollars a year is a
worthwhile costs and losing
employee at an additional cost
thirty three percent that is so
I'm I'm from you Mr chairman and
and wanna sponsored why did want
to ask that question of miss
Reagan was that you know I want
to make sure that we're looking
at this we are looking at
economic development with the
bid for site every year we don't
do that it's costing our
employees costing our state
industries and it's costing us
overall thank you Mr chairman
for your time I appreciate
everyone's consideration this
bill.
Thank you very much
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon everybody thank you
Representative Chandler and will
cover their own cerrado for
bringing this bill and just want
to publicly think
secretary mccamley for all the
hard work that his department of
putting in during comment that
made many requests to your staff
to help on institutions and and
you're doing a great job and I
are overloaded so but Mr
chairman and Representative
Chandler this bill we heard a
couple years ago in this
committee and I'm trying to
recall what happened I kind of
felt like we.
Came to a decision where you're
gonna go out in the hall and
passive stuff out with with
other folks and then bring back
up a better version of version
people could could work with is
that my remembering that
correctly Representative Mr
chairman Mr chair and
representative there were two
bills if a few recall
represented Mr chair and
we work very diligently to try
to reconcile the bills but as
time progressed through the
session we never got to a point
where it we're able to do that
and I'm pleased to say that my
colleague representative Roybal
Caballero is on this bill and
I'm very grateful for her
support Mr chair representative
did you incorporate any of that
other bill into this bill or is
this bill that we see today
pretty much like what it was two
years ago.
Mr chair and Representative my
recollection it's pretty much
what it was two years ago and
and I'm looking for not snow no
it's not okay so.
I am stand corrected Mr chair if
one of my experts could weigh
in.
I'll just speak up this is Mr
chair and the thanks for for
giving me a lead in Chandler.
It's it's very much different in
that
looking at the way we fund it is
better and I would say the the
making sure that the the
financial part really worked we
did a lot of work on own
realizing that you did actually
need to have on the maximum wage
cap but also wanting to talk
about the fact that minimum wage
workers should have a hundred
percent.
Reimbursement work as working
such that the sixty seven
percent above that guaranteed
minimum didn't end up with any
plateaus us to the very end up
with groups that made more money
or that there was nothing weird
on the funding part going back
for replacement wages and I know
that.
Those tweaks that came in were
significantly different than
what we did two years ago.
Go ahead go ahead
Representative.
Mr chair may I.
At the comment thank you thank
you Mr chair and so it's very
important to note that a lot has
happened in the last few years
and so the tweaks were
absolutely imperative in order
to be able to address the
rapidly changing conditions that
we faced ourselves in in terms
of the economy as it was
affected by the pandemic but
more importantly I think we
heard very strongly on how we
needed to make sure that we
balanced what we did with the
interests of the largest
employment base which is a small
businesses and take into
consideration that a large
number of our employees are
actually working in essential
services on the frontline in
smaller businesses and so that
balance has to be met and so the
beauty and working through
differences is that it
strengthens the outcome in a
better and in places us in a
better position so I would say
that the efforts that we put
together through and and as have
been advocated by the wonderful
coalitions of various groups
that have come together
representing many interests
actually came out with a a
really good built taking into
consideration even the harder
factor Mr chair and
representative and that is
factoring in the pandemic and
then not over burdening I either
the employer or the employee
especially since we're not yet
at higher wages and so we still
have employees that are having
to incrementally
increase there are income based
on their capacity and minimum
wage and that's just beginning
the people so what there were a
lot of factors that mitigated
the the on arrival of where
we're at today so thank you for
the question Mr chairman thank
you Representative thank you Mr
chairman and and you know I
think.
Kind of you know we have our
usual suspects in in the
audience in this in this
committee obviously we don't see
their faces today we see their
names but the The New Mexico
chamber the Albuquerque chamber
all of these business interests
and a distinctly remember Mr
chair representative that in
that committee hearing two years
ago that they they so they have
the same concerns that they have
today and in the spirit of of
Representative Roybal Caballero
that just mentioned in
collaborating and working
together did you indeed reach
out to these business community
members these people we've heard
from today and try and work
out their issues into your bill
Mr chair and representative.
Mr chair and representative I'll
give an overview and then I can
staffs some of the experts to
specifically address to whom
they spoke but yes indeed we did
rob black's noted that I had
multiple conversations with him
members of our team had converse
it had a meeting with rob black
who is it was an AC I now New
Mexico chamber of commerce I
believe we spoke into the
Hispano chamber of commerce
Let me see who else
African American chamber of
commerce society of human
resources managers and and
others and yes we did take their
input into account but.
It the bottom line is we believe
this is the best policy for the
state of New Mexico and we we
disagree with the burden that I
believe is exaggerated and
perhaps misunderstood and
that they're expressing at these
hearings but we certainly have
spoken to a number of these
groups we're always happy to
talk with them but.
The and when it comes to
drafting laws legislation and
proposing legislation the
judgment lies with the
legislators who is proposing it
on behalf of the state of New
Mexico Mr chair and
representative appreciate that
answer but I ate a I don't
necessarily agree with your
perspective on that Mr chair
because these business members
these community members that we
see today still have all of that
still had.
Definite reservations about your
bill Mr chair representative
compounded by the fact that we
are in the middle of the of this
pandemic and here we have a
restaurant owners and business
owners that that haven't made a
penny in in ten twelve eighteen
months or sixty sixty months or
going on here pretty soon and
and yet we want to propose
something that Mr chairman and
Representative cerrada pointed
out would be sort of down the
road but indeed you know an
economy's gonna take quite
awhile to recover from Mr
chairman I do I do I do think
that we we should sit down
further with these groups rob
black in Ashley Wagner over at
the chamber I think those folks
are willing to sit down and talk
to you at the mistrusting of the
and his group our city are
willing to sit there and have
those conversations and and get
you to to make some changes to
this bill so that it's not
impacting their businesses so
much you know I I feel like
we're we're just saying let's
just we're just gonna pass the
bill the way we want we'll talk
to you but we're still going to
pass the bill the way we want
and so if that's the way we do
it that's the way we do it I you
know I'm I obviously won't
support the bill in its in its
current form I'm sure that some
of the members of the community
the business community could
advise me on what would be
appropriate tweaks to to satisfy
some of their concerns and you
know I I feel like this
committee that I've sat on now
for going on six years under
Representative from my of chair
Maestas stater ship as well as
chair woman Deborah dell has
always been that committee they
gets people to talk and work
together and go out in the
hallway of course and in this
case go out and make a phone
call I suppose and work through
some issues and try and make the
bill better and everybody's
gonna be unhappy when they walk
away but I think we have a
better bill for it so Mr
chairman and Representative
Chandler and and all the other
Sanchez I would I would just
meaner strongly suggest and hope
that you would take that in the
time that we have to pass bills
in the session and try and and
work at a little better thank
you Mr chairman thank you
representative.
Thank you representative of
really appreciate the
conversation of a couple
questions and then maybe go back
to the committee.
I don't see one coming from the.
One percent
Mr concern me a lot in and of
itself in and of itself so
minimum wage is going to go to
eleven fifty January one.
Gonna go to twelve dollars the
following January one of twenty
twenty two that's assuming the
federal government as a bump
everything to fifteen which is
going to shock people what in
other economies with this
because we don't have one
economy in this country we don't
have one economy in this country
and and you know on one minimum
wage and once this fifteen
dollars one minimum wage in
another city is seven fifty like
it was in this car in the state
for fourteen years.
It creates problems and
disparities
And it creates a lot of issues
so I'm not concerned with the
one percent of so with the
twelve dollar minimum wage when
this when this bill kicks in
full effect.
Point oh I will come from the
worker correct of Representative
Chandler correct Mr chair okay
great and then point oh four
will come from the employee
Correct.
Correct Mr chair all righty so
that's in a twelve dollar an
hour minimum wage jobs that's
going to be
eleven cents eleven cents and
it's and we say employer
employee but ultimately it's
going to come from the worker.
In a come from the workers wages
so we're asking every worker to
pitch in one percent.
Of to create this world of
family leave and I think that
that that's reasonable twenty
years from now we want to give
it a second thought.
because we're all in this
together and and we need to we
need to create this fund for the
state we talk about like what
the parable last year we talk
about employees and employers
but it's really taxpayers.
The taxpayers you know throw a
pitch in one percent additional
for workers for state employees
and that's going to come from
from the general fund we know
approximately what that would
be.
Of Representative Chandler it is
Mr chair if I might just further
are economist I I'm not sure she
knows but I'm sorry I do not.
So my estimates did not break
out of government employees from
private employees and I've
looked at all employees as the
same I certainly could come back
and tell you what the estimate
would be for government
employees based on on average
weekly wage average weekly wage
received by a state government
employees in New Mexico will
that be great I think I'd also
thank you of the gender of the
state and the
So Mr Chilton I believe it's a
Mr did our fiscal impact report.
In FY twenty one it's one point
five million in FY twenty two
this.
Seventy million.
In FY twenty three it drops to
thirty three million and then do
we know why.
Why that is the the the and the
state employer contribution
doesn't kick in until January
one of twenty twenty four.
And then there's a six million
dollar dollar price tag on that
do.
US secretary Muhammad you know
whether the fire says that are
due or Representative Chandler
do you know what referring to
there's two columns there's no
workforce is far more expense
the state employer contribution
funded that total f's
thank you you know why the FIR
says that.
Mister would you mind repeating
that again I'm sorry I thank you
okay well to chair the fire as
well but it's up.
F. I F. this has a cost.
Our.
You can see this but it's.
Six million dollar contribution
I believe but there's also a
cost to the Department and it
jumps up to seventy million yes
so Mr chair this the expense to
the department is going to be
two for number one we're gonna
need to set this sucker off and
that's going to be and that
thirty to thirty five million
dollar range that that's kind of
what we're looking at which once
again it is as much as we we do
support the concept of this
that's one of our concerns is
that
even if that cost was to be
amortized over time there's
nothing the bill that lets us
borrow anything and so there's
just no mechanism for us to get
that moving forward the other
part of that cost is going to be
there are however many years
we're talking about your costs
University sixty million dollars
in your run thanks and then
there's the issue of setting up
a trust fund itself so I I think
that's what you're getting at
those are kind of this three
areas of our concern in in terms
of cost that makes sense what
does Mister Terry Representative
Chandler and and not refresh our
memory what's the the general
fund.
Budget for you ballpark figure
annually for that you know
department of labor with the
department workforce solutions
so so it's weird because we
actually I think it's about
thirteen million dollars a year
that we get from the state but
that being said our most seventy
percent of the expense from
workforce solutions actually
comes from the federal
government because all of our
unemployment expenses are pretty
much food for by federal money
almost all of our expenses that
we have for employment services
offices across the state are
paid for by the Wagner Peyser
portion of the federal
government and so that's the
other kind of sticking point
that we have missed Mr chair is
that when we do this we're gonna
have to be very careful about
calming wing funds the only part
of our office that's really
funded by the state is far labor
relations department so the
folks that you are human rights
bureau that enforce wage that
that sort of thing that's the
only part of our department it's
really really funded and our
apprenticeship staff a little
bit that's when Google people
but we just need to be very very
careful as we move forward with
these programs that we don't mix
those funds because the feds get
pretty stickler ash for using
things together and what I mean
by that is.
We're gonna have to have pretty
separated out administrative
process sees for people taking
calls people doing appeals we
may be able to do some joint
stuff together with H. R. and
with I. T. and some of those
things we're getting more people
there to write so this is
basically doubling our
unemployment division which like
I said is about a hundred
fifteen people eventually we
probably need a hundred a
hundred fifteen people to be
able to staff this thing moving
forward because of the the
procedures going forty Mr chair
if I may the only other kind of
concern we have is our economist
has a respectful disagreement
with this Reagan in that we we
are a little worried that
I think this bill gives us six
months to build up the fund
before we start paying now the
fund in our economists think
that should probably be a little
bit longer because if we don't
if we are sure that over time
we're building up the trust fund
to a place where we can pay
people out we have to start
paying people out and it is not
a moment to give out right and
so that's the only other kind of
technical concern that our our
staff had with this bill Mr
chair I'm sorry for that and
that's the one of the things
that I kinda want to break yeah
that's it all right cool right
right hook by hook doesn't reach
through the zoom but no we
appreciate the tremendous
information and you visiting
with us this afternoon Mister
secretary important stop the
because yes so I'm not concerned
about the the the the cost in
and of itself I'm I'm worried
about the ministration from the
state side we we would
essentially a new division it's
a new division within workforce
solutions to manage the program
and then I'm I'm actually more
worried about the administrative
side from businesses so if I'm a
small business I have I folks.
Of you know I have a half decent
accountant of does it if thanked
me does it affect the
administration of my small
business or does the start or do
I just send the check in the
state administers all that stuff
Representative Chandler.
Mr chair Representative perhaps
I could ask miss McDaniels to
speak to that point if if it's
okay these of.
I'm in Representative so.
The the
In section fifteen the last
section here we have set up a an
advisory committee which would
be helping to develop those
regulations the and providing an
advisory role to the Department
and that would include business
representatives and to the
intention there is to really
ensure that the administration
is designed in a way that works
that works well for the state
that works well for employees
and that works well for
employers this is an opportunity
to develop something that's
brand new I've heard a lot of
folks
experiencing challenges with the
unemployment system that is an
old system we have an exciting
opportunity to to develop
something that is designed in
the twenty first century for the
twenty first century for our
workforce and for employers in a
way that can can work well for
everyone so I I think that
that's one of the most exciting
parts and that's one of the that
that Advisory Council all I
think is
It can't be understated I am in
the can't be overstated I'm
sorry that I think that that's
going to have a really important
role in ensuring that everyone's
voices are heard and that
everyone's needs are being met
through the development of the
system thank you no thank you
thank you Mr Daniel very much
And I'm reading the shells of
the advisory committee for those
folks keeping score at home
that's it section fifteen that's
on page twenty five there's
twelve members
And then here's the shells that
can visor Committee shall
provide input regarding best
practices for the fission and
timely development
implementation and promulgation
of rules and educational
materials secretary work school
for solutions.
Now consult with paid family
leave implementation committee
at least quarterly as rules are
developed to implement a program
pursuant to.
And the committee shall not be
entitled.
Shall not be entitled to per
diem that's that's not too cool
and then
The committee shall funds saving
money Mr chair.
The committee shall function
from and our no later than July
twenty second until July first
of all time so okay I don't even
and despite that so in other
words the legislature is
creating a committee to come up
with.
With the administrative
framework of this program so.
So I don't know how engage the
chief executive is on this on
this bill it is that are we
anticipate if this doesn't if
this committee is a mandated to
meet till July first twenty
twenty two.
I mean are we gonna come back in
the thirty day session next year
and and and codified in statute
this these recommendations of if
the committee is not gonna be
told to try try to I would.
You know just think about over
the weekend okay that that
doesn't make a whole lot of
sense to me but I think I think
it's a state commitment I think
it's a state governmental
commitment I think we need to
think big of my question is
Representative Chandler maybe.
Miss regular someone else what
what is the annual what is the
anticipated annual pay out.
From the medically program.
How much how much do and then
how much do we anticipate in the
in the fund over the first six
months before the payout start
yeah we have Mr chair I I
believe miss Reagan can speak to
that point.
In speak to it but we also
supplied
Sheets that had the premiums per
employee import for employer we
also did a sheet that had the
employee replacement piece on it
and then we did what we call the
summary of what the trust fund
would look like
Is we based and I don't do you
have that materials because I
certainly can make those
available to everybody so you
can see them otherwise I would
be reading numbers off and I am
horrible at reading numbers out
loud.
Thank you Mr we can't.
Have the.
Montoya grabbed go make copies
for us right now
But but here's my point so if
you can email that stuff to us
or point to the website over the
weekend of and that's just a
reminder to all of us the
president goes in this committee
we're getting just bombarded
with emails maybe put the bill
number on the on the on the
subject line and we can kind of
go there but here's my question
I mean we have two point four
billion dollars in the bottom of
our bank account we act like the
world's gonna end a week from
Tuesday and and and we were
doing these big things the world
has shifted underneath our feet
this past year the the the
political will is come from it's
just completely different than
it was
throughout my time's up here and
so the the people demand us to
do big things the people demand
us to join the rest of the
civilized world in the twenty
first century they paid family
leave is part of that world.
In Europe you have a baby you
stay home three to four months
it's a given it's the way that
society works and nobody
questions it because it's so
normal to them I had to go back
to I. to I. deadlines of my law
practice I to go back to work
the next day My Baby overcame
about die and it was tough for
me to overcome it with given
that that situation but so we
need to do that for the babies
and we need to do that for for
our loved ones if the state was
will is is what we're going to
make this commitment the state
can write a check to supplement
that funded its first year so my
question is I mean obviously
there's not that.
You know I don't know if it was
mentioned in the state of state
or not but it doesn't seem like
that's the proposal before us so
so I asked the the sponsored a.
You know to report back as to
how engage the chief executive
is are we gonna is this gonna be
on the call in next year I we
had you know if we were to go
branch of government and we had
ninety sixty days each year
fully fully authorized to do
legislation we would be in a
different vote so so I see the
urgency of this sixty day
session.
but I also noticed that the bill
doesn't kick in for another
couple years that that begs the
question why.
Where we doing this now in the
midst of the worst economic
crisis in our lifetimes and the
stress that this small
businesses have on themselves
Representative so very good
question Mr chair thank you for
that so let's put this in
perspective the pandemic has
shown how critical it is for us
to have these kinds of safety
nets for society and I think as
some of the witnesses testified
this could be an ongoing
issue for us for some period of
time so we need to establish a
safety net for families working
people older citizens who need
support from their children or
neighbors you know family
members to help them get through
medical crises a long term care.
This is a session where we're
laying the foundation for that
it's a sixty day which is a
general policy session and you
know chair it's essential that
we do it now but we're balancing
the the public good that this is
going to do with the concern
that the business community has
about kind of a the shock wave
it might you know in addition to
what they've been going through
with the COVID crisis so we
recognize the businesses have
been hurting and to accommodate
that we're extending the
implementation and and and the
period of time when this would
kick in you know that's really
the bottom line we're trying to
be sensitive to that point Mr
chair no thank you
Representative Chandler I I
think it's very conscientious.
I think it
You know.
Obviously will know when it will
be in a better position next
year to know but it it it allows
the economy to stabilize and
start growing I think it'll
it'll grow.
Leaps and bounds I granted work
in a work in a.
But the bottom of the barrel so
that doesn't mean a lot but I
think we're gonna be going five
six.
Once a year the minimum wage
will stabilize at twelve dollars
and a couple of years
this doesn't kick in until July
July first twenty twenty three.
it gives folks an opportunity to
work out the rules and rags I
think ultimately the legislature
should impose it in statute and
not leave it up.
Folks.
so I look forward to kind of
find this next year or the
following but just couple
questions and I will go back to
Representative Powdrell Culbert
the
That's a legitimate concern by
my son tied with regards to the
sixty thousand dollar
gross receipts earnings
I don't know I would be willing
to take a pay cut to stay home
with My Baby so that may be the
uniform across the board
although a minimum wage.
The co would be tough for folks
the notifying the employer on
page fourteen lines twelve
through fourteen if you're gonna
have a baby.
You kind of know you know within
a month period when the babies
of the year.
so I think a.
The notifying of the employer
when you're gonna take the lead
when you're gonna come back.
Take a look at that language.
The of the worker can't contract
I'm not sure if the business
community has issues with that
But I think I mean if you can do
a little bit of work from home
that's that's on you this would
prohibit folks from doing that.
And then
Here we go on page sixteen lines
eighteen to twenty provide the
employer with prior notice.
to the extent practicable I
think that languages pry good
but.
but we'll see how that plays out
of obviously if you're in a car
wreck or there's you know a
loved one has a heart attack
that's different but looking
for.
For newborn baby
if there's a private but I
noticed the
Lastly.
On page.
Well I just had a question of
language
On page twenty four private
right of action by employees.
on the top of page twenty four
it says including the cost of
providing care.
Up to a sum equal to twelve
weeks so so I so I have to take
family leave I'm not granted
family leave I have the right of
action I can appeal.
And then I have the right to
bring an action in District
Court for wages salaries
benefits other compensation
denied or lost.
What if I can tell me about that
tell me about that how do you
anticipate that rolling out why
is it important for this to be
in here and do I have a right
to.
To contest my being fired how do
you how do you.
Educate me on this section if
you could Representative China
sure
Mr chair could I ask Miss
McDaniels to speak to and then I
may add something to her
comments please do.
Representative I actually would
defer to my colleague terribly
and I think she can speak to
this better than I can.
Please do.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I apologize I have a
my daughter will be here in
school and and I reminded them
down a little bit the wires
Business.
Yes
Mr chairman you were talking
about section twelve is that
what it is.
Yes yes ma'am there's a it's
basically stuff you can sue for
and at the bottom of page twenty
three it says in case of in case
in the in a case in which wages
salary employment benefits or
other compensation is up has not
been denied or lost to the
employee actual monetary losses
of stained by the employee as a
direct result of the violation
including the cost of providing
care.
I don't understand that what
that made.
This is.
We were talking to
from that paid family medical
leave coalition there was
a concern to protect the rights
of employees if they are denied
the benefits that they are able
to try to work that the ministry
of we through the department
look for solutions and do that
hello on that level in the event
that that let's say the the WSS
approve it's that the nice thing
for you would still have the
right to remove that a lawsuit
in District Court and so.
That's what that language is
about but here in terms of the
damages that could be a claim or
that could they could try to
claim and their case it would be
like wages any benefits or if
there were any costs that they
had to pay for and you know like
the take to care for their get
don't think that elder or their
child for whatever reason they
were trying to make that claim.
That would that's what I was
trying to cover.
Okay I understand thank you and
then where does this go next
Representative Jenner I believe
Mr chair judiciary okay thank
you what I ask of if it goes to
the next committee to see if
that language tracks
unemployment insurance your
friend because you're caring for
a family member so I I get that.
It seems like the policies and
procedures should be the same
I would imagine that they would
be much less contentious in this
issue than unemployment because
folks get fired maybe not but
hopefully it won't be and then
of so anyway what I would ask
and I realize you're.
You know we're at other
committees but I know you don't
have a committee Monday
afternoon you don't have a
committee Tuesday morning I
believe I I don't know if you
have zoom capability
Representative but a.
The the folks there's only like
four or five holes in opposition
to these four five folks
Representative dozens and
hundreds of the businesses who
are able to take a day off and
and and zoom with us this
afternoon so I know that you
that of the folks in opposition
aren't aren't members are policy
makers you may not be like.
Page four line twelve kind of
folks but but if you could just
kind of share as specific as you
can share your concerns with the
sponsor in terms of chapter
members and then and then chill.
So you know take those
recommendations and and agree or
not agree but but I would ask if
you could squeeze out an hour
representative to zoom with
these folks
At your convenience before we
bring it back next week thank
you Representative Rick and
Representative Powdrell Culbert
for second time thank you Mr
chairman
On my to read this a little
quickly but I'm just curious if
anyone took a stab at looking at
because we have different live
events.
At different ages.
We also have.
Different incomes as we rise
through the ranks and I'm just
wondering if
Anyone kind of looked at any of
that because what I make started
now it twelve dollars an hour
our.
Maybe five six seven years down
the road I'm making fourteen
fifteen twenty dollars an hour
how that cost breaks out for
that small employer as well as
how's it how how did that how it
is a figure out for the
compensation for medically.
Because one group maybe I can
make a little bit clearer yeah.
We're producing we're producing
would you know women are having
babies.
Then another agent we're at a
different place with taking care
parents.
Okay and so as we grow and as we
change how does this fund
compensate us we have these are
events is it stable fund you
know if I'm out at its fourteen
fifteen dollars an hour.
You know is that how the fund
bills based on line fourteen
fifteen dollars now up.
Mr chair Representative I
believe is Reagan has our hands
up and is interested in
answering that question.
Mr chair of thank you thank you
Christine so the answer is is
when we look at premiums paid by
employee is paid by the wage
that you were earning today when
you take that leave it's at the
wage that you take that leave
at.
Does that clarify that to it's a
premium and the payout is based
on the wages that you're earning
today.
Your premium is paid up the
wages that you are earning today
so that.
Continual that's how that works
okay so so Mr chairman.
So that that changes as we grow
in into that position whatever
it is.
And that's how how we're paid
out is that what you say.
I see.
I guess is what I'm sorry yes I
believe so I'm sorry your
rhetorical.
Thank you that's that's all you
have Representative.
Yes Mr chair my understanding is
we're gonna take some time to
look at some of your suggestions
the your analyst has some good
ideas in terms of tightening up
some language Mr chair and I
will set up a call with the
business community and if if
of rob black is still on the
line perhaps you can help me
with that and he could be the
point person and what we could
try to pick a time for a
conversation well thank you so
much jobs I appreciate that a
lot about Representative Google
but is that all you are you you
still have the floor I'm done
thank you all right I would like
to have the respect to hand in
the.
The second time.
Mr chair.
Representative.
What would it be okay if that
the small business association
also part of the conversation
considering the impact could be
greater on small business.
I have no problem with that I'm
just asking for some assistance
from rob black to coordinate
that meeting it won't
necessarily be exclusive to Mr
black and you know whoever is
available at the time we can set
it up.
Mr chair and thank you for that
that's a kind gesture
Representative.
Thank you thank you one last
question
Does it does this when minimum
wage goes up say you're paying
paying into the fund that you
know down the road right you're
paying into the fund a fifteen
dollars minimum wage goes up to
sixteen.
You have to take family medical
leave at sixteen you get paid
the sixteen right even though
you paid into the fund at
fifteen.
Yes Mr chair okay.
Great anticipation we could talk
a long time on this one I think
the public commenters the
experts the the Sanchez you we
work on this for three years and
we know it's a huge left but
it's it's it's a necessary left
I think that I think that
there's tremendous support on
this committee we brought up
when we appreciate you giving it
the once over and coming back
with either some clean up
amendments or a or committee sub
get it The Dallas as quickly as
you can will and that will be
you know Wednesday or Friday on
the calendar very much
appreciate your attention and
questions or when you're ready
for us yes Sir thank you so much
for your time and your
thoughtful questions and
comments thank.
Thank you members of the
committee thank you and all of
the tests that I thank you great
to see you Secretary mccamley
thank you so very much everyone
have a great week and we'll see
you next week.
Our next presenters house bill
one hundred thirty four welcome
gentlemen and receive your
patience.
I'm gonna turn it over to.
First timers in this committee
welcome Representative act
Representative Pettigrew.
you have the floor.
Thank you
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
and representative Josh
Hernandez thank you for hearing
my very first built this
afternoon with my co sponsors
reflective of Representative Dow
recover peregrine lane.
Also one thirty four
appropriates nine million
dollars from the general fund to
the workforce solutions
department to establish the
family friendly workplace
incentive program.
The purpose of the program is to
encourage small business
employers to adopt and implement
workplace policies including
those concerning Keightley how
support work schedules and other
economic supports small business
employers with fifty or fewer
permanent full and part time
employees would be eligible to
receive an award of up to fifty
percent of the cost to the
employer adopting and
implementing family friendly
workplace policies as the
Legislature continues to find
ways to support for small
businesses and employees house
bill one thirty four proposes an
innovative approach to support.
Instead of a one size fits all
mandate that will add additional
cost to small businesses
especially during this time and
many are struggling to keep
their doors open also one thirty
four creates a program that
provides financial incentives to
adopt family friendly policies
in order to support small
businesses that want to provide
to their employees but because
of financial constraints are
unable to do so.
This bill ensures our state
simultaneously supports small
business and our workers across
the state this bill ensures that
we are all in this together.
I would like to bring up our
expert witness Jason Espinoza
from the national federation of
independent businesses of us to
give a short introduction and
any additional information on H.
B. one thirty four thank you Mr
chair.
Welcome.
Mr Spinoza.
Thank you to all hi Mr chair
members the committee thanks for
giving me some time I'm just a
follow up on what Representative
Hernandez said.
You know this is sort of an
innovative approach that
addresses the financial sort of
burden and financial.
Restraint on small businesses to
be able to offer an array of
family friendly workplace
policies one of the things that
this bill also does that
recognizes you know what
everyone may not want paid sick
leave or paid family medical
leave but they want an array of
different options and so this
program what really incentivize
employers to work with their
employees to find out what
trying to supports the employees
wants whether it's a personal
leave maternity leave.
You know breastfeeding lactation
support of wellness programs
flexible work schedules are and
so on so this really creates a
comprehensive approach and
follows up on House memorial
wine from the two thousand
eleven legislative session that
really takes a position of how
can we encourage and support
small businesses as they try to
support their employees and so
thank you for your time.
Mr chair center questions.
Thank you representative welcome
Mr Espinoza let's take a look we
have eighteen attendees still
with us in the.
Out in the lobby of the zoom
does any up attendees wish to.
Wish to address the committee on
public comment what we go with
the supporters.
But in raise your hand in the
zoom we have one thus far to.
But in up raise your hand within
the zoom will bring you an up
close up who's our technical
director Giselle yes.
Let up let the folks in one at a
time okay Ashley Wagner economic
yourself please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy at the New Mexico chamber
of commerce we appreciate the
bill Sanchez looking at this
issue created to transcend by
its business owners to make
their workplaces more family
friendly for this reason we
support this bill thank you.
Thank you miss Wagner.
President.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name's
Carlos on tack and with the New
Mexico business coalition we
strongly support this bill and
appreciate the Sanchez efforts
to do something positive in
support of both employees and
employers.
There's been a long list of
bills.
That we've already seen to
provide paid time off and other
benefits for employees we
understand.
But the solution has been in
those other bills to not only
forced businesses to provide
those benefits but to prosecute
and penalize them if they don't
this legislation is a breath of
fresh air with this group of
sponsors not only recognizing
the need but giving a positive
path forward to address that we
encourage supported this bill
and thank you for your
consideration.
And thank you anyone else wish
to address the committee in
favor raise your hand anyone
else was to to dress the
committee and neutrality or in
opposition.
Anyone opposed to this bill
Gordon raise your hand there's
us for the record there sixteen
attendees we thank you for
joining us.
All right great.
We have a
I want.
Maybe.
Hello this is Meredith mentioned
from the league of women voters
of New Mexico and I would like
to get clarification doesn't
this basically subvert the anti
donation clause of the of our
state constitution I don't
understand how the state could
pay private private employers
for implementing point of family
friendly.
Our workplace policies I don't
understand it the public comment
Representative Baldonado but
she's asking questions Mr
chairman that you the chairman
of interest rhetorical the
committee where she wants to go
please proceed with so.
Not to mention.
Yes right I mean I think we
would oppose this bill because
it's
I I don't know it in great
detail but we have
Representative that but I just
yeah I don't understand how it
could possibly be
constitutional.
Thank you for the thank you for
that that opinion thank you
let's go to the I. any other
public comment.
And I mean a couple job
Representative with that if
we're in a rural.
At.
I'm not trying to be out of
order but it was it was a direct
question to that like as if as
if the sponsor wasn't supposed
to answer Mr chairman that's not
what we do in our committees Mr
chair no I hear you I think it
was just kind of a general
pontificating but I I hear what
you're saying the all right
let's go to members of the
committee thank you audience
members as go to Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman
I got on this this legislation
because I always think that
there are creative ways that
employers and employees can work
together to address an issue.
I'm.
Many employees and small
business community.
Take ownership of this small
business.
No they may not have stopped in
it but
they have relationships and and
this is important to them as it
is the owner for their business
to be successful.
And many many times employers
and employees will sit down.
And decide how can we.
Makes this.
Better place to work how can we
make.
This.
An incentive for me to say
because I really don't want to
go any place else I want to stay
here.
And this is what we can do many
of the employers and and as I
mentioned earlier
my family's of barbecue
restaurant.
Has employers that have been
employees that have been with
them a long time because they
said down and says here's what
we can do what is it want to
take to keep you well we've got
to make a living as well this so
I think this is a great start as
to ranking the employers and
employees together to solve.
A problem and come up with a
solution.
And I can guarantee you that the
small community small business
community then we had before
COVID is going to be a totally
different.
Small business community after
COVID.
So I.
I support this and I think it's
a good starting place.
So that the small business
community and their employees
can bring our small business
community back to its the
because we all have to remember
that
New Mexico.
That is a small business.
Community.
And we've got to figure out a
way to keep them strong and I
guess my my question to Josh
what after making the loan
statement but my question really
is
Tell us the number of folks that
you really sit down and talk
about talked to in order to come
up with some type of solution
that developed the space
legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Powdrell Culbert
you know I I sat down and spoke
with them from the New Mexico
and several members of the New
Mexico chamber and members of
the our our budget to be and you
know my background is I've I've
run businesses for other people
for a long time and this is
really something that I would
love to see you know unfunded
mandates are mandates that are
you know that are given to us
that that and of hurting us and
in turn making it so that you
know I have to cut employee
positions because I can no
longer for them due to those
mandates is is really something
that no business owner manager
ever wants to do
so that that's really where this
piece of legislation came from
is is being able to give you
know what I'm what myself and
other business owners would like
to get to their employees but
have not been able to have the
funding to do.
I hope that answers your
question it does partially thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman and
congratulations Representative
Hernandez I'm presenting your
first bill.
Were you were you listening to
the previous.
Bill presentation I think one of
I was here but I was going in
and out of this
Very long thank thank you Mr
chairman Representative what I
find really refreshing this bill
in the is that.
We keep your word.
I don't
use it.
Imposing mandatory.
Businesses were giving them a
competitive advantage and I
think about small businesses
that I've talked to inside this
building previous years we
listen we can't afford.
Fifteen dollars we cannot afford
paid sick leave.
We're childcare center and we
can we can give our pathways
tuition and childcare costs is
one the most expensive process
people experience in our state
it's it's really expensive in
New Mexico and so that the child
some cases it's free is a huge.
That's the competitive advantage
of the talker Center.
The work in the same class
research and we will go the
breastfeeding ram child or even
the costs and this is a culture
that celebrates.
Is within children.
So it was interesting to me.
We've decided government we
decided just this bill says I
have competitive advantages.
It's it's free college tuition
for all of our please even a
graduate we can't afford to keep
anymore working there any great
employees whether you're because
we're going to get them into
mission you're gonna learn and.
Find information learning in
classrooms
what were some of the examples
of the bill that would be
considered and our call.
You know.
Mr chair and Representative Dow
so in my personal experiences
you know I've I've run
restaurants for a long time and
things like giving free meals to
employees while they're working
on it something that you know it
may only be ten or twelve
dollars but it is something that
my employees have have just
absolutely love they don't have
to worry about you know.
You know.
We see more thirty minutes ago
run to go get passed to
you know they get a good healthy
male right there right there in
the restaurant you know I know
that
There is certain areas
you know marina owners will
allow their employees to use
things like a pontoon boats and
jet skis when they are you know
on their days off and you know
the child care one is huge
childcare is so expensive in our
in our state and so you know
that seems not only a ton of
money but it also you know helps
the family be able to use that
money somewhere else that's
that's probably much more
needed.
So those are the first few
things that come to my mind
yeah.
Mr chairman are there are some
of the do you know we were the
ones that call the the family
friendly business
edition gold star are sobering
bronze and I think that what are
some of the other things that
might qualify.
Mr chair representative Dowell
some of the other things that
would qualify when we look at a
holistic approaches you know
looking at work schedule so
first one being flexible on the
on the work schedule if you want
to do for ten hours a days other
adjusted schedules job sharing a
predictable scheduling for
certain jobs looking at other
economic support types of
subsidized training and
educational assistants
retirement or asset building
availability you had mentioned
previously to employer
subsidized for on site child
care or dependent care on
employer supported short term
financial stability all options
can be small dot small dollar
lending with repayment available
so there's so many different
things looking at wellness
programs are that they can
provide such as screenings
education health coaching so
there's such a wide array of
options that employers can
provide their employees and this
really this approach allows them
to see what their employees are
wanting and respond to that.
Thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that and I think
that will do is probably
conservative cost.
I I was a server through college
and that meal what our students
and all you know that's that's
wages for the average Mexicans
three are getting compensated
next hour and being in a
retirement community also like
to read example because people
work they work all week long to
drive down to all of you and to
put their jet ski in the water
and they're paying for part task
which is covered if you're
working during the.
To for that to us the insurance
keeping.
That we can so if you don't
think that you know freedom for
the employee to choose where
they want to work because there
really is
such that the employer has based
on what type of benefits that
they're offering.
I think that allows the employer
to.
It doesn't cost so that wasn't
right he was or that cost them
less than the twelve dollars to
give the employer or classroom
could spare the ratio of the
state required.
Sixteen the cost of child care
regulations so you know six
sentence in a room with the
teacher there's bonding rule
lawyer can roll a six for the
employee new cost then that
employer I did not see a change
in there are wind and the
employee saves literally
thousands of dollars a year
anyways thank you Mr chairman.
This bill first and foremost let
me congratulate you you all and
the presenters before this one
as well for you know taking this
issue of
you know fat family friendly
workplaces can clearly the the
the you know the other debt
different ways we can define
that from paid sick leave to a
host of other ways but it's an
important conversation happens
chairs said you know we've got
to join the the rest of the
civilized world you know it it
it is a shame that you know upon
giving birth you know some
people do not have the
flexibility to stay home and and
bond with their children you
know and that's clearly a big
problem and that's just one
example of many Mr chair and and
Sanchez I've got a few questions
you know reading the building
going through the analyses that
we have in front of us I I have
a few questions that I think
need to be clarified first and
foremost
how I didn't see anywhere in the
bill defining family friendly
workplace policies what what
does that mean.
Mr chair and representative
Martinez
Jason can you X. right further
on that please.
Yes Mr chair representative
Martinez one of the things that
we wanted to do is be flexible
within the legislation and not
nailed down and tied down on
exactly what those are causes we
know depending on situations
depending on our.
Time those maybe different
policies so instead what we did
is we're asking workforce
development.
Are made to work with the New
Mexico organization that
recognizes and supports the
business statewide to adopt
family friendly workplaces and
what we are envisioning I is for
them to work with family
friendly New Mexico which was
the result of house memorial one
back in two thousand eleven and
that's an organization that has
worked with employers that has
worked with employees to really
develop a sense of a family
friendly policies are cross the
span of P. leave health supports
work schedules and economic
support so this bill directs
workforce solutions to work with
that organization to develop the
policies that may be reimbursed.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Representative been on this and
investors but also for that for
that explanation
so I'm I'm gonna I'm gonna
deviate a little bit in to work
out
New Mexico family family family
family New Mexico I'm gonna come
back to to the right to know
because they have it is not very
often that we see in
legislation sort of a mandate
for an agency to work with.
sort of an independent
non governmental organizations
and and I know that in the past
I've made the mistake in the
memorial Steven of naming.
Organizations and and you know
our the the through the with
some of the drafters of the
lizard conserve is you know
that's not really permitted I'm
assuming.
That the way you've got this
language in the bill is
permitted so in other words it
seems like the organization that
workforce solutions we work with
would have to be that we from
the New Mexico I'm assuming that
there's no other organizations
say that fits the definition
review.
Mr chair are Mr chairman
Representative Martinez yeah the
the bill does describe that it
is just going to work on.
show work with a New Mexico
organization that recognizes and
supports businesses statewide
that a doctor in implement
family friendly workplace
policies so it does not name of.
Family from the New Mexico
directly and I personally don't
know of any other that that
exists but maybe a more seasoned
either Representative Dow or
Jason can can build me in on
that one
so you're probably not not
incorrect on that.
But it is not in the legislation
is not
reading that it specifically has
to be that organization.
Thank you representative and I'm
assuming maybe it's question
marks for mistrusting also since
you've been involved in this
work for a while
would there be like an RFP
process what what would that
look like if it if there is it
seems like it's been channel to
one organizations that mysteries
but also your your understanding
how do you read the language in
the bill.
I chair members the committee
Representative Martinez I I
think that mechanism would
really be left up to the work
force.
Developments Department I
determine the best way that sort
of comply with that it's
certainly does leave it open to
other organizations however when
we were developing the
legislation that is certainly
our family from the New Mexico
came to mind as the most
prominent one and especially to
because it did come out of the
legislative task force are and
is recognized by both employees
and employers and and I think
it's been recognized by the
legislature
several times as as sort of the
go to HSD unless.
I I I agree with you Mr is not
something I think I think we
back to the oil and concern the
making use of the expertise
that's already there I think
it's it's a good way to go I
would recommend this bill
forward I would I would
encourage the Sanchez to maybe
Amanda out just to keep it
really clean
moving forward you know I think
the assumption would be that
workforce solutions would have
would have the wisdom to connect
to an organizational and from
New Mexico you know for them to
be able to develop the rules in
the programming and whatnot and
I just would feel more
comfortable should this move
forward you know that you all
think about removing that piece
existed from a stab stories
statutory construction of
placing his doesn't seem to it
seems out of place let me move
on to a to a couple more
questions related to family
friendly workplace policies
I think if you look at the
memorial if I remember correctly
because we've seen this bill in
the past different iterations.
Are some of those policies.
Would be some sort of paid sick
leave some sort of you know
maternity paternity and what not
but I am concerned with this
potentially includes things like
meals say couldn't the company
comments the reverse match if
their policy.
As a business is to provide free
meals to the employees.
Mr chair representative Martinez
I I feel that the way that it's
written is that that would be
determined by workforce
solutions department on what
the what would be acceptable to
be asked for in reimbursement
I mean it Representative our R.
J. C. can add to that the client
Mr chairman and chairman
Martinez thank you that that was
just an example of a competitive
you know like allowing small
businesses to have a competitive
advantage of their choosing all
the family friendly business.
Existing guidance for gold
silver bronze.
That include writing printing a
joke or jet ski that is why
people will choose to go and
work in a business and they are
much more aligned with with
healthy families healthy
policies things that help grow
professional development
sustainability build capacity
for the workplace and for the
whole.
I'm not an existing example in
that role in also Jason correct
me if I'm wrong the legislation
uses that means it doesn't
mandate
Business be the one existing
on property one gets its or
their existing.
Family friendly be the only
definition.
Sure thank you Representative
that is on this percent down I
think thanks for that answer in
and I think it bags for a follow
up depending who is problem it
promulgate rules of the program
you could conceivably have a
family friendly workplace
policies are that awards grants
up fifty percent awards up to
fifty percent of the cost of
implementing those policies and
those policies could include.
Depending on the executive
depending on who's running
workforce solutions you bring
this from getting the rules they
could potentially include under
the language of this bill
reimbursement males would not be
correct.
Mr chair representative Martinez
yes absolutely
you know based on based on how
this is currently written and
who is running Wirth workforce
solutions
yes you you are correct but it
would be up to workforce
solutions to make that
determination.
God Mr chairman Mr chair I do
think Espinoza should follow up
on that as well I agree with.
Mr chairman and members the
committee representative
Martinez I'm that that is
certainly a possibility what one
of things that I do just want to
point out is you know part of
this they are going to have to
establish the policies and
promulgate rules around this
program as we know the
rulemaking process includes sort
of public comments and a hearing
process so I think if a future
workforce solutions secretary
wanted to promulgate things that
that did not make sense you're
certainly be an opportunity for
both employers and employees and
other stakeholders and
legislators themselves to be
involved in the process and make
public comment to make sure that
those reflect
things that that policy makers
to one.
Thank you Mr speaker also and
and I I appreciate that answer I
mean I think that's that's one
of the more problematic parts of
this proposal
is that we would essentially be
approving a framework and then
completely delegating our policy
making an oversight authority to
the executive through the
administrative call and which at
that point surely we can present
ourselves as a opposers orders
supporters of a rule change but
we really don't have much much
authority over their process and
so you know my concern would be
that you could have a family
friend workplace policy in place
that allows for reimbursement of
state meals which you know I
think could be viewed as a
family friendly workplace
policies I think went back to
the jet ski example.
Eight hundred different
administration could have you
know if if the Marino are I work
offers me and my family gets
these are the days off why would
that qualify as a family
friendly workplace policies and
what would keep that business
receiving reimbursement of up to
fifty percent of that cost to
the state so that that
definitely I think it's our
Sir what technical problematic
the that's that's the intention
is obviously it's not I think
you know what we want to get too
is like paid sick leave and
whatever else but that certainly
I think it's a technical problem
with with the bill and ensure it
will forward you know you can go
officer we take a look at it.
What my next question is with
regard to how we define small
business and in the bill it's
the employees are less can you
all tell me how that number.
Mr chair.
Mr chair and Representative
Martínez
G. Jason can you answer this
question I don't I don't
remember off the top of my head
how we came to that.
We Mr chair members of the
committee representative
Martinez when we look at and and
honestly in a lot of the
conversations even and relation
to previous bills the the paid
family medical leave as well as
paid sick leave and a lot of the
discussions that we have a lot
of the number and the threshold
circles around fifty employees
are lasts as those businesses
who have the most financial sort
of.
Vernon and we're obstacles to
provide these benefits
so when we look at who is exempt
from the federal FMLA and other
organizations us we trying to
parallel where we see other
statutes federal and otherwise
and and use that number.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr speaker I I appreciate that
the number seems a little high
you know the most small
businesses in at least in my
district.
Definitely don't even get close
to fifty employees cards and
more full time combined and so
it seems like you know that's
something another place where
you might want to target is a
little bit more I would suspect
you could probably get somebody
who wants to make Donald's to
create within the definition in
all fifty employees are less
and you know I'm not sure that
I I guess the argument could be
made anything on a couple of
dollars and small business owner
perhaps you are.
But it seems like you know.
That's not the.
That's not a targeted will
probably
let let me let me move on to a
question of reasonable coming
got me thinking about
The M. S. I. anti donation
clause I I know that that serve
the being of our existence in
many ways because as well
intentioned as the and the
nation cost is I think it does
hamper our B. D. to really you
know invest as a state in the
creativity and innovation our
people as they seek to start
businesses and and and roll
businesses
Mr speaker if I remember
correctly maybe a year to a goal
I think you all worked on a
similar bill and I think he was
framed as tax credits at the
time the only reason I remember
is because I think it was
incredible taxed many.
What number one was that the
case was the previous generation
of this very tax credit
which was really smart because
really that's one way to sort of
work around education classes by
you know building it's a tax
code so number one was that
previews the tax credit and
number two why did you switch
from a tax credit this award
because now I think you might
have an influence across problem
should we the bill as it's.
Mr chair and think there's a
question to me in my okay to
answer that directly.
Mr chairman and members the
committee Representative
Martinez I know you're exactly
correct to this in its first
iteration several years ago was
designed as a tax credit for
employers for small employers
who were able to offer family
friendly benefits one of the
challenges with that bill I'm in
in the discussions in the tax
committee as well as this
committee years ago what is the
definition of a family friendly
policies that was one of the
issues and in terms of
administering those taxes are
one of the other issues in the
reason that we actually changed
to this format I was at the
suggestion of speaker Brian
Egolf in that tax committee
hearing his suggestion was given
the complexity of administering
the tax credit and defining this
family friendly policies was to
really look at J. set the job
training incentive program which
has been around here in New
Mexico for decades and is really
I think lauded and supported in
the state legislature and across
the nation as a really great
program all right and so what we
did was look at that statute
look at how that was
administered and we models this
language in this program offer
that and one of the things that
are we are hoping to overcome is
that anti donation question that
was brought up
Given that gtech has worked
effectively and has had
questions regarding answer
donation for decades we believe
that setting up a similar
program in Merion it's I'm the
same way in terms of
reimbursement meeting a policy
goal of the state's.
Benefiting the employees are
that that if we don't overcome
that in the way we've created
this that other similar economic
development programs R. as well
I'm so we think.
Combined with doing it with G.
to that that we address that
issue.
Thank you Mr spin also offered
for that response you know I
think that the
and and I remember the
conversation vaguely
as you say it was a couple years
ago
that that might be that might be
away you know around education
class I I think I kind of think
that those programs you know
things a gated for example are
are sort of much broader and
bigger and and much heavier in
scope and so I I don't know that
something like that is needed to
help.
Create are incentivized family
friendly work for workplace
policies necessarily
particularly when you look at
the the price tag and I think
it's a bit late sort of apples
and oranges for me but Mr chair
and and Sanchez present but
Pettigrew and and I'm this and
send out
I I I love the idea and I think
that the way I see this is I
don't see I don't see these
proposals of this one and the
one previous to this one and the
other thirty five hundred that
are out there I don't see them
as new to the exclusive I mean I
think at the end of the day
we we certainly need to build
of the political will within our
within our institution within
the legislature to ensure that
no family goes hungry goes house
eight up simply because they.
Can I go to work due to illness
or family member's illness or or
whatever it might be I I I
really think that none of these
are mutually exclusive I think I
think all of these can work in
conjunction I think some of the
you know as we heard earlier
some of the you know bigger
ticket items you know maybe on
the companies maybe they should
be imposed by law maybe for
smaller businesses we can create
opportunities such as this one
or such as the previous bill or
both I think we needed an all
hands on deck approach up my my
concern Mr chairman and members
is that
you know.
Unless and and I think one of
our committee members I don't
remember which who who was it
but you know they talked about
the the ability of this of this
of this committee was
specifically committee under
your leadership.
my staff to really bring people
together and to come up with
solutions that really work for
for most of the constituents
that we're all representing and
and and hopefully all of them if
possible and so I would
encourage the sponsors of this
bill the sponsors of the
previous bill as well as as many
of the associations that are
present here at this meeting to
to come together and to
understand that you know it's
not one or the other I think we
can take in a no hands on deck
approach to this problem of not
being able to be sick
because we cannot miss of the
work that that's just you know
happens to life society and I
don't know of many businesses in
my district who who who are
willing to force their employees
to come to work in sick if they
can help so you know I think as
with the previous bill I think
that there's some space to to to
build a little bit more support
for this I think it's very well
intentioned I've got a lot of
respect for for Mr speaker I'll
sign and and for for the Sanchez
and for everyone who spoke in
support of this but I think it
needs a little bit more you know
more cooking a little bit more
time in the open if you will
before I can support it so thank
you Mr chair I'll stop there and
I appreciate the the time.
Thank you so much the agency
representative of federal.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Hernandez and the
other Sanchez for bringing for
the bill that is creative and
collaborative and extremely
positive all we need to look at
some of the issues facing the
workers I have a lot of small
business owners in my district
who care deeply about their
employees and are working
constantly to find ways to
provide these opportunities
these necessary benefits
protections.
Family friendly practices to
their employees and how can we
as a state help support that
endeavor is important work these
are important questions Mr chair
chair Martinez actually hit
Senator my questions.
Things that seem to be missing
from this piece that I think
would be stronger if they were
added and ended definition of
family friendly practices to
clarify John Dowd is a big one
the issue with naming a specific
organization not by name but
but.
Nation issues they've all been
raised I'm gonna give you three
more if if you'd like to think
of three things that might make
it stronger or that seem to be
missing to me and if they're in
the in the bill and I don't see
them please tell me but I'm
looking for accountability to
address that issue the chair
Martinez race with giving
workforce solutions department.
Mr chair tremendous power to set
up these guidelines that we are
not asking for anything back we
need from them some kind of
report out of where that money
went in what family practice
family friendly friendly
practices were created with nine
million of taxpayer dollars so
that that's important.
Piece of accountability and
toward that end because this is
commerce and economic
development and we talk about a
little lot you might think about
sunset if you've got a metrics
of how you're going to measure.
Reaching that goal then the
If we haven't hit those goals by
certain time then this strategy
isn't working.
It's.
And last maybe consider some
kind of language I didn't see
any that with limited toward New
Mexicans businesses.
New Mexican I don't and I don't
know if that's important to you
as a sponsor but it it seems
like something that was missing
from the.
Those are the questions I have
the last one would be.
Is there anything in the bill
that would.
Prevent.
Asking for reimbursement for a
family friendly practices that
company is already doing.
Because the goal of the bill is
to create a more family friendly
practices in their businesses so
how do you ensure that they are
growing their additional
practices is there anything of
the bell or.
or am I misreading your intent
Representative Mr chair
representative.
and Representative Figueroa just
in case you take this one.
I mean I'm taking notes hold
hold on just one second I I'm
definitely taking notes I have
written right here you did bring
up some good points
you know and you know if this
passes the committee we will
definitely address those
concerns before the next
committees.
and I know that Jason also
wanted to add something to my
comment.
Chair Representative Figueroa.
Just answer your.
For some more questions first on
your question regarding the
funds that
we this program is designed it
would require appreciation from.
The this body of the legislature
so depending on the outcomes and
and the effectiveness there
would be subject year
appropriations of
so related to the sense that
there are.
The New Mexico.
Questions the legislation
doesn't define not because I
think one of the things that
this legislation is really
focused on is our New Mexico
workers on whether or not
the business that employs New
Mexicans is New Mexico owned
this is really for the benefit
of the workers so if that if
these funds help that employer
whether the New Mexico owner not
provide those employees which
are New Mexicans these benefits
I think the wind is for the
employees on the suffers.
well and then in in terms of.
I think you're ask your
question.
Can you repeat your last
question I'm sorry
Representative.
Mr chair it would be
that would ensuring that we are
growing new family friendly
practices or any kind of
prevention for us for
reimbursement for practices that
are already in place.
Certainly thank you chairman
Representative Figueroa the way
the link which states it is to
support businesses statewide
that adopt and implement family
friendly workplaces on so it
certainly gives the flexibility
and workforce solutions
promulgation and establishing of
the rules the opportunity to
really hone in on that we're
adoption and and really develop
those policies and and the way
they see fit if it's going to
move forward for the adoption of
new policies on as well.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Jason for those
answers.
I appreciate discussion and
would love to see this bill come
back with some changes.
To make it stronger.
Mr chair and Representative
Figueroa thank you so much for
all of your input I really
appreciate.
Thank you representative
Representative Powdrell Culbert
opportunities the.
Or.
Done thank thank you
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you Mr chair
Representative Martínez kind of.
Something that I hadn't thought
about but I think one of the
most family friendly you know
and I don't people much but he
did this.
One of the most family friendly
working places that I know right
now is McDonald's.
And if you notice in your
community McDonald's you see an
eighteen million dollar
employees.
And I believe that this is why
McDonald's right now has a
program that is called under the
arches.
And their program will bring
you'll see it.
Probably.
And H. probably somewhere around
twenty five thirty now that a
working in McDonald's stores
were used to be anything but
teenagers what McDonald's is
doing.
And the local McDonalds I
learned about it here over the
past two years an employee the
comes in they'll pay them of
their pain a little bit more
than minimum minimum wage.
But you were there year they
will also provide you the
opportunity.
To go back to school in the
lecture hours around going back
to school.
They add some some incentives
and assistance for you to go
back to school if that's what
you want to do they also provide
for for young moms.
If you want to go back to school
and get a degree you can go back
to school night will help pay
for your daycare.
And that's just an example of
some of the the family friendly.
Our policies that they have
under the arches and what's
interesting about it is if these
individuals not his education as
an example if they decide they
want to go back to school.
And perhaps just to get their
GED.
Or they just want to do
something different make
Donald's does not demand that
they have to work.
In an area this McDonald's.
They can work in any profession
that they want to work and so
only bring that up because like
I said the representative
mentioned
make Donald's and I have been
involved with them over the past
couple years and watching this
program
grow and so if you notice that
your local McDonald's you see an
aging process going on in this
not just the teenagers that are
now working in the McDonald's
stores so Representative I
signed onto your bill but I
would also recommend that maybe
you have a discussion with with
our local McDonald's owner
Julian Garza and look at their
their program because it is a
great great family friendly
program in you don't see a big
turnover and employees so I just
thought I'd mention that Mr
chairman thank you.
Mr chair on that point real real
quickly maybe Mr chair.
On that point yeah and I
appreciate that Representative
political but I agree with you I
I've done quite a bit of work
with Mr Kirk said the past and
some of the folks at the
national office and and make
dolls is really at stake a gold
standard and in fast food
corporate fast food businesses
that are really doing the right
thing and that really I think
speaks to my point right.
Does McDonald's should
McDonald's be able to qualify
for a reimbursement of up to
fifty percent based on the way
this bill is written maybe maybe
they shouldn't I mean that's a
policy question for us but I I
would agree on the point that
that they are doing the right
thing and they are the gold
standard.
And Mr chair just a response to
that they're not asking for
anything in return what they're
asking for in return is that
these individuals complete.
The programs and so I only bring
him up as an example because I
really don't believe his biggest
the.
the dial corporation that they
would come back and ask for
reimbursement but.
What it says to me is like he
wasn't a big business when he
started out it's programs like
this that has helped.
Our local McDonald person Julian
grow into a business he's still
a small businessman because of
his involvement by rectally into
our schools and and to our
community and I think we could
loose but something in place.
Okay that can assist small
businesses that haven't been in
business.
A long time why do you like that
Donald is our local McDonalds
hat that this would give them an
example of base to start with
what is a family friendly
business and reimbursement helps
get them to that point for a
short period of time then so be
it thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you before we go up back
to committee up of Martinez
Powdrell Culbert coalition I
think would be unbeatable.
Know about Google impossible.
You.
And then to just another on that
point I know the the general is
going to make on that point but
I'll do one on point on that
point a session.
Because we because of the
virtual session Representative
Powdrell Culbert I think we need
to Mr padre rules barbecues next
year.
That a one.
Thank you.
Thank you on this of Mr Espinoza
Representative Pettigrew the
Because I feel like I I think
Collison to go but I feel the
frustration in the business
community with some of the
decisions that.
Honestly the decisions that are
being made but more so some of
the bills that are dropped here
and there.
And but but she framed it in
terms of of punishment
punishment it's it's
You know if there's about public
policy is not a punishment
punishment is when somebody you
know makes you know does
something negative to you so
that you stop doing something.
there may be negative
consequences to public policy
but there's also a need for
strong public policy I mean
eight hour work week was a
mandate you know there was a
the.
You know not to exaggerate the
the the point but the
Emancipation Proclamation was a
mandate on businesses you know
the the minimum wage is a
mandated so it's just a question
of how do we regulate the
economy so that it's home and so
it is common a hundred miles per
hour.
To be minimum wage and other
things like a timing device on a
vehicle it it it makes at home
better so this is a great
concept is fantastic of.
An innovative because we need to
do everything in particular this
committee really this committee
because some of my friends
Understand
and you know they haven't been
in the private sector they don't
they don't understand it's not
just a cost of doing business is
not
you know it's not investment in
it that didn't pan out it's it's
we need to set up home in this
committee that businesses that
we have businesses back and I
want to print thank you Mr
president on on this for
bringing this board and just to
make note that this this isn't a
new concept this is an off the
wall idea this is this came from
the fiftieth legislature I think
when the fifty.
The fourth or fifty fifth now
while this came from the fifty
Legislature house memorial one
the task force wanna give a
shout out.
The someone in the in the
audience is Giovanna Rossi she
was she's the director of family
from the New Mexico and was the
co chair of the task force it
was referenced in this bill also
want to thank you for joining us
this afternoon but the key
But the so we definitely need to
to encourage and and how I get
the innovation from the private
sector because the private
sector that can solve problems
the private sector.
You know solved many civil
rights problems of for
government came in you know
because there was a market
driven marketer of a salute
realities that led to some of
those
To some of those up to to to
small business owners opening up
lunch counters and things of
that nature before the before
the government mandated that
type of stuff but anyway so
encourage.
You know we the word encourage
on on line twenty two.
madam chair Representative and
on this the
To encourage small business
lawyers and then you encouraging
with the financial awards.
Program.
And even if we can do financial
awards this year nothing would
stop the economic development
department or workforce
solutions to giving.
No prizes certificates I think
the our economy is changing in
terms of corporate partners you
know three four years ago is
Presbyterian and PNM with a big.
The big you know folks on the
block now we have Netflix we
have Facebook we have Amazon and
we'll see how these companies
that integrate into the
community and whether they're
more of community minded
partners but I think with the
where with all we could raise a
few months few bugs to the
private sector and give similar
awards not that the award itself
would be would be significant
but that that touting of the
small businesses I think would
be would be awesome I think that
but the government however can't
just write a check to its
friends.
fortunately or unfortunately
as the as the Delhi brought up
in public comment up I don't
think the legislature should
handcuff itself around notions
of anti donation.
that the courts to that but but
the fact that there's no cap on
a particular award the fact that
there's no of Rick you know
requirements of the award it's
just a policy up to the
secretary to to dole out these
checks it is somewhat
problematic but I want to thank
you for being four thank you for
the conversation and
And with that are over we'll go
back to the sponsor in the
committee representative on
this.
Thank you chairman I actually
have a question for
Representative Figueroa if we
roll this bill to next week we
work with me and the other
Sanchez to to include your
suggested amendments.
Mr chair so the programs for me
to reply.
Okay.
Sure it would be in contact with
me I I happy to.
Mr chair representative for I I
appreciate that I will be in
contact with you and and before
I.
Take a motion maybe a gentle
what ever so gentle motion up
Representative Pettigrew would
you mind just saying hi we we we
wish we had had broken read by
this point because of the COVID
we we haven't yet would you mind
saying hi and where you're from
and.
But what about yourself if
you're still with us
Representative Pettigrew.
Good afternoon chair thank you
for the opportunity to speak and
and really I didn't expect to be
brought in this way I was here
as moral support for my
compatriots that that sign the
bill was we would cut sponsored
bill together with I am from Lee
County
businessman then from down there
engineer and just happy to be
part of the
the the processor and do
appreciate some of the comments
that came today there's things
that actually I have I hadn't
thought of and the I do
appreciate
Representative Hernandez as I
did to to to reach across the
aisle and and maybe work on some
changes to the legislation that
that fits the needs of of
businesses as as this was
written and also garners more
support and very similar to the
committee I was in yesterday
where I I did the same thing
more was not.
Comfortable with the bill.
But offered an opportunity to to
work outside that bill to maybe
come up with a solution for so
I'm just inclusive continue to
see
people reaching out across the
aisle so thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak.
Welcome house commerce
representative Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you Mr chairman I move ado
passed motion.
We have a motion for I do passed
by Representative Fajardo
second.
We have a second.
Although Mr chair Mr chair
substitute motion to table.
We have a substitute motion to
Gentili Gentilly temporarily
table that devotion takes
precedent and and is not need of
a second so.
But it but it has a second on
the list of.
Representative miss I'll let us
call the real.
Representative.
Representative Dow.
Table.
Representative will.
Representative was.
Yes I like to explain my the.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes the table.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Did.
Representative Culver no table.
Representative Serrato.
The table.
Well.
He noted table.
Representative.
Madam vice chair of the get off.
Yes to table.
Chair this.
Yes and so are Representative
the.
The the bill has been tabled
just for the record up resembles
not all plugged back in and it
says Figueroa vice chair but
it's Representative Baldonado
Representative Gallegos was
clear about.
Thank you Mr chair and I
appreciate the Representative is
bringing this legislation before
as I think it's a great concept
and I think all of us wanted to
vote for it I think that it's
still
needs to to be fully bait I
think that there's some
technical issues I think that
there's some
some language cleanup that needs
to happen but I would encourage
you to keep working on that and
no it's a concept that
definitely I am open to so thank
you for bringing this forward
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative of guy
goes thanks everybody for a long
afternoon create the attention
Tomorrow will be of money rather
will be relatively light the the
heavy bill is up.
The schedule come out this
afternoon and then and then
we'll hear thirty eight
hopefully Wednesday or Friday.
But we are adjourned have a
great weekend.
