Since we've had you in here
already once a bit more.
No, no.
So while we're getting ready,
let's go ahead and take off.
Representative Armstrong
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Palehon.
Representative Serato, Madam
Vice Chair.
And Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
you have a quorum. Very good.
All righty, uh, representative
to
present your bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Committee. Uh, again, what you
have in front of you is House
Memorial 52, uh, the with the
changes that were requested from
Uh, is it scary?
With the changes that were uh
requested. With that, I can
stand for questions.
All righty, and I see that we do
have the amendment and so we are
getting that passed out if
you'll give us just a minute to
get it to everybody and then um
you can explain the amendment.
Do we have a motion to
Move the amendment for
discussion. There you go.
Has everybody got a couple like.
Already represented if, if you
could explain that.
The amendment.
Move the committee discussion.
You want me to read the number
on the bottom, make sure, let's
start there, 231486.3.
No
Y'all have that copy and I'll
make it work.
I think that's
It.
Mhm.
OK, madam Chair, let's try
0.231958.1.
It's so real.
Oh my God, apology.
So apparently we've got a
prankster amongst us, we've got
little cockroaches all over the
table, which are plastic, Madam
Chair, I thought you were just
that excited about this album
that was I was getting excited.
Yes, ma'am, so darn it.
You can see what kind of day
it's gonna be for me,
right,
all right, everybody OK now?
All righty.
Representative to explain the
yourself. Uh, yes, madam Chair,
and requested last time there
was a request to add another
department, so this work group,
it'll say it's on page 2, line
24, be a further resolved.
That this work group uh be
composed of representatives from
the economic development
department.
The tourism department, the
taxation and revenue Department,
the New Mexico Office of
Housing, which is that that's
what was requested to be added.
Uh, the New Mexico mortgage
Finance Authority.
And the New Mexico short term
rental association, the New
Mexico Association of Realtors
and the assessors affiliate of
New Mexico Association of
Accountant of counties.
Ensuring a collaborative and
data-driven approach to
short-term rental policy
evaluation.
And that was one of the biggest
changes, uh, Madam Chairman.
All righty. And you know, I know
that we had already done public
uh comments, so we are going to
skip that. We will go straight
to the committee.
Uh, do we have anybody we've got
representative Serrano.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um,
and I just wanna confirm this is
uh 231-958.1. Is that correct?
231958.1. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
And I just wanted to thank the
sponsor for making a uh changes.
I really appreciate the effort
that went into it, and I know,
um, I, I, I know that this is
still a, you know, a
conversation piece, but I, I do
like that the intent is to have
that conversation, so I just
want to say thank you and no
questions, uh, Madam Chair. Yes,
ma'am. Thank you.
We'll go to Representative
Pajon.
Um, uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
and Representative Henry, yeah,
I think they're just as um
representederrado said
Chairwoman Serato, you know, uh,
I do see there was a lot of work
done on this and um and thank
you for doing that.
Madam, yes ma'am.
the will of the committee.
chair
I need
I
do not pass on House Memorial 52
E.
have on House Commerce and
Economic development. We
substitutes for House of
Memorial, 52.
Thank you, Patrick, to take the
role.
Representative Armstrong?
Representative David Cruz, yes.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lee,
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy? Yes,
Representative Parajun.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, final tally for the Du
Pas motion. 9 votes, yes, 0
votes no. You have a due pass.
Thank you for making those
changes. It was a pleasure doing
business with you today. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you.
All righty. Uh, let's go to HB
97.
Good evening, Madam Chair. Good
evening committee members. Um,
before we begin, I just want to
make sure that everybody has the
sub for this bill.
And that is, OK.
Um, when you have it, I will
read you the 0.23 number. Give
us just a minute.
All right, I think everybody's
got a, a copy. If you could give
us the
202 number.
Yes, I'm sure that is
0.231905.1.
OK. Do we have a motion to move
the stuff for discussion.
So
All right.
All right. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair. So 2 of you had the
benefit, I will say, of hearing
this bill before, um, it has
been changed somewhat. So,
To begin, in New Mexico, drivers
are required by law to carry the
minimum amount of liability and
bodily injury on their vehicles.
This covers damages to another
party when there is an accident
and you are at fault, so you hit
someone, you hurt them, your
liability insurance covers them.
This bill deals with uninsured
underinsured motorist coverage,
which is an optional coverage,
and I'm just gonna call it UM
from here on out for the sake of
expediency.
So UM provides insurance
coverage to you when you are in
an accident with an uninsured or
underinsured driver, so someone
hits you, you're injured, they
are at fault, but they are
uninsured or underinsured, your
UM coverage protects you.
So people usually get the
concept of um uninsured
motorists fairly simply, but
underinsured is a little bit
cloudier. So this bill does two
things. One, it requires that
anyone who purchases
underinsured motorist coverage
actually gets what they are
paying for. So what does that
mean? Well,
If you are hit by a driver who
does have insurance, but your
medical bills lost wages, etc.
are exceed the limit of their
policy, you have additional
coverage for the remaining
damages. Oh, sorry, Madam Chair
Patrick, did we get those
handouts passed out for this
bill as well.
Um
No.
OK.
So the handouts um will be
coming and they will help you,
hopefully.
So you're underinsured covers
the remaining amount of damages
when someone does not have
enough insurance that will cover
the total damages of the
accident. This does not mean
that you get double recovery.
Double recovery is when you
receive, is when you recover 2
times for the same bills and
damages underinsured coverage
just means that if you have
$50,000 in medical bills, and
the driver who hit you only had
$25,000 in liability insurance
that your policy will cover the
balance. If you have only
$10,000 of damages or anything
less than that 25K, you don't
need to make a claim against
your underinsured coverage.
So right now
If you carry 25.
$1000 of bodily injury and
$50,000 per accident of
underinsured coverage.
If that's what you have on your
policy. You are actually, you
actually recover 0.
So
No uninsured coverage will
actually come to you at all, and
here's why. Right now, when you
buy underinsured coverage, it is
offset by the amount of the
other drivers liability policy.
In other words, my underinsured
coverage is canceled out by the
amount of the other driver's
liability insurance if the other
driver has insurance, it will
always at least be 2550 because
that is the amount that was
required by the state.
So, the second thing that this
bill does.
Is it prevents hidden charges by
requiring that coverage be sold
by vehicle. Many insurance
companies have been found liable
in court for selling UM coverage
per policy, they sell it for
palsy, but they've been then
found to be charging per
vehicle. So in other words,
insurers have been charging more
for unstacked UM coverage than
they should be, and this gets a
little complicated, which is why
I have my expert witness, Miss
Harris here, to help answer any
questions about how that works.
So Madam Chair, um, members of
committee, if you will permit
me, I will now have my expert
witness, introduce herself.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
Representative, members of the
committee, um, I guess we're
definitely in the evening now.
My name is Andrea Harris. I am a
lawyer that I practice out of
Albuquerque. I do primarily
plaintiffs, insurance law, uh,
whether it be just general, um,
insurance claims all the way
through insurance bad faith, so
really any level of insurance
litigation, that's, that's my
specialty. So that's, I'm here
to answer or try to answer any
questions that you guys might
have.
On the coverage or how it
applies and practicalities
tonight.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, with that we stand for
questions, so do we have anybody
here in favor of this bill or
what, you know, before we do
that, do you want to talk about
your handout? Um, sure, I
actually don't have a copy of
the handout and I can pull it up
really quick. Let me just make
sure I mix explaining the
correct thing to know.
He's getting one for you. Thank
you so much. OK, so the handout,
um, this was actually provided
by the OSI and it really just
helps illustrate the scenarios
in which underinsured coverage
will come into play, how you are
currently not covered by your
underinsured motorist coverage
even though you are paying for
it. It gives several scenarios,
two scenarios in which you're
underinsured coverage will not
help you. Um, the first scenario
being
Um, if a red car is at fault in
an accident with $50,000 in
damages to the blue car.
The red car carries $25,000 in
bodily injury. The blue car has
$25,000 in uninsured motorists,
they cancel each other out. So
the driver of the injured party
only gets $25,000 even though
there's $50,000 in damages
total, so $25,000 goes
completely unrecovered, and this
bill will fix that.
Um, and then there's just
another scenario, um, same
situation, just different
numbers, where if the um, the
damages were $100,000 and both
cars are carrying the minimums
of liability and um the now the
injured car on page 2, that
scenario 2 has $50,000 in
uninsured motorists, but again,
If there's a $100,000 in
damages.
The 50, sorry, the $25,000 of
the liability.
Is offset by the um by the
injured parties uninsured
motorists, so you still end up
with $50,000 completely
unrecovered and how if this bill
goes into effect, that $50,000
would at least be reduced to
$25,000 unrecovered because you
are allowed to make a UI or an
underinsured claim. That's
insurance that you're paying
for, that's insurance that you
should be getting, um, and then
scenario three is just what
happens when um
You, I have a, a 2 uninsured
vehicles. It doesn't really, it
doesn't really apply. It's just
everybody's everybody's out of
luck in that scenario. So we're
really just dealing with
scenarios 1 and 2, Madam Chair.
Very good. OK, if that's Cindy
your presentation, I'll go ahead
and go to public comments. If we
could, um,
Go to the audience. Is there
anybody here in favor of this
bill?
So everybody on Zoom in favor of
the film.
No. All righty. Anybody in
opposition?
You'd come up to the center, the
attendant will hold the mic. You
have up to one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is Ann
Conway, and I represent State
Farm Insurance, and we stand in
opposition to this bill, as well
as the committee's sub,
primarily because it just is a,
it, it increases premium rates
in New Mexico. We have about 20%
of the auto insurance market in
the state, and we calculate that
just on the UM coverage, this
would be an increase of
approximately 20% and taking
away the exist
ing law with respect to offsets
could be up to 68 63%, I'm
sorry, for many of our
policyholders. The offset
provision only provides that the
insurance company gets credit
for the amount of insurance the
at-fault driver have.
Which is as it should be, the
injured party receives the total
amount of benefits that they
have paid for. The offset comes
into play if um the other
driver, madam chair, if I could
give you an example, if you have
$25,000 you're underinsured. I
have 100,000. OK, thank you.
Madam Chairman of the committee,
Jason Espinoza speaking on
behalf of the National
Association of Mutual Insurance
Companies, uh, regarding the
legislation, uh, we do stand in
opposition to the bill and are
very concerned that the
legislation will increase the
cost of auto insurance in the
states where 25% of motorists
are already uninsured, the 2nd
highest uninsured motorist
population in the country, uh,
as you heard from uh Miss
Conway, one of our members, uh,
their analysis predicts that
there's going to be at least a
premium hike of 63% or higher if
we
prohibit the offsets, this will
only exacerbate the uninsured
motorist's population condition
in New Mexico and likely
increase the number of uninsured
drivers. Offsets prevent double
dipping from two sources of
insurance coverage for the same
damages, ensuring that coverage
is available, but not redundant.
Uh, again, in that unnecessarily
increases the cost of insurance,
uh, we asked the committee to
vote no on this and explore ways
to reduce the cost of insurance,
not increase it. Thank you.
Thank you.
And you?
Larry Sontag.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Larry Sontag speaking on behalf
of the New Mexico Business
Coalition. We oppose oppose HB
97 because as the sponsor
mentioned, there is a law that
requires
All motorists to have insurance.
Um,
that is where the focus should
be from this legislative body.
Let me refer back to my personal
professional experience. I was a
nuclear weapons security
specialist in the Air Force. 35
years ago, I lived in Germany,
and this is easy to fix
administratively when insurance
is required, all insurance
companies are required to notify
The office of Motor Vehicle
departments if insurance is not
being maintained right now in
New Mexico, all you have to do
is check a block saying, yes, I
have insurance whenever you
register a vehicle. That's a
joke. As an Albuquerque Police
Department officer for 20 years.
I stopped numerous individuals
who did not have insurance.
And 2 or 3 months later, when we
went to court, the judge would
ask them, Do you have insurance
now? And they would provide
Some form of insurance, but it
was a one month.
Michael Morris
Hi. Good evening, uh, chair, and
members of the committee. My
name is Mike Morris. It, it
happens that I'm, I'm mayor of
Clovis and so I serve the
community in that capacity, but
I speak to you as a licensed
insurance agent serving New
Mexicans all over the state for
approximately 19 years with all
lines of insurance, including
auto insurance, and I
respectfully ask that you would
um oppose this bill or vote no
on this bill, uh, really for,
for the reasons already stated,
one, we require a liability
insurance in the state of
New Mexico. So to mandate, uh,
the, the folks that do purchase
auto insurance to carry without
choice, uh, this, the uninsured
and underinsured motorist
coverage seems, seems unfair and
I, and I think probably would
not accomplish the goal. And
then I would ask you if I were
on the committee, I would be
asking the question about
stacking. Does the bill address
stacking. Many folks carry
limits higher than the state
minimums which were used in the
examples by the presenter.
For example, if you're a
homeowner and have assets, you
might have 2,500,500 for your
liability limit. And if you have
multiple cars, this bill would
force you to carry your
uninsured and underinsured
motorists that equals limit uh
uh or or limits equal to those
liability limits, uh, driving up
the cost of your insurance, uh,
and really.
Thank you.
That is all I'm sure. Alright,
thank you. Um, let's go to the
committee. We've got Leader
Armstrong first.
Oh, thank you, I'm Adam Chair
and thank you. I'm reliving.
Uh, transportation
cause I heard this bill in
transportation and um I just
want to confirm that.
It is the law in New Mexico to
care a carry liability
insurance. Is that correct,
Madam Cheerleader Armstrong,
yes, that is correct. Thank you,
uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, and we do have
25% in New Mexicans are not
insured. Is that correct? 24.9%,
Madam Chair and leader gets. I
have to be a little pedantic
about it. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, and
this bill would mandate that
everyone carry
UM
Insurance. Is that correct?
Madam Cheerleader Armstrong. No,
um, so this is the sub where uh
after hearing the comments and
the questions, some of which
were
Extremely insightful. I made the
decision to take out the mandate
for UM coverage. I still believe
it is very important to the
state of New Mexico, however,
um, I do want some more
information from other states
about what has happened to
insurance rates that have after
they have mandated UN and since
I don't have that information, I
decided it would be prudent at
this time to remove the mandate.
So the only thing that this bill
does now is get rid of the
offsets for.
insurance company. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So this was
committee subbed.
In transportation, taking that
out, it was committee subbed
after the original version of
the bill passed through
transportation.
So
So we're
OK.
OK, I didn't know that. OK, so,
so you took out the mandate.
And
Thank you, madam chair and
representative.
So I'm gonna reserve my
questions. I didn't realize we
had a new committee sub because
so it's a committee sub for a
committee sub.
That is correct, Madam Chair,
Leader Armstrong. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair.
But you know, we can come back
to you. Uh, Chara de la Cruz.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. So Representative.
You're going to create many,
many more customers, is that
correct?
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative de la Cruz, no,
um, since we have removed the
mandate and we're not requiring
that people purchase uninsured
motorists like the original
version of the sub that you or
the original version of the bill
rather that you heard in
transportation with this new
version does, Madam Chair
Representative.
Is it just as that any drivers
that currently have uninsured
motorist or that purchased
uninsured underinsured motorists
in the future are actually
receiving the benefit of that
underinsured coverage, as we
discussed before, the offsets
make it such that if you have
2550 of under underinsured
motorist, and you have a
collision with a driver who has
the minimum liability insurance
and the damages of that
accident.
Exceed their um liability or
exceed your UM coverage.
Those two policies cancel each
other out. So we're talking
about two drivers that each
carry $25,000 of bodily injury
liability, and $25,000 of
underinsured motorists, if that
accident is $30,000 in damages
or $35,000 in damages, the
driver, the injured party, does
not ever see that extra $10,000.
So what this bill will do is
make it so once that liability
coverage plays into
The accident that remaining
$10,000 will then be covered by
the injured parties underinsured
motorist, which is not the case
right now in law, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So what
does it mean to the average
person, this bill makes it
through the house, makes it
through the Senate, goes to the
governor, Governor signs it.
What does it mean to a person
right now that would be carrying
minimal liability.
Right now, what this means to
the driver who carries minimal
liability like the bare minimum.
It does not change anything for
them at all. This just makes it
so that drivers who carry
underinsured, uninsured
motorists are actually receiving
the benefit of the insurance
that they pay for. And right
now, Madam Chair Representative,
they are not.
So Madam Chair,
You're saying that
This is not going to increase
the premiums?
Madam Chair Representative, no,
this just makes it such that
drivers who are paying for their
policy receive the full benefit
of that policy. The reason I
asked about a chair is because I
heard some of the insurance
folks are lobbyists for the
insurances, said it's going to
increase premiums. Where might
they be getting that at?
Madam Chair of Representative de
la Cruz, they might have been
working off of information from
the previous version of the bill
where uninsured or uninsured
motorist coverage is mandated,
that is not the case here.
Is it possible, Madam Chair,
representative that they would
be in opposition because they
would be forced to pay for what
people are think they're getting
and are actually not getting.
Madam Chair, Representative de
la Cruz.
If I have to speculate, bingo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, because
in the previous committee that I
heard this bill, and I know it's
a new bill now, I'm trying to
catch up.
Uh, the it struck me as odd at
the time because at that time it
it appeared that
The result would be that
everyone would have to get
additional insurance and it
would increase costs, but at the
same time would take care of
that offset, that gap where you
don't get coverage and you think
you might be getting coverage,
so they were against it then.
And they're still against it
now and are still saying that
there's going to be additional
cost to the average motorist
with underinsured. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair representative, yes,
so the, the initial.
Concerned with the bill or their
initial.
Resistance to the bill was that
by mandating uninsured motorist
coverage for everyone, which I
actually thought was odd, like
if everybody's buying more
insurance than insurance
companies should like that.
However, given the fact that New
Mexico had such a or has rather
such a high number of uninsured
motorists in the state. That
puts them on the hook that now
if everybody's covered for
uninsured and uninsured motorist
accidents.
That's, I believe the number
that we found was that the
taxpayers in New Mexico were
paying something like $20
million in Medicaid expenses for
uninsured motorist accidents. So
that then falls on the insurance
companies and that is why they
did not like the original
version of the bill. However,
after stripping the mandate,
Madam Chair Representative, the
insurance companies are still
responsible for minding the gap
between of offsets between like
liability insurance minimums and
we.
Um, people pay in underinsured
coverage, which is that same
2550, if that makes sense, Madam
Chair Representative.
Thank you, it does. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, we're going to chair Serato,
but before we do that, I just,
there is a little confusion up
here, and so I just wanna to get
through that. So it looks like
there was your original bill
started off in transportation.
Transportation then did a sub.
And then from this, that's uh,
then we are now.
Working off of a new sub. So it
is a little confusing. So I just
wanted to make sure that
everybody understood kind of
this, that there are two
different subs.
Correct,
the transportation sub and then
the sub that we should be
working on is the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for the
House Transportation substitute.
OK, so just making sure
everybody is on the same page.
So and with that we'll go to
Chairwoman Serato.
Thank you, ma'am. I'm sure thank
you representative for the bill.
Um, do other states also have
this enacted? Would we be the
first that would be doing this?
That's an excellent question.
Since Madam Chair
Representative, since other
states have mandated uninsured
motorist coverage, I believe
that that also automatically
fixes the offset, but however,
since I have Miss Harris here, I
will let her answer that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, to answer your
question, there are several
states that actually do
Separate out the mandate from UM
coverage, which we were not
dealing with today and actually
do allow uh underinsured
motorists who essentially count
as they call it an excess
insurance or floating insurance.
So there's essentially two
categories of the insurance. One
is a gap insurance coverage,
that's what New Mexico has that
says um essentially provides
this gap if there's not enough
to cover you up to the limits
that you have. But the excess
and floating theory, um, or
floating insurance is, is kind
of a term of art provide.
is the extra layer of coverage.
And so what the consumers can do
is they still have the choice.
They still have the choice to
purchase the insurance they're
provided with the premiums,
whatever they choose to pay is
what they pay, but the
difference with this bill and
this this change in the laws
that they're actually allowed to
now get the product that they're
paying for. And so, there, I can
tell you there are at least 5
other states that don't have the
exact number for you, uh, but I
can tell you, Washington,
Colorado, Arizona, Florida, and
Texas.
allow essentially this excess
level of insurance so that if
you purchase $25,000 in
underinsured motorist coverage,
and this would apply to at any
level. So it's, it's any
consumer that purchases
insurance, it's not just minimum
limits. So 25,000, 50,000 100,
250, whatever it is, the number
that you purchase and the
premium that you paid for
whatever level of insurance you
purchased, you will always get.
And so, and, and I see you will
always get if, if your damages
call for it. So that's
That's the big difference here
is that if you're in a crash and
your damage is actually exceed
what the at fault party has, but
that again is 25, 50, whatever,
you can then essentially put
your underinsured motorist
coverage that you pay for to
protect yourself on top of that
insurance to cover whatever
remains for the damages that,
that you still have that haven't
been compensated. So we are
seeing it and it is, it is
something that has been affected
in other states. And Madam Chair
and representative and expert,
again, I know you've explained
it, and it just kind of helps me
to.
at it again. So right now I have
underinsured uh coverage. I,
I've opted into that, I believe,
right? That's not already
covered.
My presumption is that that cost
may go up because I, I, but it's
not, but it's not required to
have that additional coverage.
Is that is correct, wait sorry,
currently starts due to sports.
So currently it is not required
to have underinsured coverage as
part of your insurance in New
Mexico. Is that correct?
Yes.
I'm seeing representative, yes,
it does not required. It is
optional. Thank you, madam.
Thank you representative, and
should this policy to this bill
passed when I've opted into
that, then I would receive the
benefit of that. Is that, is
that how you're framing this,
uh, or seeing this, Madam Chairs
representative.
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
OK. Thank you. That's what I
need now. Thank you.
Leader Armstrong, there's nobody
else on the list, do you have
questions at this point?
Um, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, uh, just sort of
a statement that when we
mandate,
certain things, and the cost
will go up.
And I don't have my paper here
that someone gave me earlier,
but, but the cost will is more
than likely gonna go up for for
insurance and uh I appreciate
that you took the mandate out, I
have to say that for sure
because I was, it was a, a big
problem.
For me, but um,
I, I don't really have any other
questions, but I, I can, I can
guarantee you that insurance
will go up if we're mandating
anything on insurance companies.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We'll go to Representative
Mason.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
representatives. Uh,
I'm confused also on this thing,
but I too, anytime there's a
mandate.
It just I get, I don't like it.
You know, we mandated that
everybody has insurance.
And what does that go?
25% with no insurance, you know,
so mandates don't work. I mean,
on the bottom and they for us
that have things to lose, they,
we have to comply.
Because we have something to
lose. Those that don't have
anything to lose just comply if
they want to.
If not, is that, do you think
that's kind of the scenario that
works in New Mexico,
Representative.
Madam Chair, um,
Representative Mason, I'm sorry,
I didn't quite understand
exactly what you're asking me
just now,
uh, Madam Chair represented,
this will not
Like uninsured motorists buy
insurance, but
Madam Chair representative, no,
it is already state law that you
carry insurance and apart from
I mean, I can't make something
that is already illegal.
More illegal, Madam Chair
representative, and I just want
to be clear, I've heard the
comments, um, but I wanna be
very clear with this bill. This
bill does not mandate New Mexico
drivers to do anything. It
mandates that insurance
companies give you the coverage
that you're already paying for.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Madam Chair.
Under this bill, is there any
scenario where
The the person with insured in
insurance would actually collect
more than the damages.
Madam Chair Representative, no.
You're underinsured motors
coverage should only mind the
gap between the amount of
damages of the accident less the
other driver's liability
insurance. So if it's still
exceeds, as you'll see, um,
actually outlined in scenario 2.
of the handout provided where
the, the total cost of the
accident was $100,000 in
damages.
The car, the injured party that
carried the underinsured
motorist coverage had $50,000 in
underinsured.
The other driver had $25,000 in
liability insurance. So that's
25 plus 50 is 75 when the total
cost of the accident was
$100,000. That is, um, oh sorry.
Uh, sorry, it was 25, 25, so 25
plus 25 is 50. The total cost of
the accident is $100,000 so
that's still $50,000 that will
go unrecovered.
But that's 50,000 as opposed to
75,000 and recover. So you're
never going to
Overcollect on an accident.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Madam Chair, but
uh
Currently we have
We all have I I sure voters,
right?
Madam Chair Representative know
that isn't, it's an optional
coverage, underinsured,
uninsured is completely
optional.
uh represent Madam Chair, if I
have uninsured motors coverage.
If, uh
It's basically.
Covers the site.
scenario pretty much as long as
I keep my limit.
I uninsured motors saves
150,000.
So it will, it will cover the,
the difference also, won't it?
Madam Chair and representative,
I can actually answer that
question for you. The, uh, short
answer is no. It actually won't,
as the law exists now. So what
would happen if in, in your
scenario, if you have 150,000,
if
And I, I don't wanna put this
out in the universe, but if you
or somebody in your family is in
an accident where you require
that 150,000 in coverage and the
other driver has less than that
or let's say, you know, has
exactly $150,000 in coverage,
you have 150,000 or 250,000 in
medical bills, then all you're
going to collect is what the
other driver happens to have
paid on his insurance. The, the
amount that you've selected on
your, on your own insurance, the
amount that you've paid in
premiums for that, uh,
additional coverage and
especially the, the non-minimum
limits, that's going to either
be entirely offset by the
at-fault driver or you're only
gonna get whatever that gap is,
so it's never gonna stuck on
top. So you would likely not be
made whole because you would not
get the benefit of the insurance
that you actually pay for
currently. And so it, the only
time that you will ever get that
full $150,000 that you pay for
is if the driver that hits you
has absolutely no insurance.
That's why the uh that's why our
court recently said that this,
this covers this underinsured
motorist coverage as it sits in
the law today is illusory. If
you will never get the benefit
of whatever you pay for. So, if
you are paying for $150,000 in
underinsured motorist coverage,
you will never recover 150,000,
because you will always get an
offset for whatever the at fault
party has, and your amount minus
whatever the at fault party.
So you can never actually get
150,000 in the benefits that you
currently pay for. This change
fixes that, so that every
consumer still has the choice.
They can choose whether they
want to purchase the insurance
or not. It's not mandated that
they must, they can still reject
the coverage, but what it does
require is if they, if they
choose to buy it, then what they
see on their insurance page and
what they largely I can tell you
most every person that walks.
Into my office that I've had a
conversation with on insurance,
expects when they see those
numbers on their insurance card,
their declarations page. They
expect that's what they have. In
reality, the way it applies in
the law, that's not currently
what they have. And so this
actually fixes that, so that
everybody that has a
declarations page with those
numbers on it actually gets
those numbers if, God forbid
they need them, and they
actually get the insurance that
they're paying for.
Thank you. I'm still not sure
that I
agree with all of that
statements, you know, I've had
an accident years ago, you know,
my insurance ended up paying my
medical.
they paid all of it, you know,
it uh
But yeah, I, I still have a
problem.
You know, we should fix.
Problem instead of just making
everybody else pay.
For the problem, but I'll listen
to the rest of the advice.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair and thank you.
Representative and presenter.
Uh, I had no idea that the
Under and
Um, and insured driver insurance
didn't pay in full, even if I
had done damages at that size,
so that's a
That's an interesting thing, but
I'm looking at the fur and it
says
Um, the superintendent of
insurance estimates the
additional cost of UM UIM
coverage, the result in a 16%
rate increase for a full
coverage policyholder.
And a 43% rate increase for
policyholders with only state
minimum required coverage.
So, I'm trying to figure out
That's the same amount of full
coverage.
I'm going to pay 16% more.
It's only benefits me.
probably a silly question, but
it only benefits me.
If I'm having, have a
Auto action.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthew, so first of all, I have
to say that unfortunately that
FIR that you're looking at
referred to the original version
of the bill, which had the UN
mandate in it. Yep, sorry, uh,
so, so those numbers don't apply
here. OK, so let me ask the
question, ma'am chair and
representative.
Who comes out ahead. I mean, if
I don't have an accident, all
I'm doing is paying more for my
More cars for car insurance,
Madam representative, you are
paying more if you decide to add
UM coverage to your policy.
Oh well, I'm sure I tell
everybody had that kind of
coverage. Madam Chair
Representative, no, you
uninsured, underinsured motorist
is completely optional.
So Madam Chair, uh, you know,
cause when they give you the
little sheet, they're, they've
got everything down there.
And make it sound like you're
supposed to buy it all.
OK.
Well,
Um, I'm still madam chair and
representative, I'm not real
clear.
How
I, I'm gonna pay more money.
And
Again, it, and I realized that
auto insurance doesn't count
unless you have an accident, but
I'm gonna pay more money.
And
Um
And if
What I instead want to do is
really try to avoid accidents.
Wouldn't that be a better and.
You know, a better
Use of my money, man. I'm sorry,
just, you know, buy a car that's
more
Bulletproof.
Me representative, I, I
apologize. I'm not entirely
clear what you mean when you say
you're going to pay more money.
Well, because
Um, because I'm gonna add this
insurance since you tell me I
didn't have to have.
Madam Chair Representative, are
you looking at the correct
version of the bill. So we are
working off the committee sub
which ends in 1905.1. Sorry,
sorry, sorry, so I just want to
again be super clear that there
is no mandate in this bill that
anybody purchased insurance. It
just says that people who have
uninsured underinsured motorists
are getting the full value of
what they buy. So,
uh
Uh representative then I, I
understand this, what I really
need to compare is cancering
canceling the coverage that I
probably have because
I thought I had to have it the
uninsured and the
Go
underinsured.
Or
Or not, or what.
How do I benefit from this?
Ma Cha representative, if you
currently have uninsured
underinsured coverage on your
policy if you are currently
paying for it.
What this bill will do is to
make sure that if you get in an
accident and that the cost of
that accident exceeds.
Your uninsured motorist coverage
that you are actually made whole
in the difference of damages.
It removes the offset, and but
Madam Chair, representative,
doesn't that mean I have to be
hit by somebody who
an uninsured
Motors, Madam Chair
representative, it means you
would have to be hit by someone
who is an underinsured motorist.
And Madam Chair representative,
so anytime there is an accident
that exceeds $25,000 which
happens very frequently, um,
once we get into bodily injury,
time away from work, hospital
stays, etc. etc. This makes sure
that the uninsured underinsured
motorist coverage carrier.
Um, is actually getting the full
benefit of the policy that they
are already paying for.
It does not mandate that they
buy that policy. OK.
Well, that, that a chair uh
representative was worth this
conversation.
Already. Let's go, uh, what's
the will of the committee, Madam
Chair, I move a do not pounce on
uh transportation, uh, public
works and capital improvements
can stop super house build 97,
but it do pass on House Commerce
and Economic Development, we
substitute for
Because.
For 97.
But it do pass and house
commerce economic development
can be substitute for house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements could be
substitute for hospital 97.
Thank you.
Patrick to take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
No.
Representative De la Cruz, yes.
Representative Hernandez? No.
Representative Valente? No.
Representative Mason? No.
Representative Matthews.
Um, no.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
And Madam Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, the, uh, final tally for
the Du Past motion is 5 votes
yes, 6 votes no.
Um
you, you're building a pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mhm.
Just.
Do you want it
Do you want to take it.
It.
All righty, let's go to SB 170.
Yes.
Oh
Um, and Madam Chair, before we
get started, we have an
amendment if um can be stuck
we'd like to start passing it.
They are being passed out now,
you'll just give us just a
minute. Not a problem. Just
getting ahead of the curve.
And you're back.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, any chance?
Yes.
We believe we have some action
on the floor. I could do 126
real fast and then I will leave.
170 to be done by my co-sponsor.
Sure, yes. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
Would you like me to start? Um,
well, give us a minute because
we just passed out 170.
So I sincerely appreciate
everyone's patience. Thank you.
Alright, so then let's go to 126
and then I, I assume that, uh,
Representative Fernandez will
then present 170. Yes, ma'am.
OK.
All right, and do we have a
amendment or anything on that
one?
Oh, it's.
Yes.
for
We have an amendment on 126. No,
that's for 170, yeah. OK, so
There is
OK.
Yes.
What do you know? There is an
amendment for 126. It looks like
a great amendment too
and I'm pretty sure I wrote it
because it turns out.
All right.
Uh, would you like me to
introduce the bill very quickly,
please. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair, vice chair and ranking
member, members of the committee
Senator Michael Padilla, and I
do apologize for the confusion
this evening. We're all running
in circles, and I appreciate
your flexibility, but
essentially, you know, I've been
attempting to reform our dollars
and cents that go to broadband
development, delivery, and
proliferation created the Office
of Broadband Access and
expansion in 20017, we had to
build directly related to this
piece of legislation this year
that essentially reformed the
rural universal Service Fund.
They took the dollars from that
we could raise from $18 million
a year to $30 million a year,
uh, through the fees on our
telephone bills, but also in
that year, I said, well, gosh,
why don't we just take and make
sure that 80% of all of those
funds in the rural universal
Service fund, go to new
technologies, i.e., broadband,
so fast forward to 2020, 2025
where we are now, uh since we
want to take that fund because
of its success from $30 million
to $40 million. We've been
taking baby steps, if you will,
if you could call, uh, you know,
a $10 million.
step, baby step, um, and
essentially to take 100% of that
fund and move it toward, um,
modern um uh innovation and, and
on projects related to broadband
uh as an example. These funds
almost 98% of them are used only
in rural New Mexico for our
rural uh telecommunications
carriers. We all know that
broadband is extremely important
outside of the metro areas
because it brings that economic
development, job creation, uh,
telehealth, telemedicine and
distance learning in a lot of
different.
ways. So that's essentially the
legislation this year. We do
have an amendment that just made
sure that uh eligible
telecommunications carriers are
included and, and insert in lieu
thereof broadband providers. So
take that out and then anybody
now that's offering broadband or
were these funds would be
directly related to me and
that's what the amendment does.
And Senator, if you would go
ahead and give us the 202 number
so we can make sure we, we've
had a little confusion with
amendments tonight. 231-981.2.
OK. And so, um, do we have a
motion on the amendment?
To move that.
OK.
All righty.
So it is um open for discussion.
I think you, you kind of
essentially wanted to make sure
that if you're out there in the
hinterlands or you're in the
middle of the city, whatever,
these are eligible. I'm sorry,
um, for striking eligible
telecommunications carriers and
again modernizing the
legislation as well, which is
what this amendment does and
says broadband providers, so
anybody that's doing that,
you're able to apply to this
fund and there'll be dollars
there to help you uh expand or
offer a broadband services, so
just to make sure it's clear.
That's all this is. So is that
the end of your presentation?
Yes ma'am.
Uh, do we have anybody here uh
in favor of this film.
Uh, anybody on Zoom?
Um,
meeting host is the name.
You have one minute.
Hello, madam chair.
Yes.
We can hear you.
She's still there?
Hello?
Uh, JD Bollington.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. This
is JD with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
uh, supporting Senate Bill 126.
We appreciate Senator Padilla,
and his leadership.
On taking a lead role in
expanding broadband services in
New Mexico.
Quality affordable broadband is
very important to the economic
health and development in our
state as we know. We've got, of
course, digital transactions,
but let's not also forget the
opportunities this to create
creates for distance learning,
class instruction, and also
telehealth. So broadband clearly
has benefits to our economy, to
education, and our general
quality of life and the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
urges you to support this bill.
Thank you.
That is all that I'm sure.
Anybody in opposition?
All righty, if you all come to
the center here and
The attendant will hold the mic
you have up to one minute. Uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jay Santiannis,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Exchange carrier Group.
Um, with me is our executive
director, uh, Matea Santiannis,
um.
We were, we were in full support
of this bill, but the amendment
changed, changes that, uh, the
ATC ETC designation is very
important to the New Mexico
exchange carrier Group, and uh
with the with the change to
remove the ETC status is uh uh
changes our position on the
bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I want to thank
the sponsor for all his work on
this bill, um, but, uh, the
same, uh, changing, um, the ETC
um moves me to oppose the bill.
Thank you. Thank you. Do we have
anybody on Zoom?
Um,
Senator, do you want to respond
to the change in the amendment.
And how it impacts um Yeah. So,
Madam Chair, members, um, I, I
think that there's just sort of
a con or
It's a matter of terminology in
my opinion, all of these
carriers that that provide
services in uh through the New
Mexico exchange carrier Group,
and we're almost always in 100%
alignment. I've carried so much
of their legislation over the
years. I worked very well with
them. Uh, to me, brought the
dollars need to be designated
for broadband providers, and
they all do that, so I'm really
surprised to hear this
opposition today.
All righty. So, um,
Let's go to the uh committee.
Peter Armstrong. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Senator. Um, so if it's just
kind of a matter of language,
why change it?
Well, chair, I, you know, I
actually could go either way on
it, to be honest with you, I
wasn't 100% sure we were going
to introduce this, but it was
served to me when we got here
and I, I, I, I could go either
way. I don't really, we don't
have to have this amendment, but
it, it is um
It just ensures that we continue
focusing on broadband because it
uses the word broadcast, uh,
when we initially made the
change to the fund in 2017. What
we did is, uh, we, we made it
for you know, um new
technologies is what it said at
that time. So 6 and 1 half
dozen. What is a new technology
could be all of the above
solutions with Broadband.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and,
and Senator, um,
I, I see that the PRC um
That there's a clear process
with the PRC to become an ETC
carrier. And so that, that's a
concern, um, and Madam Chair and
Madam Leader, uh, now, now that
I look at this, you know, this
actually, we had another
amendment we were going to
introduce, that's one, that one,
this is 2. And so this actually
isn't my amendment. My amendment
was 1 and it had a couple of
other technical things, but it
wasn't anything, you know, so
whoever introduced this, I mean,
if you want to pull it back, I'd
be happy to support that too
because I had 231.
981.1 and this is 231-981.2. And
so Senator, uh, are you done?
OK, so Senator, um,
Representative Hernandez may
have a solution for you here.
So, um,
Mr. Senator, so or yes it's late
and I'm tired, um, Senator, so.
I don't love number one on your
amendment, but I really, really
love number 3, so that we make
sure that there is at least a
good quality broadband being put
into these communities, which is
something that you and I have
talked about in the past. Would
you be willing to modify your
amendment to get rid of one and
keep 2 and 3.
So let me just turn around real
quick. Absolutely.
Yeah, OK, so here, here's what
I'd ask, uh, Madam Chair and
members, um, I would be happy to
just if we could, with your
permission, I've seen this
happening in this session quite
a bit. If we can strike, you
know, what we haven't adopted
it. You haven't adopted it yet,
but if I'd be, if you're able
to, we just pull this off to the
side over here.
You like non purposes there. And
if you allow me to move forward
this evening, I will work with
the group and make sure that
we're in good shape before we
have, uh, you know, some, if
you're comfortable with that.
We're just
Does this have another stop
before it, it, uh, I have to
look it up and I think it goes
to the floor after this.
That's appropriations, yeah, so
we've got another stop where we
can do some more surgery.
Because it does have a dollar
component to it.
OK,
which we usually don't allow, we
usually want it to be fixed
before it leaves here, um, but I
think, I think that's a clean,
it's, it's a, it's able to be a
clean.
Clean up before you get to
appropriations. OK, so if we can
just, we'll pull the amendment.
All right? Anybody else?
Anything else, uh, have a
comments on the committee.
OK, what's the desire of the
committee?
Not sure I do pass on Senate
Bill 126.
Patrick to take the role.
We have a second.
Representative Armstrong.
Maybe.
Yeah.
Representative De la Cruz,
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy,
Representative Serrado,
Madam Vice Chair and Madam
Chair. Yes, Madam Chair, final
tally, 10 votes, yes, 0 votes no
for the two pass motion.
Senator, I am, I uh trust that
you will get it taken care of in
the next committee. You and I
walked into this building the
very same day, 13 years ago, and
I, we know each other to be very
honorable that way. I'm not sure
if I could introduce 170 and
then I got to rip my rear end
back to the floor, so thank you
and I'll ask.
A co-sponsor to come on up here.
We got a bunch of coast bars,
secretaries running around, all
sorts of things going on
tonight. So Madam Chair, members
of vice and vice chair and
ranking member and members of
the committee. Again, I'm
Senator Michael Padilla here in
Senate Bill 170.
Um, essentially what you have
here, we do have, I believe
there is an amendment for this
one too because we had to do
some things and that is uh
231-983.2, Madam Chair, and I
believe the committee members,
this has been handed to them,
but essentially what you have
before you today is a companion
to a bill that you passed out of
here just the other day, which
is the site readiness bill. This
essentially helps our economic
development group have an even
stronger pool belt in their
pocket related to economic
development.
or utility preparation is
required, uh, doesn't do any non
or um um anti-donation issues or
anything like that. It simply
takes the utilities to the
property where it needs to be,
then the community benefits
beyond that and up to that point
and all that kind of stuff. We
do have the public regulation
commission here, uh, the, the
chief of staff, um, who will be
here to answer some of those
questions because they did come
up in the last committee
meeting. I want to make sure
that we have somebody on staff
who on team with us that can do
that. I have my co-sponsor,
Representative Fernandez,
secretary designate Rod Black
and the PRC here, but
essentially, um, this will be a
key part of our economic
development comprehensive site
readiness initiative. It's
designed to make New Mexico more
competitive for recruitment of
new industry and then existing
industry to help them grow, it
creates an expedited public
regulation commission process.
If you could say 6 to 9 months
is expedited, but actually
today, the real, the real McCoy,
the real story is this takes for
approval in some cases, and we
love our friends over at the
PRC, but in some cases, it, it's
taken up to 30 months, 36 months
in some cases, they worked
really hard.
hard to bring that down, but we
think we want to be able to give
certainty and and and have
companies that are looking at
New Mexico feel very good about
their decision to come here. So
essentially, um, what the
legislation does is it, it just,
that's it's what it does. It
takes the utilities all the way
down to where they need to be,
and then you go on the other
side of the property and the and
the uh the property owner after
the site, um, readiness database
says, gosh, you know, these are
the 9 sites that would be great
for your business if you want to
come to New Mexico. Uh, by the
way, we also need to stretch
utilities here.
We're going to help you get that
done in a very expedited
fashion. That's essentially what
the legislation does. Uh,
secretary will say a few words.
I'm sure the, the co-sponsor
will, and um I'm gonna
Believe you. Thank you all very
much. You've been so kind to me.
Serious, the whole session it's
been wonderful. Thank you. Thank
you, sir. Thank you. And here's
your.
You can take,
You can tell.
OK, thank you.
All righty.
Go ahead, sir.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, it's a pleasure to be
here with you today. Uh, this is
an essential part of uh our
economic development strategy
for New Mexico. Uh, one of the
things when I first moved back
home in 2018 and took on the
role of the chamber, we heard, I
heard, I heard back then that we
don't have enough sites that are
ready for development.
And, and how do we solve for
that? So, that's why we brought
SB 169 and now we have 170 here
with you. This is that, what
this allows us to do though is
up move upfront that utility
deployment.
I think part of the challenge
is, well, current law allows for
uh CCN process to go through,
um,
A convenience of certificate of
convenience and necessity for
new service, uh, to go through
currently at 9 months up to 15
months with an extension.
What, what that typically
happens after a contract's been
signed with a customer.
That, so, so that process then
or you, you go through the 15
months.
And then the utility gets
approval.
And then they need to go buy the
equipment, and that's part of
what's happened, especially post
pandemic, where we have supply
chains chain problems, that is
that then time to actually build
out the system can take 3 to 5
years. So that's where that
longer term frame happens. What
this allows us to do is to move
forward faster prior to that
individual customer being
identified and it creates a
mechanism and uh the PRC chief
of staff can talk to them more
of the technical issues.
But kind of how that works, if
there's questions, but allows us
to really move up the time
frame, so when a customer comes
to us, or business comes to us
and wants to expand or locating
the Mexico. I said, I need to be
up and running in a year.
Today it's very difficult, or
even 15 months or 16 months.
It's very difficult, if not
impossible for us to execute on
that.
Um, this would allow us to get
much closer to be able to
deliver that power, uh, on time.
The other thing that's really
important about this bill is
because it, it also allows for
financing mechanism for our
rural co-ops through the PPR of
the public project revolving
fund so that they could go and
borrow funds to help support
that utility-free deployment
with co-ops. It is specifically
limited to co ops and it does,
does not include the IOUs being
eligible for the PPRF, but we
wanted to make sure that uh our,
our co-ops who aren't as
capitalized as investors.
utilities still were able to
take advantage of this
opportunity. So with that, I'll
also.
in my comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Choy Aquari. I'm the chief of
staff of the public regulation
commission. um, this is a bill
that we have been working on
with the secretary and the
sponsor, uh, I guess from the
inception of it, and so I'm
happy to be here to answer any
technical questions that you all
might have.
you. All righty. Um, are you
done with your presentation?
We will stand for question.
Alright, um, do we have anybody
here in favor of the bill?
Ready, if I can get you to line
up, the attendant will hold the
mic. You have up to one minute.
Enrico, you should go last.
Just kidding, I'm just kidding.
OK.
Hi, Rico Gonzalez with El Paso
Electric, uh El Paso Electric
stands very much in favor of
this bill, giving us an
opportunity to be a little bit
more competitive with being able
to bring these kinds of projects
to our.
El Paso Electric serves both
Texas and New Mexico.
And within those areas, we have
a town called Anthony. Anthony
lives in New Mexico and then
across the street he lives in
Texas.
And so every single opportunity
that we have in New Mexico is
also an opportunity for Texas,
which makes us very competitive
region in in New Mexico and Port
New Mexico. This bill will
provide us those opportunities
to be able to make
New Mexico, much more
competitive as we look at these
different um programs like data
centers like advanced
manufacturing, uh, come to New
Mexico, be able to employ New
Mexicans.
And um grow our tax base. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico IDEA, the statewide
academic development
Professional Association, uh,
and as I stated on, on Senate
Bill 1692. I mean, this is
really our economic development
priorities for the year, site
readiness, and we look at this
as a key companion to site
readiness. We can do everything
else in terms of
pre-development, but if we don't
have deployment of utility
infrastructure, the site's not
ready, the site's not complete,
and that really does impact our
timeline. So anything that we
can
you to shorten our timeline for
utility development and and
deployment infrastructure, it's
gonna enhance our
competitiveness, uh, and create
more jobs in New Mexico. Thank
you.
Uh, good evening, Madam Cherry
Gallegos, members of the
committee. Carlos Lucero with
the Public Service Company in
New Mexico.
You know, and, and we've heard,
you know, the timelines, you
know, to build projects are
taking too long. In our case, uh
with the utilities, it's could
be under up to 4 to 5 years
under the current process. With
Senate Bill 170, we'll do is
we'll help prebuild
infrastructure and expedite the
rate-making process to attract
and retain commercial and
industrial businesses.
And that's gonna be capable of
enhancing our local and state
economy.
And the more of these larger
economic development projects,
and more utilities are able to
offset it increasing costs and
keep rates lower over time.
Also, Senate Bill 17 to offer a
relief fund loan program to
support smaller utility
investments, investments and in
rural New Mexico. So for all
these reasons,
We support Senate Bill 170.
Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair Vince
Martinez, uh, interim CEO of New
Mexico Rural Electric
Cooperative Association.
For all the reasons that were
stated, we stand in support of.
Thank you. Thank you. Do we have
anybody on Zoom?
Enrique Neel.
Yes, good evening, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you so much for having me.
Um, give me just a second here.
I'm balancing a couple of
committees.
So, uh, Senate Bill 169 is all
about, uh, hold on, I'm sorry.
Senate Bill 170, 169 is its
partner. Um, so Senate Bill 170
is a critical bill that we need,
uh, that will work with another
piece that's making its way
through the committee process as
well to give New Mexico a leg up
when it comes to economic
development and attracting
businesses here to New Mexico.
Uh, we urge you to support
Senate Bill 170 and ask for a
due pass. Thank you.
Michael D'Antonio.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mike
D'Antonio with Xcel Energy. We
serve about 130,000 customers in
eastern New Mexico, electric
service, uh, we think the
sponsor and uh Secretary Black
for bringing this legislation,
uh, we feel like it gives us a
more competitive advantage to
attract industry uh to New
Mexico and we strong support.
Thank you.
Uh, meeting host.
Hi, my name is Maryelle Nanai
and I'm with New Energy Economy
and I, um, and our 5000 members
and I oppose this bill very
strongly
support.
Give us one moment.
Next, is there anybody in the
room in opposition to this bill?
OK, back to the zoom.
Meeting host.
Thank you. I'm sorry that
meeting host pops up. That's
because new energy economy has
Zoom calls, but what I wanted to
say is new, my name is Marion
Lenai. I'm with New Energy
Economy, and I strongly stand.
op pose d to this bill, and
here's why. Fast track
permitting stifles community
input. That's number one. Number
2, it allows the utility to
build generation before
obtaining regulatory permission,
which means that they don't have
to prove it's cost effective.
They don't have to prove that
it's carbon-free, etc. This
could result in new utility
generation for 150 million or
250 million.
Of new generation, including if
this quote unquote economic
development uh you uh business
never materializes. Look at the
FIR for 2.5 pages, it warns of
unintended consequences from
utility building generation
without prior PRC review. The
last thing I want to tell you is
there's an important
Facebook example. Facebook came
here.
OK
That is all.
So I walked out of the room for
just a minute. I, I'm assuming
that we did all the opposition,
OK, that's what I thought I was
hearing. All righty. um, if we
can go to the amendments.
Um, I'm sure we have an
amendment we would like.
Uh
for discussion. OK, you read the
202 number, please? Yeah,
231-983.2. OK. Um,
We want to move them for
discussion.
Ready.
Already telescoymis
in um speaking with our
wonderful committee, uh.
Analyst here. It's very like,
uh, these were some things that
were brought to our attention,
um, number one,
replaces a possibly the worst um
10 year sunset I have ever seen
written in legislation, um, to
give an actual date.
Um, and then the rest of them
are clarifications, um, so we
have
Department, uh, sorry, page,
page 11, line 11 after
department and start using
industry standard guidelines for
site selection, uh, page 11,
line 12 after commission strike
the remainder of the line and
insert.
In lieu their period, uh,
113 after all insert certified
and approved, uh, again on 13
after Project strike the
remainder of the line and on.
Line 14 strikes section, um, and
it keeps going on like this for
just for clarification of what
was already there.
Um, yeah, so that is what the
amendment does. It's for further
clarification and some cleanup.
Thank you. Do we have any
questions on the amendment? What
do you want to do with the
amendment?
contribute to adopt the
amendment.
Like
Right.
adopted amendment.
All righty. But we're back on
the bill.
Any questions from the
committee?
No questions?
Oh, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Was there a companion house bill
to this?
No, OK,
Madam Leader, no, this was the
only one, going through there
was, this is the companion bill
to Senate Bill 169.
Um, but there was no house
mirror.
OK. Thank you, ma'am Chair.
All righty. Um, the only
clarification and I, and I know
that, and I appreciate um the
sponsor, uh, working with our
team, um, I just wanna reiterate
one more time that um,
That utilities will not be able
to set their own rates, that
they'll be some monitoring in
that. Could you just discuss
that just a little bit for me.
Madam Chair, that's correct. Uh,
as far as agency operation goes
and how the utility gets
Nothing changes at the PRC,
essentially this shortens the
time frame in which we have to
review it, but it doesn't change
the process or the approvals or
frankly, even the standards
necessary for the PRC to
approve.
Amend or disallow the
application from the utility.
Thank you. And once again, I, I
wanna, you know, say that I very
much appreciate that you sat
down and hammered it out with
this and uh that was made clear,
so uh with that, what's the will
of the committee?
Lu pass
Like
All right, Patrick, to take the
role.
Representative Armstrong? Yes.
Representative de la Cruz, yes,
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy,
Representative Parajun.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair,
yes, Madam Chairelli for the
Dupa as amended motion. 10 votes
yes, 0 votes no. Yeah, but do
you pass.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think uh now we are at the
long awaited house memorial 59.
Rico, do you, would you like to
sit at the table and help him
with this
because you know, we, we will be
having a celebration afterwards.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I started my
day with Lucky Charms and
hopefully we'll end up with
something maybe a little
stronger,
um
Uh, it's my pleasure today to be
in front of you, um, originally
what started out as House Bill
564, um, through the wisdom and
help of the chair and, and Mary
Lee became memorial Memorial 59.
This, uh, bill directs, um, the
legislative council uh to
request that the appropriate
interim legislative committee,
uh, addressing economic
development issues to stay the
benefits of a formal economic
relationship with the Republic
of Ireland.
Including establishing in the
Mexico-Ireland Trade Commission
to advance bilateral trade and
investment between Ireland and
New Mexico and to make
recommendations for legislative
initiatives for next session.
The uh business between Ireland
and the United States has been
expanding rapidly, um, exports
from US to Ireland, um, are
growing at a rate of about 4% a
year imports from Ireland are
about 6% a year. Um, it's
roughly $100 billion economy.
Um, and I think there's some
very, uh, logical, um, um ties
between the two countries.
Ireland, 1 out of 6 babies, uh,
that feed on formula in the
world are.
feeding on Irish formula because
of their dairy production, and
they have some of the most
advanced technologies of how to
do more with milk than just what
we think about in terms, in
terms of making other products
and powdered products and things
that could be stored and
shipped, uh, and converted
easily.
Uh, the other area that
intrigues me won't be a surprise
uh to this committee is the area
of energy. Um, many parts of
rural Ireland still actually
burn peat, which um is not the
most efficient, uh, energy
source in the world. Um, what
the rest of their energy
actually is very, very expensive
and imported, uh, mainly from,
um, the, uh, from the British,
uh, from England and um and
other forms of energy are
actually generated with Soviet.
Uh, natural gas. Um, the thing
that I've been talking to many
in the Irish government about
is, is how uh it would be better
if they burned US natural gas,
and I would very much like them
to burn New Mexico natural gas.
Uh, the benefit to uh not only
our producers but also our
beneficiaries would be huge
because of the price, the
different price differential
between gas that we, is
plentiful and that we pay for
here and this that uh is more
expensive because it's so much
more rare.
Now probably
Um, in, in terms of agriculture,
the best example I can give,
most recent example is Glanbia,
which is invested $140 million
into the uh Southwest cheese
facility in Clovis and uh that
uh that company, uh, through
their ownership controls about
10% of the cheddar cheese
production and they're looking
to grow that, uh, here in New
Mexico. So that'd be a big boost
for uh for the agricultural
areas. The other, the other area
that is rapidly developing and
um, um, is technology, AI in
particular, uh, I would note
that, uh, Intel, um, and, uh,
and Apple, other companies that
are establishing presence here
in New Mexico are doing so very
rapidly in Ireland.
Um, and the thai, there there's
at least been discussions that
there's also an educational tie
there because many of the um
Uh, young Irishman, uh, and, and
women need, um, the types of
things that can be taught,
they're being taught very well
at our universities in Mexico
State, for example, a leader in
agricultural technology, UNM, a
leader in, in pharmaceutical and
medical and bioscience research,
New Mexico Tech, uh, my alma
mater, which knows a thing or
two about energy. Um, we also
have the strong cultural ties,
and I think that everybody in
this room, whether you're Irish
or not, feels a little Irish on
this particular.
day. So, um, it's something
that, that has been celebrated.
We have a cultural history that
goes back more than 200 years,
um, during the gold and silver
rushes of uh
The 1800s, both here in New
Mexico and Colorado, a lot of
Irish immigrants came over.
Also, they were, they were
facing um some pretty bad
famines at that time. So, um, a
lot of people don't know that
Saint Vincent's Hospital and,
and Chris Saint Elizabeth's were
both founded by Irish nurses.
And two of our most famous Billy
the Kid and Georgie O'Keefe are
also from Ireland. My family
came in the 1790s. I realized
that I'm I'm the last one
standing between uh you all and
freedom, so I will wrap this up,
um.
I believe that the Mexico and
Ireland have an opportunity to
formally network and collaborate
through this trade commission,
assuming that that's what the
recommendation is, and I look
forward to working with this
committee as a uh as a, as more
information is gathered in
specific recommendations are put
together and I stand for
questions and once again when I
express my appreciation to the
committee, the chairman, and the
staff, uh, for helping me get
this right. Thank you. Do we
have any um opposition?
Um, on Zoom.
OK, do we have anybody here in
favor of this film.
We do have so many favorites
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Sky
Demore, according to 23andMe,
I'm Irish. I said my baby's
twins formula when they were
little. I love cheddar cheese
and I use AI to write this
speech. Thank you, thank you.
Oh, I love this committee. All
righty, um, we'll go oh.
Anybody, nobody is here, OK, um,
we'll go to the committee. Do we
have any questions from the
committee?
I would pass.
Before we did it, um, would you
please have him the items, not
the better, not better.
Oh.
Irish delicacy. Thank you very
much. So, um,
it is and um so.
And when, once we do the vote,
I, yeah, then you can open that.
But it has color.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Dela Cruz, yes,
Fernandez. Representative
Valente, Representative Mason
Representative Matthew,
Representative Murphy,
represented Parajon.
Representative Serrado,
Representative, uh, Madam Vice
Chair.
And Madam Cur Madam Chair, final
tally for the DuP pass motion.
10 votes yes, 0 votes no.
How did you pass
you started the day with like a
Charms and
um, and I will, uh, invite the
committee to celebrate at in my
office, uh, your victory.
Yes, thank you, and we are
adjourned. We will be at the, I
think we do have bills. I'm not
sure that anything on the site
today, so just be listening.
