HB 268.
Uh, Chairman De la Cruz, do you
want to start your presentation?
You, Madam Chair, or let me
introduce my expert witness to
my left here. This is David
Fernandez. He's vice president
of public policy at Austria.
And, uh, Madam Chair, I'm going
to read a statement rather than
try to wing it. I'm usually bad
at that.
So by me.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee today bring HB 268, a
bill aimed at establishing a
vape directory in New Mexico.
This bill is is straightforward.
It's about reducing youth access
to illicit vape products, Madam
Chair, if I might have your
assistance in I'd like these
products that are in front of me
to be seen by all the members.
Would it be possible for me to
put them in a bag and have them
disseminated so you all can see
them.
Sure, if we can get the
Thank you, Madam Chair, if I
might proceed.
Zoom.
The products here in front of
you were purchased in the last
48 hours.
In my city of Albuquerque and in
Santa Fe.
Just a few blocks from this
building.
I ask you to use your common
sense.
Who exactly is being targeted by
these products.
These are vaping devices
disguised as toy figures and
gaming devices, clearly marketed
to our children.
The sale of these products in
New Mexico, it's wrong. It's
just that simple.
Across country, more than a
dozen states, including
California, Florida, and Utah
have recently enacted stronger
regulations for the sale of
e-vapor products. Many have
created directories requiring
manufacturers to register and
confirm their products comply
with federal laws.
In Louisiana, for example,
illicit products virtually
disappeared from traditional
channels in the weeks following
the lunch of its directory
primarily through
self-enforcement. Both the
Louisiana and Alabama
directories feature hundreds of
compliant va products benefiting
responsible businesses while
also protecting consumers and
improving youth access,
prevention.
Efforts, HB 268 simply requires
that manufacturers who wish to
sell their products in our state
confirm their participation in
the regulatory process. This
includes strong enforcement
mechanisms, a sound fee
structure and clear
documentation requirements
regarding the fees this body has
the authority to decide what the
fees are appropriate and support
the.
Man
Uh, we're gonna stand for
questions in a minute, but
I, I've got to tell you that
these products that you're
looking at.
The federal government has
regulated products that credible
business people.
Have on their shelves.
None of the products that you
have before you are regulated
products.
But they're for sale, and you
can go buy them yourself.
We stand for questions, madam.
Thank you, um, do we have
anybody here, um.
In favor of this bill.
OK, if we can form a line and we
can get the attendant to come
up.
Don't be shy. Come on up.
Oh, OK, thank you.
Madam Chair, my name is Leland
Gould, and I'm here representing
the New Mexico petroleum
marketers.
Our association has hundreds of
small business owners in New
Mexico, um, almost in every city
and every state, in every county
and House Bill 268 is supported
by the majority of our members,
our distributors and our
convenience stores throughout
the state.
Who want to ensure that e-vapor
products sold in New Mexico are
regulated and are legal.
First, this will help ensure
that retailers know what
products are operating within
the regulatory framework and can
be legally sold.
Second, it will help remove
illicit products from the
market.
It will also help retailers
mitigate risks of federal
enforcement and fines, and for
this reason, our hundreds of
members support this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Committee, my name
is Ron Brown. I own a small
business in Rio Rancho, New
Mexico.
And I'm here to ask for your
support for House Bill 268.
At latitudes we take age
verification extremely.
Um
Seriously, and, and I would
challenge any of you to please
come into my store anytime you'd
like and just see how we handle
our age verification.
HB 268 would really help us out
as a retailer.
Going to the federal website,
we, it, it is confusing and but
coming
If there was a state website
with a directory, so I knew when
we were approached on a regular
basis, whether we can we carry
this, should we carry this, or
won't we carry this. Now I can
tell you my store will never
ever.
Carry any of those directed at
underage kids, but we still need
a directory to know what is
legal. We want to stay on the
right side of the law and make
sure that we're handling things.
So I thank you for allowing me
to speak and just ask for your
support.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, thank you for letting
me speak today. My name is Scott
Williams. I'm here, uh, on
behalf of Corremark to urge you
to support House Bill 268 and
nicotine vapor product directory
bill in New Mexico. Formark
employs 200/280 New Mexicans,
and we supply over 870 stores in
the state of New Mexico.
Currently, many vapor products
in the, in the Mexico market or
in violation of FDA rules and
federal law is very challenging,
if not impossible, for
responsible wholesalers,
retailers and consumers to
discern which products.
are compliant to be sold and
which are not. The adoption of a
vapor directory in New Mexico
will allow responsible
distributors and uh retailers to
know which products are
compliant and which are not. In
addition to protecting consumers
of Vapor directory would
facilitate an equal playing
field for all distributors in
the state and protect New Mexico
businesses from federal
enforcement or unknowingly
selling or distributed
distributing non-compliant
products. Right now, we have no
clarity what may be enforced
against us at any point.
OK.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Dan
Kaufman. I'm here today on
behalf of Gem State Distributors
to ask you to support New Mexico
Bill 268.
states a family owned
wholesaler. We supply grocery,
candy, and tobacco products.
To over 400 stores in the state
of New Mexico, and we have a
warehouse in Albuquerque.
We believe a vapor product
directory is necessary because
it will help wholesalers and
retailers across the state be
compliantly sold in our state.
We take our responsibilities as
a wholesaler very seriously.
Licensed wholesalers like us
have an insulated system.
In addition to collecting taxes,
we are proud of the ways we help
ensure tobacco products are
responsibly distributed and
sold.
We need your help establishing a
list of compliant vapor products
so that we can ensure we are
successful in our mission to
only selling compliant legal
products.
Without such a list it's next to
impossible for me to know what
products are legal and what
products are. Good afternoon,
Madam Chair. My name is Luke
Otero, registered lobbyist for
uh Reynolds Tobacco.
Thank you, uh, Representative la
Cruz for introducing this bill.
Having a registry.
Is
The best thing for the state of
New Mexico because of all the
reasons you've just heard, but
coming from a major tobacco
company.
We have been regulated.
And continue to be, and we don't
mind it as long as the playing
field is equal.
But when you get products in
from China and who knows where
else.
And they're on the shelves.
That's not equal playing field,
madam Chair, members of the
committee, so please, I hope you
can support us. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of
Commerce. We stand in support of
this legislation. We think it's
important to create parity in
terms of how
you registering these types of
products and subjecting the same
regulatory criteria as
cigarettes is really important.
You want to prevent these from
being in the wrong hands. Kids
should not be, um, marketing,
they shouldn't market to them,
but at the very least we should
be checking those regulatory
requirements and ensuring that
we are doing everything we can.
can't prevent them from falling
in the wrong hands. Thank you.
Do we have anybody on Zoom in
favor of.
technical difficulty on the
zoom, just if we could just.
So do we have anybody on Zoom in
favor of this bill?
Ali
Hi, um, can you hear me?
Yes.
Fantastic. I'd like to speak for
a minute, if I may begin.
Yes, you have one minute.
Man share members of the
community. My name is Ali
Hassan. My own coursesinmo in
Albuquerque. I'm here to be in
support of House Bill 268. I'm
doing my best to be true to the
values of the vapor category. I
work hard to ensure that
products, including vapor
products are only sold to those
21. I know from the 2024
national youth tobacco survey
that youth are much less likely
to be using FDA compliant vapor
products. Keeping people
products out of the
hands of the youth matters
deeply to me, but there is no
clear way for me to know what
products are compliant with FDA
and illegal to be sold, and we
are. I'm hoping that I trust the
right people and make the right
decisions on what to carry.
Responsible retailers like me
needed an easy way to know
what's legal and write yourself.
Please support 26. It's good for
our state. Thanks.
Thank you. Alrighty, do we have
anybody in opposition?
All right, if we can form a
line.
We have one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Representative Joanne Ferrari,
and I have chaired and been part
of the tobacco, um, settlement
revenue Committee, um, since I
was elected in 2017 and our
committee has listened to, um,
Um, a lot of um different uh
testimony and reasons for this
not to be adopted. Um, the
registries that have been in
other states have been very
costly and much more than what
they had expected. It also is a
diversion of funding that should
be used for prevention and um
other uses. So, with that, I
just urge you not to, uh, adopt
this.
Thank you.
Hello, Madam Chairman in this
the committee, uh, my name is
Abdullah Shaif and I represent a
coalition of smoke shops that
are on borderline cities like
Hobbs, New Mex Hobbs, uh, Las
Cruces, and those areas, we're
worried that we're completely
for vapes, not like in Texas,
how they're no longer, they made
it so that there can be any
faces on it, no cartoons, stuff
like that, that's a great idea,
but with this bill and what the
others fail to tell you is
there's also a part where it
increases the cost of the bill,
and they
They made it seem like it would
be carried on by the
manufacturer, which is a lie.
The manufacturer passes it on to
us, who passes it on to our
customers. What happened in our
Oklahoma locations is once those
bills came into effect, the cost
skyrocketed and we had to go up
with the cost. We had to close
all of our Oklahoma locations
and we let go of over 45 people.
We currently have 732 employees
in Las Cruces and everything, if
this bill passes, people can
just drive 10 minutes to Texas
and get what they want. In
addition, also,
those
things that you guys are seeing,
you can't smoke vapor out of it.
They're not vapor machines.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Representative
Liz Thompson, I have served on
the tobacco settlement revenue
Oversight Committee, the interim
committee since 2013, including
several years as chair, we as a
committee have come up with a
lot of different ways to
approach this. What the research
shows us is the best way to keep
vapes out of the hands of kids
is by making them more
expensive, the way we can as a
state can make them more
expensive is through taxing them
and that the research is very.
on that
What, what I'm afraid this bill
is about will end up doing and
we are still litigating 2006
settlement and the big tobacco
keeps finding ways to withhold
more and more and more of our,
uh, the money that should go
into that fund because we are
not keeping up with all of the
things that they throw up. I see
this as just another way to set
it up so that big tobacco can
take more money from our
settlement award, and so I, I.
beg you to please do not pass
this bill, it will hurt New
Mexicans. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Linda Siegel representing
American Cancer Society Cancer
Action Network, and I have
represented.
The Cancer Society and other
health organizations like Heart
and Lung for decades and this
bill will do nothing to impact
youth consumption of
particularly e-cigarettes,
chewing tobacco, etc. We know
that what works are taxes,
increasing taxes on young
people. We know that the um
regulation and licensing
department says it'll cost 1.5
million to even set up this.
Regulatory body, they already
have a job, and it is to license
anybody who sells a tobacco or
nicotine product, and they need
to spend their energy on doing
that. We know that the Attorney
General's office opposes this
bill, the Department of Health,
FIR says this is not an
effective way to impact uh youth
consumption.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Mahesh
Sita of the American Heart
Association. I think, uh, you
know, you, you have to take a
look at this bill in terms of
expenses and how expensive this
is going to be for the state and
draining the resources that are
meant to be, you know, helping
kids quit. We have cut down on.
Uh, enforcement, we've cut down
on education and tobacco
education and prevention
programs, and this is a FDA
function, you know, the big
tobacco has been going around
saying this is going to help
kids. There's no way this helps
kids, you know, this will open
up more stuff for the kids and,
you know, I strongly urged to
take a look at the agency, uh.
Uh, reviews on this bill and we
strongly reject this bill and
this is not going to help New
Mexico. This is going to create
more problems, and that's what
big tobacco wants to do. Thank
you. Thank you.
Abraham and uh I'm a business
owner. I have a few businesses
in New Mexico and dividends stay
too, and that bill is gonna hurt
the state more and make uh the
state growing up because uh
The after that, the tobacco
companies and we sell tobacco
too, but we have the uh license
for vape and the wholesaler will
we get it from, we have license
for it to get it from that
wholesale and charge us taxes
for to to the state.
And no reason, I mean, what does
he bring here, some of them is
not, is not vape.
What we get from the wholesaler,
wholesaler has, he has license
from New Mexico. That's what we
need to try like the state has
to be to get licensed for a
wholesaler where we buy from
like in uh in Texas, we get a,
we get it from Texas. It has
wholesaler license from New
Mexico too.
And this one, and I got a hug to
to the state to grow up, but.
He has to take money for you.
Hello, my name is Adnan. I'm a
business owner as well, and I
just wanted to say with this
bill being passed, this could
ruin um.
Sales tax revenues for the state
of New Mexico tremendously. I
mean, as a business owner
myself, this would hurt me and
my family because this is the
only way I could provide for my
family as well, and I got plenty
of workers and obviously we all
know that New Mexico has a
tremendous percentage when it
comes to unemployed people and
for that bill being passed, I
feel like it isn't fair for
anybody, and I mean that's,
that's really all I got right
now.
Thank you.
Hey Madam Chair, my name is
Waza. Uh, first and foremost
like to, uh, apologize. I'm not
too familiar with formalities,
so.
Apologize, but um, I, I highly
urge that this bill does not be
passed because um no matter
what, whether it's passed or
not, if kids, they wanna smoke
uh smoke shops get banned, for
instance, there's gonna be more
people selling them on the
streets even now with smoke
shops being opened, there's
still people in every single
city selling uh to the streets,
to the kids, so it's like, um,
like one of my other friends
said to as well like, um, the
devices you see on the table,
they're nothing to do with
vaping at all. It's it's a
battery that's for different
hemp derived products for
for dispensaries. It has nothing
to do with a smoke shop.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Hello, Madam Chair, my name's
Hammad.
I'm a small business owner as
well. This bill while while
well-intentioned, will harm
small business owners,
particularly in border cities
like Hobbs and Las Cruces, with
increased costs for vapes,
consumers will shop in Texas,
causing local shops to close and
unemployment rates to rise. New
Mexico will lose essential sales
tax revenue, worsening financial
strain as federal budget cuts
loom.
Our educational system.
Ranked 50th nationally cannot
afford this loss. Please
reconsider this bill to protect
jobs and maintain economic
stability in our state. Thank
you for.
My name is.
My name is.
I'm manager for a store.
I'd like to disagree, he said
that.
are owned by big tobacco
companies and tobacco.
OK. Thank you. Is there anybody
on Zoom?
Dave Dobbins.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes.
Hi, I'm Dave Dobbins. I, uh, I
have a 20 year career in uh
tobacco control. The beginning
primarily focused on new use. I
now work as a consult as a
consultant for Altria and
tobacco harm reduction.
I just want to say I strongly
support this bill. Um, when
we've seen optics and usage of
novel nicotine delivery products
in every instance, it's been
unregulated products. All this
bill does is ask New Mexico to
have their retailers deal with
manufacturers who are in good
faith.
Working with the FDA to make
sure their products are
regulated and those
manufacturers will be
responsible to appropriate
federal regulators to make sure
that their products are not
being abused by youth, but
instead are being used for their
intended purpose, which is to
get smokers and people using
higher toxicity nicotine
products to a products that are
safer and will improve their
life. So I, I strongly, uh,
support this bill, and I hope
that it will pass.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
else on Zoom?
And just to clarify, that was
for in favor of the bill, um,
even though we were going, we
were going for who was opposed
to it.
Anybody else? OK. All righty.
um, and, um, representative Dela
Cruz, did you want your uh
witness to say anything before
we move on.
No, ma'am. I'm sure we'll field
questions. Thank you. OK.
Alrighty, our first question is
Representative Matthews.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
can I get the wife?
Thank you.
So I, I'm a little confused.
Between
There's a, the federal
government has a registry of.
Legal
Vaping products, correct?
So
Is this
a legal vaping product?
I'll let my expert witness that.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, that is illegal under
federal law.
That is illegal that is illegal
and, and Madam Chair, sorry,
Madam Chair, this is being sold
in New Mexico legally at this
point, Madam Chair,
Representative Matthews.
There's no
Law under the laws of New Mexico
that makes that illegal today.
Madam Chair, uh, so we have a
federal registry that defines
what's legal, but it doesn't
apply to the state of New
Mexico.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Matthews.
Um, it's concurrent
jurisdiction, so federal law
applies here.
Um, but the absence of a state
law that applies means the only
backstop here is an FDA that's
able to police a marketplace
nationwide, which is why many
states
are taking the steps that you're
considering here, which is to
bring order to this category of
nicotine products.
I representative Matthews,
that's part of what we're trying
to do here. That's, that's the
issue. There are license
regulated products that the
federal government has
recognized.
But it means nothing here
because people can buy product
from wherever they can. All
these products, by the way, are
from China.
Every single one of them from
China.
And we don't have a way of
regulating and the FDA is not
showing up at these stores.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Interesting situation we have a
federal law that has no teeth in
it is what you're telling me. It
has no enforcement.
Capability to stop the sale of
these products if they're
illegal. Am I understanding
correctly, Madam Chair,
Representative Matthews, you're
absolutely correct. That's the
whole issue. These, these
products were purchased here in
New Mexico in Albuquerque and in
Santa Fe, and I'm gonna add
something, Madam Chair.
One of the receipts for the
products.
Did not identify it as the
product that was sold. It said
drinks.
Uh, Madam Chair.
I had a question about
This box, this box says legal
disclaimer, not for sale to
minors.
And I just note that this box.
Doesn't the yellow box doesn't
say anything like that. So is
the white box.
Legal
I is it a, a
Registered by with the FDA as a
legal product.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Matthews, any
product that looks like that is
made by a manufacturer that has
no interest and has made a
decision to bypass all federal.
Uh, regulation, let me
illustrate it this way. There's
two marketplaces in the United
States and here in New Mexico.
One marketplace consists of
products that are made by
manufacturers that are getting
product to market through FDA.
None of these products are made
by manufacturers.
Who are
Complying with federal consumer
protection and underage
prevention laws. We do that. Let
me give you some flavor for
that.
We are registered with the FDA.
They can hold us accountable.
Our factories are inspected by
FDA. We disclose our ingredients
and we can't put a new product
on the marketplace.
Without first going through FDA
and what FDA does.
As it checks the product to make
sure it is appropriate for adult
use.
is much less harmful than
cigarettes.
And really importantly, they
checked to make sure that the
product isn't likely to be
attractive to kids.
And so if you look at the legal
marketplace which consists of
products made by companies that
are complying with FDA, you will
not see any products that look
like that in that marketplace.
So the issue here is a group of
Chinese manufacturers that
decided a few years ago to
essentially secede from federal
regulation and have flooded the
US with these products. They are
now getting to store shelves,
not by being imported legally
through customs, but by being
Disguised as other products.
And smuggled
And that is how this market has
has come about.
Uh, and share, so the answer is
that this is also illegal.
And then there was another madam
Chair, there was another box
that had warnings on it about
the dangers of nicotine and so
forth. Was that also an illegal
product?
Thank you, Madam Chair. You're
correct. It is an illegal
product and by the way, I will
draw your attention to some of
the verbiage on the boxes that
talk about ingredients.
They say and they they sound
fairly harmless, but the reality
is because they're not regulated
at all, we have no idea what's
in those vape products at all?
Uh,
Madam chair.
I, I guess I'm curious what what
is a legal product, a legal
vaping.
You have a sample?
I do not have a sample with me,
but they would look.
Um
They would not have features
that look like they are
attractive to kids.
Um, but I'm happy to have um
images of those brought to you
as soon as possible.
Madam Chair, I apologize, uh,
Representative Matthews, that's
my failure. It didn't occur to
me to get a legal one.
But we can get some, thank you.
Madam, sure, I, I have to admit
that I'm fairly ignorant about
vaping products, um.
Having never vaped
Um
But I, the reason I'm asking the
question is, is because, Madam
Chair,
Presenters is.
When I'm reading the FIR, for
example, the Department of
Health is saying that these
registry bills.
Or another tactic to divert
state resources away from
strategies.
That are known to be
evidence-based and effective at
impacting youth consumption
rates.
And so
It seems that the dialogue is
about the packaging.
And
Um
Madam Chair, I'm trying to kind
of figure out how to answer this
question, but.
That
It doesn't seem to make much
difference what the packaging.
I mean, the packaging is
whatever it is, this is
designed, I guess to be.
Um
Um
Attractive to to young people,
but
But that the products, the the
products that are legal to be
sold are no better.
Healthwise, then these illegal
products. Am I misunderstanding?
Well, what you do know about the
legal regulated products is that
they are tested and confirmed to
be what they purport to be.
In this case, what's in those
boxes and in that product, we
have no idea if it's real or
not, so that's why a minute ago,
Madam Chair, I, I mentioned that
many of these products have.
The ingredients listed.
But they're meaningless because
there's no verification to those
to those.
Contents
Well, Madam Madam Cheer
presenters, I mean, my
understanding is that vaping.
Is not a uh healthy activity
regardless of the box it comes
in.
Am I, am I incorrect about that
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews.
We're not here to defend.
Vaping legally.
Uh, we're not here. I'm not here
to defend a tobacco products.
I'm not a fan.
Of tobacco products, but that,
that's not what we're trying to
do here. It is to say, look, if
there's going to be a product
that is deemed legal, whether
you like it or not individually.
That product must meet a certain
standard under law.
And what we have here
Is every one of those products
was on a store shelf, was
purchased.
And
We don't know what it really is.
So, um, Madam Chair.
Representative, as I understand.
What you're asking for is that
we adopt the Federal registry.
The products.
Go with the Federal registry,
which has some some
verification.
And
And it, as I read the.
Materials RLD would be
responsible for enforcing it.
Is that right?
Madam Chair, that, that is
correct, and yeah, beyond that,
should there be noncompliance,
uh, then there is a, a stepped,
uh.
actions that will be taken, but
ultimately it would be law
enforcement through either the
Attorney General's office or
whoever they enlist, Madam
Chair, and I'll make this quick.
I don't mean to dominate all the
questioning, but um what would
be the penalty.
Or selling one of these if we
adopt the registry.
has
Our, our law.
Madam Chair, I have the expert.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Matthews, I
believe there's a there's a fine
structure that would expose a
distributor who's selling
products that are not on the
state directory of $10,000 and
ultimately their license would
be at risk.
In other states that have
adopted this.
What you find is that the.
Licensed distributors.
Don't want to put their business
at risk and so what they do is
they carry only those products.
That the manufacturer has
demonstrated to the state are
complying with federal consumer
protection laws.
Well, Madam Chair,
Presenters, I, I just find this
a little strange that we have
this federal registry that the
federal government doesn't
enforce, but somehow if we pass
it here it's going to have.
Some teeth to it, it's just it's
kind of strange.
Situation, but thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Parajon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and expert
for being here today. um.
I just wanna say I.
Totally agree with you,
Representative Dela Cruz, uh,
when I speak to a lot of my
younger constituents, uh, this
is one of the number one issues
that comes up, um, vaping in
their high schools and their
middle schools, um, we have
statistics from New Mexico
Department of Health that it's
young women who are
overwhelmingly vaping and so
this is definitely an issue that
I, I think is really important
and I'm glad that there's some
effort made to bring something
forward like this, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Um, I am also having some with
the bill.
And, um.
You've said now that that the
that these products are illegal
under the FDA because they have
not been approved, is that
correct?
That is correct, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Parajun, they are
unregulated products that get to
shelves.
And more specifically, Madam
Chair, they are illegal, the
these are products that without
an FDA approval, you cannot
sell, is that correct, Madam
Chair? Madam Chair, that's
correct.
And
Um, Madam Chair, my question is
similar to Representative
Matthews, I mean, why you're
giving all this authority to RLD
to the AG 10 enforces, but
there's already federal law that
preempts our state law to
enforce the regulation of this
product.
So why currently is it not being
enforced, Madam Chair.
Uh manager representative Pa and
I,
I appreciate the question.
And it's a good question because
I wish I had the answer.
But I think at the end of the
day for all of us.
The question is, do we care
more?
Do we care enough to try to
protect our young people.
You know, the numbers are
staggering.
And I
I would never vape. I would
never want.
My
Children to vape or, but that's,
that's not really what's what
we're trying to do. It's really
trying to say, look, if you
couldn't vape.
And let's have a product that's
regulated and that you know
what's in there.
Mature and representative, um.
What I heard a a little bit from
your expert's testimony was
that, uh, you know, exac exactly
what you're saying in the
absence of the state law, that
means that states don't have a
way to bring order. I also don't
want more people to um to vape.
But what this bill looks like
it's doing right now is that.
Currently, the FDA says.
If the product is not in the 34.
E-cigarette vaping, um,
categories, you cannot sell it.
We still have all these
different products coming out.
And
Uh, that is the strictest law,
right? Those are 30, only 34
products. But then I'm hearing
that what this bill is going to
do is that as long as a vaping
product is in the process of
getting approval from FDA hasn't
received approval from FDA, uh,
it will be allowed to be sold.
Is that correct, ma'am Chair and
Representative.
Madam Chair and Representative
Alejon, um, it's a little bit
more complicated than that.
So
Under this bill, the 34 that
have been authorized would be
allowed to be sold.
But there are also a group of
products.
That have been waiting for FDA
to determine their status since
2020.
The FDA won't say that they're
legal because strictly speaking
under the statute, they're not.
But the FDA told the
manufacturers of those products,
you could keep them on the
market while I review your
applications.
They are not FDA is not
attempting to remove those
products from the market, and
many of them were protected by
court order.
It is a, of course, a judgment
call on New Mexico's part as to
whether to allow those products
to be sold and get on the
directory or not.
We don't have a product in that
category.
I would argue, and it would be
my perspective that respectfully
that it's important to have
adult vapors have access to
products.
Where the manufacturers have
gone through all of the FDA
process.
Demonstrating goodwill that
their product.
Merit's authorization.
I recognize that's a judgment
call.
But the question here is,
Do we want to go from a place in
which literally anything and
everything is available,
including the products you see,
uh, you see today or do we want
to also consider adult vapors,
many of whom quit smoking.
With vapor being the reason that
they quit.
And I do believe that it's
important for them, the adults,
as long as the product is going
through review to demonstrate
it's not attractive to kids and
is is appropriate for adults.
That would be at least my
perspective,
so is that list that you're
talking about the ones that have
been court ordered or stayed
that are in the waiting status
since 2020. Is that a public
list of
It's, it is FDA does not publish
that list, but you can refer to
the list in Louisiana that sets
up those categories exactly like
the spill, and there are about
350 vape products on that list.
A group of them
I think over 100 of them are
currently waiting for a Supreme
Court case that will determine
their fate because they were
rejected,
are those that are published in
Louisiana is that something, you
know, if I was a vape store
owner, I could access that.
Easily, Madam Chair
Representative
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
it's available online right now.
We can send you the link.
So it is legal to sell.
The some of the products that
are pending approval in New
Mexico and, and we do have that
list.
So
What I'm trying to understand
is.
Um
With the bill allow for.
Products that are not on this
list, not the ones that are in
waiting status since 2020 to be
sold on the market,
Madam Chair Representative
Pajon, no, those would not be
allowed to be sold.
Um
There was some confusion and if
you can talk a little bit, Madam
Chair and representative about
the Alabama, Louisiana,
Oklahoma. I understand that
they're having their statutes
that they passed they're having
to amend them because of
confusions like this one, can
you talk a little bit about
that?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I won't talk about those. I'll
have the expert witness talk to
the specifics of those
particular states.
Uh, but what I do want to share
is that I've learned quickly in
my time at the legislature that
very often we don't have a
perfect bill.
We have a bill that creates a
lot of great discussion and and
and maybe comes back with
amendments or maybe comes back
the next year. I'd like to keep
this in the in the hopper till
we get.
To a point where we all either
agree or or we don't, but either
way, uh, it's possible that
there may be changes to this
bill if necessary and if it's
the will of the committee.
Uh, I will have the expert
address the specific.
Yes, Madam Chair, Representative
Parajon, um.
The
States have
been adopting this bill over
time and the ones that were the
first to do it.
Fi have learned that they made
some uh errors along the way
that made it not as effective as
it could have been Louisiana is
really the state that got it
right for the first time, and it
is a it's a.
It, it, it very quickly brought
order to that marketplace where
the consumer, the adult consumer
moved.
From products that were
completely illegal and
unregulated and made in
factories that no one was
inspecting.
Two vapor products that were.
Made in
Factories that were inspected
and followed FDA and follow all
the consumer protection.
Uh
Uh
Requirements so there is a good
example out there in Louisiana
of.
built like this bringing going
from chaos.
To to a more well regulated
marketplace in our view.
Sure, um.
I, I understand what you're
trying to say, representative
here with that, that this is an
imperfect bill, um, that you
know we're trying to get
something in the hopper to get
things through and and I think,
you know, for a, uh, this bill,
it is, it's quite a heavy price
tag.
And I know agencies, you know,
want to, um.
Estimate what they need, but in
my FIR it is looking like
there's a big update to the
salesforce platform that has to
be done, that's gonna cost 1.5
million. Um, there's an
additional.
500,000 needed to compensate the
6th person, then after that,
then we have some recurring FTEs
to maintain it and, and, and I,
I mean, we haven't even gone
into the enforcement costs, let
alone, uh, whether or not this
bill does what it's, um,
intending to do what you're
saying is to reduce.
Um
Youth smoking.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
I apologize. What's, what
exactly is the question?
Well, you know, I think I'd like
to hear a little bit more, madam
Chair, what the evidence around
having a registry like this is,
um, if it really does reduce
what you're saying in in terms
of youth, um, consumption rates.
And I say that because, um.
Right now, the way that I
understand it is that.
Right now, because we have no
law, the FDA law is supreme and
you know, there's some even some
legal questions as to whether if
we implement a state law that
allows for, um, not just the
waiting status since 2020 to to
come onto line or as it was
listed in the bill, there's some
other um.
Uh, you have received a
marketing denial order. You have
30 days to sell off all your
goods, which means that in those
30 days, you're offering huge
discounts for your vaping
products that are no longer FDA
approved, which, as we know what
our young people gonna go for
for the.
products that are on sale. So
I'm really struggling to see how
a bill like this addresses the
youth issue. Um, if you're
coming forward and saying, Madam
Chair, that this bill is for
something else like you're
trying to um.
And like you, like you were
saying, provide options for
adults to um to have different
options for vaping, that's
something different, uh, but as
it currently stands, what I see
in this bill is that it allows
actually for us to have products
in our markets that aren't
approved by the FDA and
introduces actually more lax
laws for allowing um products to
be introduced into the.
Man representative, I'm not
quite sure how you get to to
that logic, but um.
I think when you get back to the
basics.
You have a wide array.
of unregulated property.
And maybe by virtue of its
appearance.
Very appealing
Uh, and I think that big tobacco
can be a great example.
I think we know that once upon a
time in history I know certainly
when I was a young man.
We were targeted.
We were targeted with advert
advertisements and appealing
images that were designed
specifically.
To get us to buy cigarettes.
Etc.
And so
You see what what's out there.
And the idea is that if you're
gonna have product out there, it
needs to be regulated and we had
a layer.
To that regulation by adoption
of this bill or a bill similar
to this.
It
I don't think that this is a
bill attempting to legislate
morality.
But I think it's a bill.
Intended to protect somewhat
young minds, and if they want to
buy a product.
Whether I agree with it or not,
that it, it'd be a product that
we know what's in that product.
It comes from China. It's
unregulated.
And God knows what's in there,
and the young people very often.
Oh, don't believe anybody. It's
written right here.
Just because it's written just
with those boxes have some
verbage doesn't mean that's
what's in there.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm sure that's uh the
conclusion of my questions, I
think just in closing, um.
These products already are.
So I really like the parts of
your bill where it's saying
there are um.
You know, there are penalties
and we have enforcement and um
we have maybe we have laws
where, um, certain flavors are
are banned, right, like mental
cigarettes, we know those were
targeted towards our
populations, right,
representative, um, so Madam
Chair, I, um, I think I still
have some questions about how
these elements are connecting
with federal law and um.
I, uh
I'm sure if I might. I know that
wasn't a question. I would love
to work with you offline, uh, on
this bill and maybe come up with
some ideas, but I do want to
remind the committee, Madam
Chair, that much of the costs
that are cited in the bill.
Or actually the manufacturers
pay that. It isn't your mom and
pop store selling vape
cigarettes.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, just a statement to start
with, I
As we've talked before, there's
no doubt that we need.
Different regulations.
Protect our, our most
vulnerable, our young or under.
After um
Like
Cruz, when I, when you were 21,
if you want to do things, do
them.
Uh, but
I do have some some questions on
the deal.
It, uh
Uh
Is, is she stated.
The registry
For legal product.
It, uh
In New Mexico.
Now we have
54 or.
With these others, what's a
couple of 100 or so, did you say
those?
It would be a good starting
point for that, but.
My main concern.
Madam Chair Representative.
I
We as a state,
a terrible job of enforcing
anything.
And to me this bill, Madam Chair
Representative.
Is not
Strong enough on enforcement.
It's more on regulation.
We regulate everything.
But stopping the black market,
or regulation doesn't stop,
doesn't stop the illegal sales
of cannabis.
Alcohol
Any
So, my question is, will this,
is there enough enforcement in
this bill to make a difference?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Mason.
I, I wish I could disagree with
you.
But what I can say is that if we
don't have something that are
either attorney general or law
enforcement can work with when
you have a business that is
flagrant or egregious in their
approach to business.
You have something that you can
work with.
Right now
Your best option is to try to
get a hold of the FDA.
And so
I think this gives us and begins
to get us to a place where
The regulation might be
effective.
I mean we, I agree with you
because look at what happened
with cannabis, right? Now we're
trying to fix it.
So sometimes that does happen,
but I do think that we're, it
gives, it puts us on a path of,
of, of getting us to a better
place with our our protecting
some of our some of our young
people and, and not just young
people, but anybody that vapes,
so they buy a product it's.
It can be tested, it's safe,
it's or it's not.
Thank you.
Representing Madam Chair, I
agree with all of that. It, uh.
The uh
Illegal product
They're legal with you.
Regulate against it or not.
It's illegal now but it's here.
So
It, uh
Well, you know, I have a hard
time.
Believe in this legislation is
I love the idea.
I just can't see.
That it's gonna
Helps tremendously.
But I will
They
What, what are the consequences
if we don't pass it.
Yeah
Its status quo as it.
I haven't decided exactly how
I'm gonna.
do when it comes down to the end
of this thing, but I would like
to see.
Madam Chair harder.
Harsher penalties for.
Anyone that here that has a.
I, I use tobacco products.
I go into awesome.
To buy a can of snow.
I have
Why
Don't
Is it impossible for us? I don't
see that in here.
To make it
Criminal civil.
Criminal offense if we do not
abide by the law.
Madam Chair, Representative
Mason.
You have
Uh
Proprietors that are very
ethical.
And the they they check IDs and
and I I really want to get into
that particularly only because.
Your
Legitimate vendors.
They play by the rules.
But
They, they sell only those
products that the FDA has
approved.
Right now, anybody that sells
the products that you have up
there.
There's nobody rely and there's
nobody checking on him.
We would be able to now as to
whether the the the there has to
be bigger teeth in in the uh in
the bill either now or later.
That's a good question.
And, and, and, and that's why I
want to make it clear I'm not
trying to pretend this is a
perfect bill, but I think it
puts us on that road to trying
to get legitimate products on
shelves where they're going to
sell these types of products.
Thank you Madam Madam Chair. I
agree that's the reason I used
Dawson.
They probably sell lake product.
I'm sure.
You go in there, they're gonna
not when I go in to buy a snuff
or buy beer.
They're their employees are
trying, what I'm saying is I
don't see anything in here where
it makes.
$500 fine.
Somebody in here has a shop in
the
And they
Don't follow that regulation, is
there?
I would like to see something in
there that requires
Every place that sells them.
The ID everyone that felt.
No matter
I mean, I, I look over 21, I
think.
But they still required me to
provide.
I would like
All of them and I think and like
I said, I think all of y'all in
here that are legal
representative.
But uh
I think
Teeth need to be
Stronger if you don't do it.
The license is gone something.
I, I, I'm a, I, I wanna be the
tough guy in the room.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm gonna have
the expert address that, but
representative based on that.
I didn't think you're a day over
22.
Yes, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Mason, um, the
bill specifically provides for
um.
Increased penalties on anybody
who violates this who's a
distributor or or retailer who's
licensed. I believe ultimately
within the statutory context of
tobacco and nicotine products.
In under state law, you're
putting your license at risk if
you are not following the law.
If you think about in the
cigarette context, very mature
business, been around for a long
time. New Mexico has a very good
system where.
Only
Licensed
Wholesalers, distributors,
retailers are carrying that
product and they're not gonna
put that license at risk we
believe that the same incentive
structure is going to apply to
this only licensed distributors
and retailers can carry the
product and only they can carry
products that are on this list
if they start to, if they get
caught.
Cheating on that list.
The state's gonna come down on
them through the ABC with fines
ultimately putting their license
at risk and what we find is
that.
The vast majority of
distributors don't want to walk
down that path and we'll
voluntarily.
I chair the representative.
Thank you all and
I hope what you say through.
Like I stated earlier, our track
record is not as as a.
Governing bodies
Regulating illegal products, no
matter.
What they are
The
Go, come, comes to enforcement
on our we have plenty of laws if
we could just enforce.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Representative Serato.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, for
bringing this forward. Um, I
think it's such an interesting
coalition of people who have
come out for and against this,
and I'm, you know, I know folks
are kind of new and it's good to
have everybody here for the
conversation, it's good. Um.
I, as many people here know, I
have kids, you know, and I, I
hate this.
I hate this so much because I
could absolutely see my mom.
Giving my kid a treat and
spending $35 to like buy this
for my kids because it's super
cute. Uh, it actually bought
other crap stuff like this. It
drives me nuts inside my house.
But it, but I could see my mom
doing this and it, and it
bothers me and I can see your
passion and your uh your
I just see it coming out of you,
your visceral reaction to seeing
that these are on the streets
and are available for our kids
and stores that they could
purchase. I, I do have questions
like my colleagues and, and just
some clarification too, because
I'll be honest, my kids are too
young to be around beeping Madam
Char representative. So I, I
don't understand.
What's confusing me about this
is these are, these are
batteries.
Um, is a few people point out,
there's no tobacco in this
thing, um.
So if I were to go to the store
and purchase this, would I need
to be over 18 to purchase this,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair and representative
Serrano, I don't actually know
the answer to that question, and
I do believe that there is a
product right in front of the
chairwoman.
The one that has the the video
game on it.
Which I think is the most vivid
example of the liberties that
these manufacturers are taking
because they they decided
they're just not going to
participate in federal consumer
protection laws.
And we, we've seen products that
have
Basically Donkey Kong type games
where you're.
What it does is it
allows you to compete with your
friends over how much you're
vaping.
And that's
That's not OK, um, and.
The products that would be legal
to be sold under the directory
are all manufacturers that have.
Decided to to be a part of the
regulatory system they.
is there. If you go through FDA,
FDA is going to decide two
things.
Is the product less harmful for
smokers?
If it's not, it's not going to
get approved. If it is, next
question, is this going to
appeal to kids if it will, it's
not gonna get approved
manufacturers are in the system
know that and any future
business for us has to be in
that lane.
So
Anyway, I, I hope that answers
your question. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, and, and, uh,
and thank you representative
for, uh, yeah, I, I understand a
bit more. I think there were
some heads nodding when they
said that you kind of have to be
overage to to purchase this. I,
I appreciate the rest of what
you said because it also comes
with the second part of it. Um,
I'm, I'm a little confused why,
why we needed a, I mean it's uh
19 page.
Bill
When to me it just seems like we
could just upload, like, like
stream, what's on the FDA list
to RLD's website, and that would
just complete the same thing
with far less cost to the state
and far less onerous process. So
that's, I, so, um, you know, why
isn't this just a bill to stream
that information over.
Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative, I appreciate the
question because I think it's.
Self-explanatory
The question is, why not do
that?
Why need do you need a loan?
Then the question then is, why
do we have these products on the
shelves?
RLD
Everybody else supposed to
already understand this.
And they're not doing it.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
representative. That's, that's a
fair point about that, um.
The other piece I'm curious
about is that these are already
illegal, you were mentioning
earlier that there are already
penalties for having these uh
products that sorry, that there
are penalties, correct? that
that Madam Chair representative
that somehow that like if you're
selling these, there are strict
penalties against utilizing
these things. But, but there's
not.
But they're being sold right
now.
So what, what is that gap that
they're that I'm that maybe you
answer my other friends and I, I
didn't understand my colleagues,
Madam Chairman and
Representative Serrado.
Um, if you're caught by FDA, you
will pay fines.
Although really what FDA will do
is first send you a warning
letter and then a second warning
letter and eventually a fine.
They have uh the whole US to
police.
The question for the states are
is that OK, is that enough? And
for this phenomenon.
It's OK for states to say I'm
going to make it illegal under
New Mexico law.
To carry a product that's not
made by a manufacturer that's
not participating in FDA
regulation.
Which I think
So that the state then has its
own authority.
To punish
Distributors
Punish retailers.
For carrying products that are
like these completely
unregulated and let me just say
if I could one more thing.
We're a manufacturer and we're
here. We're here participating
in this conversation.
What you won't hear from are the
manufacturers of those products.
They are in China.
They are not registered with the
FDA.
And they are.
More or less beyond the reach of
FDA, FDA can't easily sue them
and bring them into court, so
that makes it difficult for FDA
to hold those manufacturers
accountable.
They can hold us accountable the
instant they want to, but for
these manufacturers across the
ocean, they can't, so that's
what's raising this question of
can states step in and use their
own laws to tighten up and bring
order and organization to this
marketplace of products that yes
if they are authorized by FDA
are an important solution for
adult smokers.
But not if they're gonna put
kids at risk and not if they're
appealing to kids.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
representative Thank you expert
for that. I know, I, I, it's
clear they're not good actors,
right? If you're making this,
you're not really trying to be a
good actor. So I, I, I
appreciate that as a perspective
and I appreciate that you are at
the table, but you, you kind of
get to the heart of where I'm
getting to with this as well,
which is, I would, I would, I
would.
I, I like aspects of this bill.
I do, and it's like I'm quoting
some of the, the things we're
hearing from some of the
agencies.
I do feel like it's duplicative
of of what the feds do. And the
bigger thing to me is I just
want.
More money for the enforcement
on this stuff and, and to get to
the heart of that because it
shouldn't be so difficult to see
this, to tell a person, hey,
you're you're selling this and
it's illegal, um, and there's an
easier way to report this,
right? And, and to me, I would
love to streamline that.
Aspect. It should 100% be about
enforcement, um, at this point,
because in, in, the first thing
that that my colleagues and I
were saying up here was, I
thought this started illegal. I
thought we'd figured this out
like 30 years ago. So when Joe
Camel was around, you know, but
I, I think like this is a very
different generation, and this
is so that that actually don't,
I thought there was a question
there about I'm sure but I'm
gonna end there and just say,
what I, you know, you said
you're open to more
conversation. I just want to see
more of an enforcement aspect to
this. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair.
I,
I wholeheartedly agree and I,
I'd love to work with you on
amending the bill if necessary
to add some
Level of of monetary.
You know, inclusion in the bill,
uh, there is some because some
money there will be revenue
that's raised as part of this
bill through its regulatory
process.
Uh, that could be used for that.
It's not directing that money
directly there now if even if we
were to get the bill passed and
and collect the money, it
doesn't necessarily direct it to
enforcement, but it certainly
could, but I, I love you holding
up that particular.
Vape product and there's others
up there that are just as
appealing. Imagine your child is
watching your.
Older teen young adult.
Using one of those products and
children are very
Their minds they they they
absorb and they see those
products. One of those products
particularly has a game on it.
It's, it's an electronic game.
one.
That's my favorite one. You
smoke that thing, you vape it or
whatever it's called.
And you're playing a game at the
same time, you can.
We
Puff, what do you call that?
Um, more and, and, and it's kind
of like this circle and then you
have all of the potential for
little kids seeing that stuff
and think, oh, that's great.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Over here trying to turn on the
game.
Um, OK, so,
I mean a whole bunch of
questions.
Um
The big thing is that.
OK, so this.
battery or has a connector on
it. This is just a battery.
I'm super worried that in your
definitions in this bill.
That if you order or that if you
get the pieces.
The battery plus the vaporizer
plus the juice plus the
everything that it's not.
Covered
And that
to be covered.
This, if you look at the
packaging that says voltage
battery.
So, it might be an existing
language somewhere, it might be
in somewhere and it's, it's not
a.
I'm not trying to bash on the
it's.
Just, if you're gonna, if we're
gonna do it, you got to do it
right, so that, cause this is
what's going to be attractive, a
little.
Tank with
You know, that's empty and juice
and everything else is not going
to be attractive.
This or the Mario one or the
A
Still can't believe there are so
many of these, um, is what's
going to be attractive.
To someone who's under 8,
the rest of it, that all looks
very mechanical and technical,
and, you know, all of that.
So
Um, can you tell me if this by
itself is in a different part or
if I'm missing a portion of this
bill to make this covered.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hernandez.
Um, a component part of a
tobacco product is regulated by
FDA.
And so if it's not on the list,
it's not legal to be sold. The
question would be is that?
A component part of a vapor
product if the bill is unclear
about that, that's a piece of
clarity that we can bring to
that. We're happy to.
You know, provide our
Input in that regard, but I
think that that can be done.
If I'm understanding your
question.
Correctly, which is these
component parts are also a
problem.
Right, I, I was just making sure
that the component visual.
portion of it that's going to be
the attractive part.
Um, just making sure that it's
covered now. Yes, but my other
question is, does
And I don't know that you guys
are gonna know this. It's just
what's streaming out of my brain
at the moment is.
Does a
Battery
Like this.
have to be FDA approved.
Even though it doesn't have any
of the pieces to actually
create.
So, you know, gone down that
rabbit hole far enough to figure
that out, but
Um
Because at that point, then,
All of the things that you're
showing this one which is the
complete unit, um, would still
be fine and that is if this bill
continues to go, I want to make
sure that doesn't.
So
Madam Chair Representative
Hernandez, that's
perfect and the reason I say is
perfect is because these
products are sold in.
as a product.
So if it has a battery that.
Lights on fire for some reason
because it isn't a battery that
should that should have been
there, that it should have been
regulated somehow, some way.
That's part of this issue,
because now it's well the bill
isn't doesn't attempt to address
that specifically, those
products are getting to market,
they're getting on shelves right
here in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque, and yes, the
battery is not regulated.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that answer. I mean,
This looks like something I can
buy.
Um, because it does not produce
any.
Or it doesn't have anything to
produce the vapor. I can't plug
this in and make paper. So
that's what, that's all I'm
worried about is that.
Does the, does this under FDA
rule need to be also be
registered if it doesn't have
any of the other pieces of the
components or the
The parts that are required to
produce vapor in the box with
it.
Is this still required to be,
because this is what's
attractive. Madam Chair
Representative Hernandez.
Um
It is required to be authorized
by FDA components of tobacco
products must be as well.
Um
But here's the thing, if.
Um
The registry uh mechanism
mechanism is adopted.
The products that are on the
registry.
Um, won't be products that
connect or for which those
components are remotely
relevant, so the market for
these components that are
designed to go along with the
vape products that are totally
unregulated goes away with the
market for those products, I
think.
I'm sure, so we're more.
Focusing on the one that has the
game on it.
All in one, I mean
Understand that that is the big.
thing right now is you walk into
a store, grab it, it's, you're
good to go and then you throw it
away, and I get that.
Um
Yeah, I, OK.
Yeah
Thank you. Um.
To me, this is just really
disturbing that, um, it's being
marketed to children. You can't
tell me that these are not being
marketed to kids and so that's
very, very problematic. Um, I
think what I could sharing today
is that there's some overall
general support for your bill.
Um, I think that, um.
I'd like to know what the
sponsor thinks, I think that,
um, there was some questions on
the bill that um make it.
Difficult, um.
Uh, as the bill as a whole, so
um I'm gonna refer to the
sponsor and see what you'd like
to do.
I'd like to work with the with
the members. I think there were
great suggestions that were
presented. I'd like to roll the
bill and work with them and
maybe bring it back fairly,
fairly soon, I know we have a
bazillion bills to deal with.
Um, so I would like to do that,
but I, I'd actually like to say
something about what you just
stated, which I really
appreciate it.
A long time ago I used to teach
intro to business classes at
CNM.
And we taught our students about
marketing.
When people think about
marketing.
It's kind of up to
interpretation. It really isn't,
but people kind of see it that
way. They see marketing as well,
uh.
advertising
Or they see marketing as a point
of sale at a store. It's
marketed.
But marketing.
Also includes
Images
That are intended to elicit a
response.
And my question, I agree with
it? I'm glad you said the word
marketed is be who or who is the
audience.
For some of these. Let's just be
frank about it. Who is the
audience? So Madam Chair, I
would like to roll with roll the
bill and work with with the
members.
We will roll the bill. Thank you
for your presentation today.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members.
5.
And do you need to pick up all
your baked products.
I'm keeping the
If we could get the next uh bill
up.
Uh
Representative Herndon, HB 56.
Representative Herndon, thank
you for being here today. Um, go
ahead and start the presentation
for your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, it is
indeed an honor and a pleasure
to be before this committee and
to bring before you House Bill
56, and this bill relates to a
reimbursement for birth centers,
Madam Chair, one of the 31 in 3
of New Mexico's counties is
considered a maternal health
desert nearly 18% of women in
New Mexico lack access to
birthing hospitals within 30
minutes of where they live
compared to the national
average.
9.7% according to a
22 March of Dime's report. As
more hospitals across New Mexico
closed there labor and delivery
units birth centers could play
an important role in providing
prenatal labor and delivery,
newborn and postnatal care to
low risk patients who lack
access to hospital care or whose
or who choose to birth in a
licensed and nationally
accredited birth center, but in
order to be a part of the
solution.
Burst sinners must be
financially sustainable. HB 56
attempts to solve that problem
by requiring the secretary of
the healthcare authority to
adopt rules to ensure Medicaid
payments made to birth sinners
for non-complicated births are
equivalent to those payments
made to a hospital, Madam Chair,
we do have an amendment which I
will let my expert witness carry
Robin Brunder, who is a member
of the governor.
board of Daluth birth and health
center explained to you now.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, um, the amendment is
an amendment that we worked on
with the Medicaid office. I'll
disclose. I'm taking off my
professional lobbyist hat for a
minute. Um, I'm a volunteer
member of the board at Darlo's
Birth and Health Center, uh, the
amendment basically has the same
intent behind the bill, so the
bill would still be achieving
the purpose of creating parody
in Medicaid reimbursement
facility fees between hospitals
and birth centers.
for non-complicated vaginal
births and for newborn care, but
the wording in the amendment
allows the secretary of the
healthcare authority to
promulgate rules to actually
create that methodology, um, and
then to just make sure that
whenever they're increases for
hospitals, there are comparable
increases made to bird hunters.
So that is why you have an
amendment because
So do I have motion to move the
amendment for discussion?
I can
Yes, for discussion.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair, I have with me
Abigail Eaves, the executive
director of Dalu's Birth and
Health Ciner here to say a few
words to the committee.
Madam Chair, member of the
committee, thank you for having
me today. My name is Abigail
Lana Eaves. I'm the executive
director and founder of Daralu's
Birth and Health Center.
Um, you all have our one pager
that shows the differences
between payments received by
hospitals versus birth centers
for the same services of an
uncomplicated vaginal birth and
care of a normal newborn.
By increasing birth center
facility reimbursements, you
would create more sustainability
for our birth center model,
allowing more mothers to choose
and out of hospital birth and
laying the groundwork so birth
centers could play a greater
role in the maternal health.
So, madam chair, we stand for
questions.
Um, so let's first go to, um, do
we want to adopt the amendment?
Right
And do you have a second?
So
The amendment is adopted and do
we have anybody here in favor of
the bill?
Want to speak on it?
Yeah
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee on behalf of
the New Mexico Nursing
Association and the New Mexico
nurse practitional counsel, we
urge you to support House Bill
56. The bill will help residents
of our state, particularly in
the rural areas, as this gets to
spread, where there are
maternity care deserts. Our
patients deserve to receive
timely care, Las Vegas, Gallup,
and Artesia have closed their
birthing units. This renders 1
out of 3 pregnant moms stranded
in a, without a place to have
their babies safely and 1 out of
5.
Over 90 minutes away.
I wish I could bring in a
pregnant woman at 38 weeks and
40 weeks similar to the boxes
you just saw, so you could see
the model, but um, you know,
the, the fear of having your
baby in a car is real. And this
is basically looking for birth
centers to be part of this
solution. They provide safe,
affordable, high quality care to
low-risk women, and this bill
helps bring birthing centers to
become financially stable
through ensuring these centers
have facility.
comparable.
Thank you. Next.
with your respect, Madam Chair
and honorable committee members.
My name is Beata Sosi. I'm the
organizational director for
Breath of My Heart Birthplace.
Breath of my heart is an
indigenous-led birth center and
free community midwifery clinic
focused on providing culturally
relevant care for low-income
families in the Espinola Valley
surrounding regions and 8
northern pueblos. We are working
to increase the number of
midwives from indigenous and
historical New Mexico
communities and increased access
to out of hospital birthing
options at BME.
midwifery care includes
comprehensive reproductive
healthcare, maternity infant
care, and other family support
services.
Ultimately, our birth center
employs highly skilled and
qualified maternal healthcare
providers and more relaxed, less
invasive birthing space for
healthy pregnancies. I
appreciate the support from
maternal child health that has
been put forth through HB 56 as
a clinic that serves the
majority of Medicaid clients, it
is vital that our birth center
is valued and given equal pay as
compared to hospital facilities.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Alana Dances. I'm
the medical director of that,
uh, Medicaid program and the
healthcare authority. So we
aren't uh in opposition or
support of this bill, but just
wanted to draw your attention to
the concerns that were brought
up and that the amendment really
resolves many of them in the
fiscal impact report, we kind of
laid out how birth centers and
hospitals are just paid very
differently and our authority
with the federal government is
very different for the two of
them, and we've been working
with the sponsor.
we're comfortable with the
amendments. So.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
opposition?
So there's nobody here in the
room, but we do have uh
opposition on Zoom.
Oh, in favor. I'm sorry.
I was in favor. I apologize.
Leona, you have one minute.
Thank you. Can you hear me?
Yes.
Wonderful. Thank you. Hello, my
name is Leona Gray Savage as
Aululle Antonian County and a
member of the New Mexico July
Association. I'm a mother of an
adolescent girl and I feel the
need for accessible reproductive
healthcare is clearly apparent.
The people in healthcare deserts
of New Mexico have no access to
care. Birth centers in our state
are as much needed, are much
needed commodity to provide
reproductive care and education
to young people and the
underprivileged communities
living in those healthcare
debtors.
access to this type of care
could help the heartbreaking
rise of the maternal mortality
rate in our state. Birth centers
need reimbursement in order to
thrive, and we need them to
thrive. Please consider creating
a pathway for their
sustainability like this
supporting HD.
Thank you for your time and
consideration today.
Justin Lorenzo.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
community.
Uh, my name is Jess Lorenzo and
I'm the emergency fund director
at Digital Swim and rising.
Uh, this one helps me folks with
low-risk pregnancies, access.
Midwifery and Doaa inside and
outside of hospital settings.
We know that because of
colonization, many native
birthing practices have been
lost.
For those who know or want to
connect back to their ancestors.
We deserve to access these
practices outside of hospital
settings and cost should not be
the barrier.
This Bill will also help
midwives who are rooted in their
communities to build up
sustainable businesses that
serve low income families who
want to continue their
pregnancies. Thank you.
Danica
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Danicaronas, and I am a
wife, daughter, and mother.
I'm also a full spectrum doula
and birth justice manager with
Gold Futures. I reside in rural
Southern New Mexico and I'm
currently accepting my second
child this summer. I'm here to
seek and support today Hospital
56 from the lens of these
intersections, birth centers had
a long-standing history in New
Mexico with as a beautiful blood
personalized care for pregnant
people and medicine rooted in
traditional and cultural
practices.
If we have to begin addressing
the rapid maternal mortality and
morbidity crisis our state
faces, voting yes to this bill
is a step in the right
direction. This will not only
get existing birth centers a
more sustainable budget to
operate under, therefore,
improving care to communities
that will likely incentivize
additional providers to open
birth centers in parts of New
Mexico currently suffering
without local maternity care.
There is an opportunity now to
do this without placing
additional financial burden on
our midwives, with who are
equipped with life saving
skills. As a doula, I look
forward to the day when bursting
outside of the hospital, it was
normalized as birthing within
and as the lucky my mother, I
yearn for the day that we cease
to lose black and brown parents
to preventable circumstances.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak to this, and I urge you to
go in support of this bill
today.
Felicia Rodriguez.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Felicia Rodriguez, and I am a
current board member at Breath
of My Heart Midwifery in
Espanola, New Mexico, and um I'm
also a former client of theirs.
Um, I am not, I am not, uh, have
any formal education in lobbying
or anything like that. So I
apologize if I'm not stating
anything, you know, if I'm
saying things incorrectly, but
um,
It's really important for women,
especially indigenous women and
indigenous families to have the
ability to make a decision as to
where we feel comfortable to
burn our children and um
midwiferies are very safe,
especially birthing centers that
are nationally recognized and
they deserve to receive the same
compensation that any other
nationally recognized medical
facility.
You. Thank you.
Now we'll go to opposition. In
the room, is there anybody?
All right. If we, if we can go
to committee, any questions?
We'll start off with
Representative Matthews.
Thank you. uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you presenters.
I was lucky to, lucky enough to
do a tour.
Or I lose facility this past
summer.
I was incredibly impressed and
while we were sitting there
talking about the facility, a
mom and dad walk out with a
brand new baby. It was just
like, wow, this is really
happening. Um.
And we talked a lot about the
finances.
And I, thankfully you're making
this amendment because
apparently uh it's going to be a
much better way for you all to
get more uh financial resources,
and I, I, so my comment.
Obviously, I'm going to support
this, but a comment is
How come we have a health care
authority.
We do tons of things with
Medicaid in this state, and
somehow.
Nobody's
until you all ask for more
money.
Nobody picked up that there was
a way under Medicaid to have had
increased funding all this time.
And I just kind of think.
I'm wondering what our
The state plan.
Where the money was less didn't
seem to take into account that
there was a better way to do
this under Medicaid, and I'm
just kind of like frustrated by
that kind of thing.
Because we could have.
In providing these important
resources more more financial uh
resources if we had been aware.
If we had been smarter about
Medicaid and my last comment is.
We, we have to.
We have to all wish as hard as
we can that.
Our Medicaid is not going to be
cut.
By the federal government.
Represent Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
gonna make the actually the same
comment in the last presentation
about
Tariffs in China.
Get our money.
Anyway, I won't make it. Too
late. Oh yeah, whoops, I just
did. Uh, anyway, I are you is it
reimbursable now? Do you get
reimbursed through Medicaid now?
And, and is that just a less
percentage or what? why is it?
What's the difference? Well, how
much does the hospital get
reimbursed compared to how much,
uh uh uh a facility like yours
would get reimbursed. Yes, thank
you for the question, Madam
Chair. Representative, uh, at
this time we get reimbursed
$1400 for a vaginal birth that
takes place at the birth center
and 50% of that 700 for a labor
transfer.
Um, and that has been since 2016
when the rules were first
created, hospitals on your one
pager get an average of about
22, 65 for um.
For a vaginal birth, and then
they get an additional about
1000 for the newborn, we don't
get anything extra for the
newborn.
So Madam Chair, uh, ma'am, you,
you all want equal.
Is that what this bill would be
asking for. Yes, correct. OK,
thank you for that. Um, and
under significant issues from
the healthcare authority, your
amendment fixed that, correct?
OK, just double checking. I see
you're shaking your head. That's
good enough for me. Um, and do
you have to have medical
malpractice insurance.
Madam Chair Representative,
absolutely. We do. I don't think
it's required actually by it's
required by in order to have a
contract in place with any
insurance company or Medicaid,
you have to have malpractice
insurance.
And are your doulas that
actually do the delivering.
Do they have to have medical
malpractice insurance, so our
midwives are all covered under
our, our malpractice policy.
So it's a madam chair. It's a,
it's a umbrella.
Type, um
Insurance. Do you happen to know
what the hospitals do?
Uh, I believe they have similar
policies that.
I suspect just cost a whole lot.
You suscept
Excuse me, Ma'am, I'm sure you
suspect costs a whole lot more.
Physicians in hospitals, they
malpractice rates are much
higher than certified nurse
midwives and licensed midwives.
Thank you for that. Yeah, that's
what, that's my point, Madam
Chair.
That's my point. They're, their
risk.
is a lot more and you're wanting
equal reimbursement. I am all
for you to get equal
reimbursement, but there are
entities across the state.
That don't get equal
reimbursement. We thought, Madam
Chair, in a bill that, um,
actually that, uh, Carrie helped
me with a couple of years ago
that we were getting equal and
everyone was raising the
reimbursement rate across the
board for medical for um
Or Medicaid.
It didn't happen. They're
specialists across the state
that didn't get that.
Ras.
Um, and so my concern is.
Um
As I want you to get that
reimbursement. I also know the
cost of doing business as a
hospital is a lot more.
Um, and I, and so it's a concern
for me.
That
equals not really equal.
Uh, I don't, and, and, you know,
we talk about um Madam Chair and
and Representative, we talk
about, you know, these birthing
deserts.
I lived 4 hours away when I had
my babies.
You know, if I had to stop on
the side of the road, I would
have had to stop on the side of
the road. I didn't want to do
that.
Um, but
I, I don't.
Care for, um, not that you all
are doing it, but the scare
tactics of, you know, birthing
deserts and everything else. We
have done such great work.
Across the state of New Mexico
to say we have.
All of these options for women
who want to have a baby in in
any capacity.
Whether it's a doula or in a
hospital or a home birth,
whatever it is. I have 13
grandchildren.
Who, uh, my youngest daughter is
soon to deliver any day now.
Which I'm really upset her
planning was horrible because
here I sit.
So don't even talk to me around
March 1st.
Um, but I mean I'm just, I'm
just bringing to light that it's
not.
I understand you want equal
reimbursement, but the cost is
not equal. And so that's, that's
my biggest concern.
Madam, madam, uh, chair, members
of the committee, Representative
Armstrong. There's some other
things that I'd like you to
consider if you look at the fact
that doctors themselves don't
actually pay the medical
malpractice. It is the hospitals
who pay most of these, most of
these hospitals are multibillion
dollar conglomerates, and we
also must look at the fact that
many more doctors are involved
in the operation coming under
that under that umbrella. So
let's take a look at the
birthing center. So the birthing
center is much smaller.
And it has uh it has a greater
attention that is being paid to
the individuals that come in for
their services and I would also
say to you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Armstrong, if you
looked at the at the maternal
mortality rate of those of a
hospital and you look at those
of a birthing center. I think
that you would be very much
surprised and the fact of the
attention that a woman gets when
she's in a birthing center and
the likelihood that she's gonna
be much better off, I think that
we are looking at something
that.
It's a much more equivalent and
looking at the fact in the
service that will be received.
That's what I'd like you to look
at, Madam Chair, members of the
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
uh, Representative. Um, you
know, it's all about choices.
Um, I really dislike it when
someone talks about big
corporate.
Um, because
People have choices.
They may choose a hospital for
whatever reason, and they may
choose your facility for
whatever reason. I'm all about
choices.
But I really dislike it when
we're, we have negativity
towards the corporate that have
served serviced New Mexicans for
years.
Um, and so I, I, I'm about
choices.
But I want to weigh equally.
What the cost and a lot of
hospitals now.
Our subcontracting with doctors
where doctors have to pay their
own medical malpractice.
So they're not always under the
hospital.
And so maybe we should think
about fixing the medical
malpractice problem that we have
in the state of New Mexico. I
hope the governor's listening.
Because that is our biggest
problem.
If it was fair across the board?
Heck yeah, let's do it.
But it's not fair right now. And
we are
Funding, I'm, I'm not even gonna
go off on that, but thank you
for that. I, I appreciate your
insight always, uh,
representative.
I appreciate that.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong, uh, Representative
Sarato.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward. I really
appreciate this dialogue that
we're having right now. Um, I
have just a few questions for me
to understand. Uh, so, Madam
Chair Representative expert,
what is a labor transfer?
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. uh, when somebody
comes to the birth center and is
and is admitted in labor
sometimes their risk status
changes, their babies in a funny
position.
develop
hypertension, start bleeding,
things like that, and then we'd
require to transfer to the
hospital for the next level of
care.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. That
actually an expert, um, that
answered my, uh, my expression
which was, you know, there's
obviously so many complications
that happen in a birth that are
expected or not. Um, I'm also
curious of birth center, Madam
Chairs representative, it does
not do prenatal.
Madam Chairpresentative.
Madam Chair Representative,
actually, we prefer to do all
the prenatal care cannot just
come to us for birth, so we get
to know them. People can
transfer in and their prenatal
care, but you can't just come
and have a baby with us. We have
to know that you're low risk in
order to come and have a Madam
Chair representative expert
that, that fills my heart. Uh,
we were both of my daughters
that I had in New Mexico, you
know, I'm 10 minutes from the
hospital. Um, I, I had
complications and I was, you
know, in a pool of women that
had complications, but the
number of women that were
traveling for ultrasounds 2
hours.
to Santa Fe or or other just
maintenance is, is overwhelming
and the number of of families
that I knew that got hotel
rooms, uh, in the additional
expense because you just don't
know when a baby's coming, so
you're generally throwing some
dice and hoping they come in
that little window we
anticipate. So I really
appreciate that, you know, that
aspect. Um, Madam Chair,
representative and expert, uh,
one thing that someone asked us,
uh, or sorry, sorry, it was one
of the analyses.
It said that there's only one
certified uh birthing center in
the state, uh, I'm sorry.
Accredited birthing center
state. Can you, uh, expand on
that? Is that true? How would
this help if there is only one
in the state?
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. Yes,
we are the only nationally
accredited and licensed birth
center in the state of New
Mexico.
Um
I think that the.
Issue with opening birth centers
is difficult and especially in
the rural communities because of
the cost and
You know, we've been open for
nearly 14 years and we've
struggled a lot of that time.
Um, we didn't get facility
reimbursement for Medicaid until
2017, and so.
We always on those births. This
would help because there are
midwives out in those
communities who have really no
other way to practice except
maybe in home birth, um, but
this would allow facilities to
open, and we know that when
pregnant people get prenatal
care
in their communities when their
risk status changes or if the
risk status changes, they have
the opportunity to at least be
transferred to a hospital
instead of not even knowing and
not getting care.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and expert.
So if I'm understanding right,
you feel that by equating the
Medicaid dollar amount that you
would, what would happen was
there would be a more uh
birthing centers would grow
throughout the state is what you
anticipate, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair representative, yes, I
believe so. Thank you. And then,
Madam Chair, a representative,
you may be able to help me with
this, um, and it's just for
clarification for myself, it
seems so when you say.
You had it on the sheet that you
guys passed out, but you know,
it's $1400 including baby for
what you all preside. Thank you.
Um, and then, uh, for the
average hospital it's about
$2200 for what they provide.
This is for the same services
provided. Is that correct, Madam
Chair Representative?
Madame Cha Representative, yes,
that is correct. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and I'm, this
may be a presumption, but I'm
presuming part of the reason why
doctors and hospitals may pay
more as that they provide
additional services for more
complicated births. Is that part
of the reason why they're
expenses may be higher, Madam
Chairpresentative, Madam Chair
Representative, that is correct.
Manager uh I, I appreciate that
perspective because again, it's,
it's like services, like costs.
That's what we're looking at
when you provide additional,
then, then absolutely my
C-section costs more for my
doctor and
and, and I, and should I have
been on Medicaid, that would
have had a larger reimbursement.
My, uh, gestational diabetes
when they, when they, you know,
uh, my, um, they, uh, you know,
my preeclampsia concerns, you
know, all of those things were
additional costs incurred by the
doctor that would have been paid
for us separately, but for like
services, um, it seems that this
is that that that's what we're
trying to encourage on, um, you
know, my only concern with this
was what happens when there's a
complication because they happen
so suddenly, but it does sound
like Madam Chair and represented
that there's a process for that.
So no
question on that. I just
appreciate that that lot. Thank
you.
Um, thank you, representative
Serato.
Uh, Germanman Lunte.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to move a do pass on House Bill
56 as amended.
OK, we have a do pass motion
from Representative Lin and a
second from Representative
Serato, we do have a few more
people for questions, so we'll
come back to that motion.
Representative Murphy
represents an experts. Thank you
very much, um.
I have 2 daughters, um, they're
both, um, and a new grandson, so
just over 2.5 years old, so this
is an issue that um I feel
strongly about, um.
The
My experience has been that
uncomplicated births.
And become complicated very
quickly.
And with that in mind, not all
facilities are gonna necessarily
have the same resources.
I know that hospitals many times
have cardiac.
Uh, cardiologist, other types of
experts that have got to be
supported, um, in, in some way,
and I have to wonder if that's
not some of the reasons for the
differences in the Medicaid
reimbursement rates.
Um
My, my other issue is is that
this seems to only.
Benefit one company and I think
we would all agree.
That the goal really is to have
more burdening centers,
adequately resourced birthing
centers throughout the state,
and that's something I would
absolutely support.
Because we have that across our
healthcare spectrum.
Um, in this state.
And so, um,
Then the question, Madam Chair
and the experts is how do we do
that?
Is this really do that? Is this
accelerate getting these types
of sinners in the areas where
they're most needed, the rural
areas, um, the reservations in
particular.
Um, where the distances and the
risks are high.
So I don't believe it does. I
would love to be convinced that
it does.
But I would think that in
following up uh my leader's
comments that the issues are
broader than this, and they
involve medical malpractice
rates.
And other things and so.
Um, and perhaps grant programs,
um, adjustments in the tax code.
So with that statement, I, I
unfortunately can't support the
legislation as it's presented. I
certainly would love to work
with you on the larger issue of
getting better medical care for
all of our residents, but, but
our at-risk mothers in
particular.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you expert.
And
um represented.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy, uh, Chairman de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So is part of the intent of this
bill to
Help increase more facilities
that would decrease the desert,
the uh maternity care desert, is
that part of it?
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, let me take a stab at
it. Yes, um, the short answer is
yes.
I, I wanna go back to some of
the questions that's been asked
by leader Armstrong, when there
is a birth, whether it's in a
hospital or a birth center,
there are two different bills
that go to Medicaid.
The first bill was for
professional services. That's
the bill that actually pays the
midwife.
Or the physician.
So that that professional
service fee is different
depending on the kind of
provider that you're actually
seeing, which helps account for
some of that other cost that's
happening in a hospital setting.
The 2nd bill that goes to
Medicaid is for the facility
fee. The facility fee is
supposed to cover the cost of
everything else, right? So
you're registered nurses, um,
your utilities, everything that
it takes to actually run the
center, including, yes, the cost
of medical malpractice
insurance.
When you're in a hospital, that
facility fee, if you have a more
complicated case to
representative Serrado's point,
your facility fees are going to
be higher because the cost of
that care was higher, but if you
are in a birth center or a
hospital, and it's just a
non-complicated vaginal birth.
Um, I gave birth to my daughter
at, at Darlo's last year. Um,
those are similar expenses. So
there's only one nationally
accredited board cert.
Or nationally accredited in
state licensed for center right
now, that national accreditation
is the important key.
We have other birth centers in
the state of New Mexico that
don't have that national
accreditation. It's very costly
to get your national
accreditation. There's a lot of
other things that go into that
accreditation. But this bill is
trying to do is say, if we can
get the Medicaid reimbursements
to a comparable level between
hospitals and birth centers for
non-complicated vaginal birth,
we can then incentivize those
first centers that exist right
now that are not nationally
accredited to.
Get their national
accreditation. They can start
billing Medicaid in a far more
comprehensive way than they are
right now, and that can become
part of the solution. We are not
pretending that birth centers
are the solution to any of our
high risk patients. They are not
the solution to necessarily all
of our maternal health that
deserts, but they are a tool in
the toolbox that we can use for
our low-risk patients so that we
can alleviate some of that
burden.
That's happening in other
places, so that are high risk
mothers who need to be in the
hospital setting are there,
they're being well taken care
of, low risk mothers like
myself, um, can choose to be at
a birth center that's maybe
closer to them, that's
culturally relevant for them,
um, or is, you know, just a
place where they're choosing to
have their their their family
grow.
So I, I hope that answers some
of the additional questions.
So
Madam Chair
The
The shoot that has the the
prices for, for the
non-complicated vaginal birth
newborn.
Dale 400 total and average
hospitals 3100.
Where do you get these prices
from? How did you arrive at?
Those are the just averages.
So that's a really great
question, Madam Chair and
Representative de la Cruz. Uh,
so what we did is first centers
have a national association as
hospitals do, right? Um, and
there a couple of years ago
there was a mandate that
hospitals post what they're
charging, um, charge sheets, but
they can't be read by human
beings. It has to be read by a
computer. So there is a national
organization um called Turquoise
Health, not to be confused with
turquoise care or Medicaid plan.
Um.
The turquoise health will take
those files, feed them into the
computer and will tell you this
is how much every hospital is
charging for this code. So our
national association looked at
these codes, non-complicated
vaginal birth, normal newborn,
and they looked at cesarean
section and said in New Mexico,
what is each payer paying for
those individual codes. So we
took those individual codes and
we average them amongst the 5
health plans.
Um, and that's how we got those
numbers, but it's those charge
sheets that are published by the
hospitals. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
So
In having this.
additional reimbursement for
birth centers for Medicaid, uh,
the intent is also to
incentivize by having more
people go to the birth centers
because it's less expensive.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, yes, madam
chair and, and Representative de
la Cruz.
The cost savings at birth
centers are giving to the system
is not necessarily in the actual
non-complicated vaginal birth.
The cost savings that our
centers are making to the system
is through decreased rates of
C-section. So there is a
that receives your care at a
birth center, even if you end up
having to transfer because you
risk out at a birth center, your
chance of getting a C-section is
much, much lower. Um, it's only
about 20% of a C-section rate
that comes out of birth centers
and C-sections are reimbursed.
We did the averages there at
about $4500. So, as we have more
care that's happening in birth
centers, again, the cost saving
isn't in the similar service
because there's parody there,
the
Cost saving is
Hopefully diverting more and
more patients away from having
to get a C-section, and that's
what actually saves the system
money overall. Lastly, Madam
Squirter, how does this jive and
maybe it's not part of what
you're working on, but how does
this jive with smaller
communities.
Smaller hospitals that are
barely surviving now. Is there
anything that
Helps in that type of situation.
Madam Chair and Representative
De la Cruz, like I said, this
bill is not gonna solve the
hospital problem. Um, you know,
in, in my professional world, I,
I represent the physicians to
the New Mexico Medical Society.
Uh, we are very, very attuned to
the struggles at the rural
hospitals are having.
As more and more rural hospitals
though are forced in a position
to close their labor and
delivery units.
Weave you birth centers as
something that could come into
that community and say if you
are a high risk mother, you have
gestational diabetes.
You're going to have to travel
to go to a hospital, and
hospitals need to be supported
for that. But if you are a
low-risk mother, we can take
care of you here in your
community. And so again, it's
not solving the labor and
delivery problem for the
hospital, but potentially
providing another option for
those low-risk mothers to have
care at home or closer to home
and having to drive potentially
2 hours to actually have their
birth.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Chair de la Cruz,
Representative Parajon.
Um, just a few, uh.
clarifying questions.
Um,
First thing, um.
Experts.
Um, so this was, but.
So what you were saying, um,
Miss Brunder is that.
One
That the profession Medicaid
covers the personal services and
um fee in the professional
services, does the CNN provider.
There's a CNN provider already
have pay parity with provider.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Parejon, uh, when
the state has increased through
House Bill 2.
The professional services
reimbursement rates to be no
less than 150% of Medicare. That
is creating a comparable
professional services fee for
that professional service code.
So there is a Medicare code for
the certified nurse midwife.
Abigail is now getting 150% of
that Medicare code when she
attends a non-complicated
vaginal birth, just like an
OBGYN is receiving 150% of the
Medicare code when they attend a
non-complicated vaginal birth.
So there's already comparability
there.
Um
And you had said this before,
but in order to to bill for a
Medicaid facility, you need to
be madam chair and state
licensed. That is a bill that
passed in 2015 and the rules are
promulgated in. And, um,
And so
One of my concerns is, is that
some of the um some of the folks
that I, some of the folks that
I've worked with as in in my
capacity with like homelessness
and housing, you know, have,
have had a lot of trouble
getting accreditation in order
to um bill for Medicaid
services, I mean, it, it is very
difficult, so, um.
Do you know, and, and we have
already a lot of birth centers
that are running and they aren't
necessarily need to be, um,
nationally accredited.
So you know it, it, it's, is
there any?
Effort to um.
Is there any effort to try to
involve the folks like, um,
those that are working in um
like breath of my heart and
espanola, for instance, or, you
know, have have those folks been
consulted, do they want to
become nationally incredible.
Madam Chair and represented
Pajon, uh breath of my heart is
supportive of the bill. They
testified, um, during public
comment. I think that the
question about national
accreditation, one is in a
separate rule and so if we want
to talk.
about that national
accreditation piece. I think
that's very appropriate to do
with the Medicaid office and
with the Department of Health
through that licensing rule from
that bill from 2015. This bill
would just say anybody who is
billing Medicaid would receive
those comparable rates, so I
think that your question is.
Absolutely the right one to be
asking, but it's resolved in a
different place, not in this
legislation. Um, so I think that
that's something that we should
be doing and I think that's a
conversation that we can
definitely engage in with the
other percenters.
OK, so there is a lot of talk
about the national accreditation
piece, so I think that I think
that's what um.
But I was, I was trying to
understand because since there's
only one, it seems like we're
legislating for like one birth
center, um, supports and etc.
and it sounds like it is
difficult to get national
accreditation slash maybe the
birthing centers in the other
places that don't, um, but I
think um.
That that was kind of the.
Thank you, Representative
Parejon, um,
we have represented,
uh, please call the roll.
Representative Armstrong.
Uh,
Representative De la Cruz.
pass
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Lente.
Yes. Representative Mason.
Yes
Representative Matthews.
Yes
Representative Murphy.
No.
Representative Parejon.
Uh, yes, and I'd like to
explain.
Representative Serrado? Yes.
Representative De la Cruz.
Yes
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Mason.
So
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair
So turned around, um, Madam
Chair, the final tally is 7
votes, yes, uh, 2 votes no.
Thank you, um
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
think so first I, I'm a huge
supporter of births of Doula
work, um, when, um, when I was
growing up, that's what my
parents do is trained community
health workers and soula work is
so important because that that
in a lot of rural areas, that's
the only way that folks are able
to give birth, um, so it is
really important for me though
to ensure that as we're
developing, you know,
legislation like this where, um,
yes, we have Dara Luz a birthing
center coming forward to say
this that we're
Also looking at the broader
picture of all the birth centers
that are in our state, um,
especially the birth centers
that are serving our Hispanic
and our native communities,
right, who, who need these
services, um, in the rural
areas, so, um, I think you know
there is still some work to to
do, um, in terms of, um, in
terms of bringing that in and
making sure that this works for
everybody, uh, especially our
birthing centers that are um
across the state are doing
incredible, incredible work.
Um, for the folks who need.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
Representative Herndon and
experts, you have a do pass
motion on House Bill 56 as
amended.
Oh, that was loud.
the committee.
Representative Lujan.
To the hot seat.
Good afternoon.
Madam chair
Play musical chairs like in our
community, um, good afternoon.
Uh, madam chair, today, um.
I'm presenting
Uh house Bill.
26.
No, I'm not. This is the wrong
bill. That's the other bill I'm
working on in your committee. I
apologize. 232. Yes, thank you.
Um,
You guys got me real busy in
your committee, ma'am chair, um.
So, I just like to start off to
say that there's a real, there
are real barriers to home
ownership in New Mex for New
Mexicans.
Home ownership is out of reach
for many. I have heard from
constituents who are fortunate
enough to own a home about the
skyrocketing costs and increased
restrictions placed on them by
the HOAs in 2023 I heard
specifically from members of a
local HOA whose board was
proposing, I believe at that
time, a 3% fee to be paid to the
HOA on the sale of any home in
the AA.
In addition to monthly HA fees.
This would further put ownership
out of reach.
For many, mortgage lenders will
not cover these costs.
And it's hard enough meeting a
20% threshold now for HOAs, uh,
for your down payment and now
HOAs are proposing to increase
the costs to purchase from 3 to
10%.
This bill would prevent an age
wave from such an assessed fee,
madam chair, and I don't have
any um expert witness, this was
one of those bills that was
generated purely from my
constituents and their concerns,
and I'm sure many of us, a few,
uh, live or know about our HAs
would would hopefully agree.
Thank you, Madam Chair. With
that, I stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
let's, there's no one in the
room for comments. Is there
anyone online in favor of this
bill? Is there anyone online
opposed to this bill?
Great, then we'll bring it over
to the committee for questions.
Uh, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Uh,
One
I guess
My first question is this.
apply to like
2nd or or greater transfer of
property.
Uh, to the first owner from the.
Like I own a lot that I bought
from the HOA and I'm selling it
to.
Another party ever built a
house.
That what this
And Miss Maner, yes.
Does the A, Madam Chair,
representative does the HMO.
When I sell this property.
Incur
Any expense on their part.
Man, it's my understanding that
it could go either to the seller
or the buyer. The seller, um,
would, could either with that
assessed percentage incur the
loss or have to, you know, so
that the buyer could then pay
the HOA or the the the the buyer
could just pay for it.
There could be an adjustment if
that's what you're asking.
Uh, Madam Chair, not exactly.
I'm.
You know,
Will the second owner have to.
There's the way.
Charge a fee to change the
ownership from one to the other
they actually incur an expense
HOA.
Not, not per se, uh, it would
be.
In, in, in the, in the closing,
Miss Madam Chair, is my
understanding that they then um.
With that percentage would be
added to whatever that cost is,
so say you have a $600,000 home.
It'd be $18,000 that would be
owed to the HOA.
By the, by the new property
owner.
Armchair.
Madam Chair, representative, I
don't.
I don't know if that's still
answered my question.
I apologize if I'm not
understanding your question I
don't know
how to put it exactly.
Uh
I realized when I buy property
from an HMO.
I've
Right, but
Is there an added expense that
the that
Is the HOA have to.
Send money for you to sell it
again.
The HA is not incurring any
costs,
Madam Chair,
I don't know. I just
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, the
only other thing that I guess
kind of sticks in my car a
little bit.
When I buy a property from the
HMO.
I signed a contract that says
this is what we will do.
So now we're
They enlisted.
Um
To, uh
Undo
A contract which
I have already agreed.
When I bought the property I
agreed that these were the
rules.
Now then,
You're asking, they're asking
us.
say that these rules that I
agreed to when I bought the
property are no longer valid.
Madam Chair, I don't believe
that that is entirely true, I
think there was a.
But it seems to your point, um,
I'm not sure of all the
legalities that would be how
that would, that agreement would
come upon, but there is that
additional fee.
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Mason,
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, ma'am, Chair
Representative Luan, um.
I, uh, do have some experience
in this area and, and correct me
if, if my
Understanding is incorrect.
Um
Typically, Madam Chair
Representative, typically these
types of fees are contained in a
HOA document.
Going to uh represent Mason's
Point.
And in my experience they've
taken two forms.
One form is is that as a tax.
Sometimes HOAs will actually tax
the transfer and sale from one
individual to the other as part
of the HOA contract.
And that is to both cover fees.
And also perhaps to um build um.
Typically HOAs have a reserve
fund or either improvements that
need to be done to the property,
emergencies or that type of
thing.
Um, sometimes there's an
additional administrative fee,
but usually they're separate.
And that is the type of fee I
believe you're talking about and
that is the transfer.
In essence in a title within the
internal HOA documents. So
therefore, Mark Murphy has sold
his HOA property to Joe Blow.
And the HOA then needs to
correct its records to say that.
Joe Smith now owns the property,
his HOA fee bills can go to a
certain address and so forth.
But to represent the Mason's
Point, these are private
contracts.
That are agreed to when one
party goes in and purchases it
and agrees to the, the
conditions of the HOA agreement
when establishes the homeowners
association.
Now
Sometimes if I was to transfer
that property.
I would be required to pay for
it and sometimes the seller
would be required to pay for it,
but it's still contained within
the HOA document.
And I guess long way around the
barn, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, isn't it really
the responsibility of the buyer
and the seller, to understand
what their obligations are under
these these HO agreements and
either make a market decision to
enter into those agreements or
not enter into those agreements.
Um, that's my question. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thanks for the
question, and I understand it,
and I, I do understand that that
would be part of an agreement if
agreed upon in an HOA, and that
was what they were, they agreed
upon. What I am trying to uh
mitigate through this piece of
legislation is to prohibit that
this type of agreement in NHOA.
Because it, it creates a barrier
and a cost that that.
It can be really inhibitive.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, but the point is,
is that these are two willing
parties that are negotiating and
entering the contracts.
And the HOA, Madam Chair and
Representative, the HOA cannot
charge a fee that's not legally
entitled to charge by contract.
So in other words, if uh if
If all of a sudden
Representative I Mason and I
enter into an agreement.
And one of us gets a bill from
the HOA that says, hey, you guys
did this and you owe us $500.
Mason and I would probably pull
out the HOA contract and say, we
don't see anywhere that there's
this provision or we would say
we would, we did look at the
contract, we should have
reviewed it beforehand, you're
right, we owe the $500. But
these are private party
contracts and negotiations and
Madam Chair Representative, what
I think you're, you're asking
this body to do is to say, we're
gonna, we're gonna decide what
people can agree to, what they
can't agree to in private
business contracts,
Representative, uh.
Excuse me, Madam Chair
Representative, thank you.
May I respond, Manager?
Yes, I understand what you're
saying, and, and I, I'm not
disagreeing upon what, how, how
you're, how that is, how those
are contracts are arranged, what
I'm trying and I understand that
HOAs are private um entities and
have their own governance. That
is, that is true. But when they
are, they are in creating these
um.
These rules, I guess, or these
charges through their HOA
through their authority, then it
is inhibitive and it's, it's
part of the issue that we're
having in a barrier to to costs
for um housing, Madam Chair,
thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair, I'm
sorry, just one final point and
I'll get out of everybody's way,
um.
Uh
I guess, Madam Chair
Representative Lujan, who is the
HOA?
You say that the HOA creates
these fees, who is the HOA? Man,
this could, this can go to any
HOA has the ability to do this.
Thank you, madam, Madam Chair
Representative, one last point.
If I could answer my own
question, HOA are the members of
the Homeowners Association that
form it.
So it's the community of people
that have come together and
decided that this is how they
want their community to be
governed under these er and if
there's fees involved they agree
to them and if there's not, they
don't and any subsequent
purchases or sales that are
subject to those agreements, but
it's a voluntary agreement, um,
the way I understand it, Madam
chair and representative Blue.
Madam Chair nodded, not all
HOAs, um.
Have the same process and
governing um agreements and some
make these decisions without the
entire membership. Thank you.
And I'm sure, I, I'll just drop
it at that. I think, I think
that with all due respect to
Representative and I have had
different experiences and we'll
have to um disagree. Thank you
for your indulgence. Thank you,
Representative for your
presentation.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy, um, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Thank you, Representative Lujan,
for bringing this forward. I, I
remember this from the last
time.
I was curious
Why do we have HOAs? Why don't
we just do away with HOAs? I'm,
I'm serious because that's
exactly what this you wanna do,
you wanna say HOAs don't have
the right people, um, Madam
Chair and, and representative
people.
Willingly join HOAs. They
willingly in a contract when I
buy a house and it's there's an
HOA fee.
And I know what those are for,
and I read all the the things.
But the biggest pain in my rear
has been an HOA.
And, but I chose to to to be
there. And so I'm, I'm just, you
know, people want their
neighborhoods to look a certain
way. They want everything to be
a certain way, so.
Aren't we just taking the power
away from the HOAs and and the
people who actually choose to
live in them.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative
for that, um.
It's a bigger conversation. I do
do, I do agree. I, I'm, I'm zero
in on one factor and to be quite
clear, when you entered in EA
and you chose to enter into that
HUA.
That was at that that time and
that when, um, you purchased
your home and property.
However
They can, the, the governing
body, the HOA can change and
their fees and their conditions
can change.
Continuously
So that can be inhibitive and
may maybe this does enter us
into a bigger conversation
about HOA, quite frankly, I
might agree with you on.
On that in the question you
proposed, why do we need them?
Um,
Again, there are so many
different functioning ways. Some
do incredible jobs, some do, you
know, that, but there is an
issue of of the oversight with
them. There is an issue of, you
know, different uh pros and
cons, manager, and I think a
study could.
Could be proposed at some point,
but
I just heard of it way down in
uh Silver City in Grant County,
where there's a huge debacle
there, and the county had to
take over because the HOA wasn't
able to um.
Uh
Uh, incur the cost for the, the
waste management or something to
that effect, so this is a bigger
issue and a bigger problem. What
I'm just zeroing in is on this
very simple 11 page probably
this shortest bill I've ever
had, Madam Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
just
Um, you know, I, I think
protections are always nice, but
I also think that uh entering
into a contract, you know what
you're getting into. I
understand that they change.
Get on the HOA board, join the
board.
Have a voice. Make it, make help
make the decision.
Um, and if you don't like it,
then sell your property in your
HOA.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Leader Armstrong, um.
What from representative Sorato
in a second, please call the
roll.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
No, and I want to explain my
vote. Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lee.
No
Representative Mason.
Oh
Representative Matthews.
I'm sorry.
We're voting to approve the bill
pass motion. It's a pass, OK.
Um, I
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parejon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair, uh, final tally for
the Du pass motion is 4 votes,
yes, and 6 votes.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Oh sorry, sorry, explanation
representative De la Cruz, I
apologize, Mr. Cha.
I was gonna have her represent
I wrote it down.
Representative Lujan, I
appreciate your intent.
I think you're trying to do
something noble by trying to
help people have more access to
purchasing homes, selling homes,
but.
I have to agree that.
And I have a little bit of
experience with this myself.
When you enter, you know what
you're getting into.
And
Anything that impedes that by
the government on a voluntary
thing between private property
owners, I think it's problematic
for her.
I think there's other segues for
us to do affordable housing and.
So thank you, Roger. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you for
the conversation to all of our
committee members. I think this
is a much bigger conversation.
Thank you.
Thank you, oh, but, but sit back
down, we're not done. Sorry.
Yeah, because we're back on the
bill thank you represented Dela
Cruz. So since we are back on,
what is the will of the
committee at this?
I don't, that's OK, it's
all right.
The
Never mind. Thank you, madam
Chair, and we're all learning
and, and I hope that, and I
learned a lot today too, so
thank you very much. Thank you
very much.
OK, committee members, thank you
for another good day. I have no
notes. I, yeah.
Thank you, we are adjourned,
thank you.
OK, perfect.
