Well, there we go. All right. So
thank you, Madam Chair, and I
will do my best to be as
efficient with your time as
possible. I was watching your
floor debate and uh ours is not
any more fun. So, uh,
essentially we set up a sa, a
horse racing integrity and
Safety Authority jockey and
exercise rider insurance program
a couple of years ago. It was
the first time, Madam Chair
members of the committee that,
um, we were able to bring the
tracks, the horsemen, and the
breeders together and to agree
on something in several decades,
and that was quite the, you
know, what kicking.
contest for me, and we got that
done, and now we have these
dollars that have come together
that we allotted to make sure
that this very rich part of New
Mexico, the, the horse racing
industry that brings a lot of
pride and and culture to our
area as well, to our state.
These funds are basically
stranded, Madam President, and
we need a fund to have them sit
there so they can be uh
dispensed that way. I do have,
as I said, Fred Heinrich, who is
the um compliance officer and
operator of the Sunland Park
racing track, and I will tell
you that we have full essential.
agreement once again in the
industry, um, so this fund gets
set up and then there's a way
and a mechanism to actually
build these dollars out the way
that they need to in a
professional manner. The key
provisions of the legislation
are that we established this
fund, the funding sources
remain, the money is collected
by the New Mexico Racing
Commission, um, distributions
and appropriations income from
investmentss, gifts, grants,
donations, and bequets, uh, the
administration is another
provision, and why would we want
to do this? We just want to, um,
enhance safety for the
participants.
of our horse racing industry,
primarily the jockeys, uh,
compliance with legal standards,
uh, financial sustainability and
support for the horse racing
industry to make sure that it
continues to to be a
professional operation. So I'm
gonna ask Mr. Heinrich to say
about 42 seconds worth of, uh,
backup dancing and singing here
and then we'll, we'll take any,
wherever you want to go, madam
chair.
Thank you, Senator toil uh and
thank you, Madam Chair. Um, this
is a technical fix, as Senator
Padilla mentioned, no
substantive changes to the law.
Um, it passed overwhelmingly two
years ago, and we're just here
to get this fix of the racing
commission can actually fully
implemented. That's simple.
Thank you. OK, let's go to uh uh
Senator, are you done with your
presentation?
Have I told you how wonderful
you are.
I'm glad you added that in.
Thank you. Um, is anybody here
in favor of this bill?
OK, if you'd like to speak on
it, you've got one minute. The
attendant won't hold the
microphone and uh Patrick will,
will tie me.
Uh, afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the Penny J Squeaks
registered lobbyist for
Albuquerque Downs Racetrack and
Casino. This does fix an issue
that was created when the bill
was initially passed. We didn't
create an independent fund. The
money just stayed in the purse
fund, but it was then segregated
out for jockey insurance and
hissa. This creates that
independent fund and it allows
the racing commission to more
easily, um,
Move the money to where it needs
to be moved in terms of paying
the insurance because the
insurance payments aren't due on
the fiscal year. So this fixes
that issue, that's all it does.
We'd urge you that you move.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for all Americans Doso
Downs racetrack, we also stand
in support of this legislation
for the reasons stated by Mr.
Weeks. We appreciate the
sponsor's work in getting this
clarification so that the fund
works the way it was intended
to. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for Penn Entertainment, we
operate the Zea Park racetrack
down in Hobbs. Uh, we stand in
support of this bill to need to
clean up.
He's passive.
Thank you. Is there anybody on
uh Zoom?
OK. How about anybody in
opposition to this bill? OK?
Anybody on Zoom?
No, madam. All righty, let's go
to the committee.
Does everybody
A leader Armstrong. I move to
pass on Senate Bill 92.
Wow, senator,
I think that's almost a
As fast as we've gone around
here. OK, Patrick to take the
role. Representative Armstrong.
Representative Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representativeente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthew,
Representative Murphy, yes,
Representative Parajun.
Representative Serato? Madam
Vice Chair. Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, final tally
for the due pass motion, 9 votes
yes, 0 votes no. Senator, you
have a pass.
Thank you everybody very much.
Have a wonderful day. Thank you.
Thank you.
Alrighty.
So we've got
OK, Senator, in your
presentation, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair. The Senate was
still on the floor, but I was
like, I have to leave now.
Um, thank you for hearing our
Senate bill today. I'm excited
to be here in front of all of
you.
Senate Bill 175 is a simple bill
that expands the uses of the
childcare revolving loan fund.
This fund is housed at the New
Mexico Finance Authority, and I
have Marquita Russell here to
help with any technical
questions.
This one was created by the
legislature in 2003 with the
intent of helping childcare
providers around the state
expand their businesses with
access to small interest loans.
Since then, it has only been
funded twice, once in 2005, and
again last year.
This year in hospital 2, there
was a $10 million appropriation
included.
And we are excited that it's
still there.
One thing that's ST 175 is
attempting to do is to allow
loans from this fund to be paid
back on a contract for service
basis. To qualify for a contract
for services repayment option,
the childcare provider must meet
certain criteria found on the
bottoms of pages 3 and 4.
Such as being located in
Childcare desert and offering
non-traditional hours of care.
SE 175 also expands the
eligibility of the loan to allow
employers who wish to offer
childcare services to their
employees to apply and build
build out these services.
Access to capital is needed for
childcare providers in our
state. We know that many parents
struggle to find childcare in
their communities.
And many providers would also
like to expand their services
but are unable to do so because
they do not have the funds to
renovate or build.
Access to more childcare helps
all of us, and we're confident
this bill will also help.
And that will stand for
questions.
All righty. Um, is there anyone
here in favor of this bill?
Anybody on Zoom?
Yes.
We're an SB 175.
Ruth Porta, you have one minute.
members of the committee. My
name is Ruthor.
And preschool.
Smoking issue of not being able
to um.
Can you hear me now?
Hello.
Can you hear me?
Give us one on that.
Can you hear me now?
I.
I think she can hear us.
We're gonna hold in place for
just a minute, Senator.
How many people do we have on
How many people do we have?
2.
In advance.
OK, so we, what do
OK, so we, what
my team, what are we?
Of
OK.
OK. Thank you.
So what we're gonna do is we
will
Go back to the, well, we'll go
to the committee. We'll see if
they can work out any of the
technical issues. We've got two
people that are showing on Zoom
and it appears like they are in
favor of the bill.
If you'll stay on the line, uh,
we'll try to see if we can work
out the IT issue, um, but if
not, we will note that you are
in favor.
OK. So let's go to the
committee.
Oh, let's go to opposition.
Nobody in the room?
How about on my um
yeah, OK.
Alright, then let's go on to the
committee.
Any questions?
Mo you faster.
Oh, you guys are moving fast
today. OK.
Let's go to leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, one of my questions is,
Uh, is there a requirement to
expand 10%? Is that, am I
reading that correctly?
Madam Chair Representative, to
qualify for the contract for
services, yes, there is the 10%.
Expansion requirement. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
Senator, so
And this is for childcare,
correct?
Yes, yeah.
Um, we regulate the heck out of
childcare and isn't it really,
really hard to get a license
to expand, you'd have to make a
bigger building. You'd have to,
there's a lot of requirements. I
had a daycare, childcare center,
and I know all the red tape. Is
this unreasonable to be able to
qualify as part of that, or do
you think not?
Madam representative that's not
in this bill that is a good
point you're making, um,
I don't.
The, the fun from NSA is to
allow
The, the fun from NSA is
to apply for these small
interest loans.
So I'm simply if the business
needs all the other
qualifications for expansion
then they can make money.
But I want to add anything to
that.
So Madam, so currently the
program allows more loans
regardless of whether you're
just um improving the facility
or expanding the facility, you
can qualify for a loan from this
fund. The new addition for
contractor services requires
that you, um, expand by 10%
according to Senate Bill 175, so
you can still access the low
costs money and, and be able to
improve your facility without
the 10% expansion, but to add to
qualify for that additional
contractor services you would
need.
To meet the secondary criteria.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Marquita and
so.
That's a little bit concerning
to me just because of the
regulations of childcare centers
and how that works. Um, do we
Is this requirement, this is the
new requirement and its
contractor services, so explain
to me what the contract for
services.
Thank you Madam for services
provides that a portion of the
loan can be repaid the provision
of services, meeting certain
targets, and so it's just a
different way for the loan to be
repaid. Some of it gets repaid
by cash and some gets repaid by
the provision of services to
those that meet that
qualification. And I think,
Madam Chair, relative to your
earlier point, the projects that
are selected here and
recommended to the Finance
Authority will go through a
vetting process by ECECD. There
are partners in this program.
They
accept the applications if the
um if the center couldn't
qualify for the expansion.
There's series out in my mind
that the application would even
come forward, um, so they
couldn't meet it to begin with.
It would never get to the
finance authority. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and we're providers
at the table or what what do
they think about all of this,
and is this for private
providers as well as is this for
all providers?
Madam Chair, I'll let the
senators obviously speak to how
this came about, um, but this is
for private for-profit and not
for profit. So public facilities
don't qualify for this funding,
just nonprofit and for-profit
facilities.
And Madam Chair, Representative
Serato is also a co-sponsor on
this bill, and she brought it
last year as well. Um, and the
public comment you're gonna hear
from, I believe, are childcare
providers who wanted to weigh in
and in support of this bill and
have been part of the process
along with the ECECD department.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your answers.
Thank you. Do we have any other
questions from the committee?
Uh, Representative Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you presenters
representative, I'm sorry,
senator. Um, gotta get used to
that these last two weeks. Um,
I, I just wasn't clear, um,
These loans require that you
increase the capacity that you
expand by 10% is that a physical
expansion or an expansion in the
number of children you're
taking.
Madam Chair representative, the
expansion part is only for the
qualifications for the contract
for services repayment option,
but it does, it's on page 4 line
7.
6 and 7.
And that they increase the
number of children they're
serving by 10%.
Oh, OK.
Uh, thank you. I just thought it
was hard be hard to always
physically do a 10% expansion.
Thank you.
Alrighty, um.
So I guess the only question I
have is if, if we're looking at,
I just wanted clarification, so
all the money is like the early
childhood trust fund money.
For child care is not available
to expand daycare services. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair Representative or
Madam Chair, um.
In general, I think I, that's a
good question. I know the answer
and we have the answer for the,
the money and the fund from
NMFA, but outside of that,
Maybe later Armstrong knows that
it's for better or um so I I do
know the answer. The answer is
no.
And so I just want you to
clarify that for the committee,
that that's why this would be um
Uh, uh, it would be helpful
because people think that
there's all this money
available, but it's not to
expand those types of programs,
so, um, that was my
clarification point, so thank
you. Um.
We do, I think we have zoom back
on. We're gonna just try one
more time.
Ruth Porter.
If you want to try again.
Um, can you hear me now?
Yes.
OK. Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ruth Porta. I am the
owner of Esperanza Preschool
back in 2016, my husband, an
army veteran, and I applied for
a small business administration
loan, which was a very complex
task to that took 14 months to
get approved.
In order to qualify for the
loan, my husband had to cash out
his 401k to have the Capitol
available for the 10% down
payment. There's no other
financial uh.
There's no other loans that we
could apply. By 2018, we had a
beautiful facility. We've seen
how capital funding has helped
public schools expand New Mexico
pre-K, but private providers who
make up a critical part of our
childcare infrastructure.
have been left behind. I ask
you, please, to give a small
business like mine a chance to
compete, grow and thrive by
passing Senate Bill 175. You're
not just standing childcare, you
are investing in New Mexico,
working families and economy.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Barba Tiro.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Barbara Luna Tedro and
I'm a provider in Farmington,
New Mexico, been in business for
25 years. I have been fortunate
enough to expand to 5 beautiful
facilities to meet the needs of
my community. However, that has
been at a long expense, um,
privately. And what I mean by
that is I would like the
committee to understand that it
has taken my husband and I, 25
years of cashing out 401ks,
taking loans from
Um, untraditional methods,
because when you go to a bank or
the SBA people don't loan on
children.
And that is the problem with
childcare.
We are facing this year,
Secretary Greginsky is looking
at lowering ratios and uh in
childcare for infants and
toddlers from 6 to 5, and we are
looking at losing a capacity of
over 800 infant slots in the
state of New Mexico.
This funding is needed to please
allow private providers to meet
the needs of New Mexico families
and expanding and utilizing the
money available through NMFA. I
urge you to please support House
Bill 175. Thank you.
Thank you. OK. Um, so if there's
no more questions from the
committee, let's go. Do we have
a, a motion to move it to pass.
Patrick to take their role
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz, yes,
Representative Fernandez,
Representative Lente
Representative Mason.
Yeah. Representative Matthews,
Representative Murphy? Yes,
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair. Yes,
Madam Chair, final tally for the
Du pass motion, 10 votes yes and
0 votes no. Got a pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Thank you. All
righty. Um, we will go to HP
426.
OK.
So we're gonna go to SB 112. Do
we have people for SB 112?
Alrighty. You're back.
News to me as well. Yeah, OK, go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. San Bill
112.
Amends the property tax statute
to exempt property taxes on
student dormitories built on
university-owned land through
the a public-private
partnership.
If an active this bill will
promote lower costs on campus
for housing for university
students and medical residents.
Senator Wirth is the main
sponsor of this bill, and it did
pass the Senate unanimously 39
to 0. My expert is David
Campbell, and he can go into any
further details that I
I have missing my brief summary.
Thanks, thank you very much,
Senator. Um,
SB 112.
It aims to exempt property taxes
on student residences built on
university-owned land through
public-private partnerships. Um,
it
In so doing, it promotes lower
cost housing solutions for
students and fosters a
supportive environment that
enhances access to resources,
faculty, peer connections
crucial for uh student
engagement and success.
Importantly, this is the use of
public-private partnerships that
are uh have been found, uh, both
in New Mexico as well as
nationally to be an essential
part of a solution to
housing, uh, effectively
tackling the growing shortage of
student housing in UN at UNM by
tackling that problem, you also
alleviate the need for students
to go off campus and find
housing, uh, outside of the
campus environment. Um, I'm
pleased to have with me you and
M stands strongly in support of
this bill. Um, I am pleased to
have with me you and M's vice
president for enrollment, Dan
Garcia.
Uh, UNM residents life director
Megan Chibanga, UNM University
Council, Dan Jones and Deputy
university council Scott Satter
here to answer questions, and
Madam Chair, I am uh available
to answer questions of the
committee.
Thank you, Mr. Campbell. All
righty. Do we have anybody here
in favor of this bill?
Alright. Do you have anybody on
Zoom?
No manager. All righty, do we
have anybody in opposition of
this bill?
Anybody on Zoom?
No, I'm sure.
Oh, OK, let's go to the
committee. Anybody in favor of
this?
yeah.
Represented by.
Um, back here, I just wanted to
um express my support for this
bill.
Is that correct? We're on that
right now? Yes, OK, um, and, um,
I, when I was working at the
Westside Emergency housing
Center in Albuquerque, uh, I, I
do recall that there were
students who were sleeping there
at the shelter and doing their
homework there, um, by the
incandescent lights in the
shelter. They're taking the bus,
um, the homeless shelter bus
that the city provides to do
their homework in in that
facility, and I think that
housing is just one of those
things that especially students
struggle with.
So I'm, I'm grateful that, um,
you and M has been proactive
about this and considering the
implications of uh what would
happen if if their housing were
to go away. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I will do pass. You
can't. Oh, I cannot apologize.
That's OK. Any other questions
from the committee?
OK, later, um, I'm sure. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Sorry for
another question. Um, I
wondered, uh, uh, I have
information, does, does this
only affect you and him?
Or are there other entities that
it affects. This is a general
piece of legislation that does
uh that yeah, it would affect
everybody in higher education
throughout the state of New
Mexico. UNM happens to be the
one that it uh that it affects
right now, but it will be a
general applicability for the
entire state.
OK, thank you for that.
Um, that was really my only
question. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Murphy. Thank
you, madam chair and senator and
expert, um, so that was sort of
my question as well as it being
focused only on you and him, but
it, I saw in one of the analysis
that it really only applies to
UNM because its schools listed
in the Constitution. Um, is that
correct? And if so, somewhere
else I read that it would not
apply, for example, the San Juan
Community College or an
institution in my district being
the Mexico Military Institute.
Am I misinformed on that?
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
take a stab at this. The 55 main
universities are
constitutionally mandated.
You, you and him Northern,
western, eastern, anonymous you.
The Community colleges, I think
would be separate, and then I
don't know where Mimi is.
So perhaps Mr. Campbell could
answer that part.
I, I believe, um, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, that, that
was accurately stated.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and,
and Senator and Representative,
um.
Why not make it broader, um, and
to apply to the, the
nonconstitutional institutions.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
we're, we're trying to handle a,
a, a, a very specific kind of
issue here, um, that has arisen
on particularly in a dormitory
situation where we have
residents, uh, resident dorms in
this, uh, in the school that
that uh this will address
specifically to as I answered to
Representative Armstrong.
It is of general applicability,
but within those limits of
constitutional um authority. I
do have university council here
if, if, uh
Yeah
got uh deputy counsel would like
to address that.
Uh, Madam Chair, with your
permission, could I ask, uh
Scott Souder, Deputy University
counsel.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Murphy, um, Scott Sutter Deputy
University counsel, um, we
attempted to tailor the bill to
the universities that are
engaged in um the most uh um
need in terms of getting, having
access to capital to build
dormitories.
Um, and we recognize that San
Juan College and um New Mexico
Junior College do have
dormitories.
I believe that the school of
medicine.
At least the space in the
dormitory set in the Mexico
Medical College for their
medical school rotations.
Um
If the committee were to, I want
to expand it to um the community
colleges, I don't know from a
practical standpoint, whether we
have an opposition.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
senator and, and experts, um,
you know, um, housing is a
problem everywhere and um and I
understand why you, uh, you have
two principal properties there,
U and them that you're trying to
adjust or address, excuse me,
and I certainly understand that,
um, I would, I would say,
however, that um this ought to
be a program that's available to
all of our universities um
because an in-house student, uh,
whether they're in, uh, Artisia.
Roswell, where we have Eastern
Mexico University in Portales,
uh, that they, they could
benefit from this as well. So,
um, I don't want to belabor the
point. I understand now what
you're trying to do and thank
you, Madam Chair, and senator
and experts.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
thank you, Senator and um Mr.
Campbell.
And uh counsel. Um
There were some materials that
came with this at one point.
Um, and I had some conversation
with Mr. Campbell about them,
and the materials we're talking
about how this was really
important because it was, it
would help be sure that the
students had a lower tuition,
not tuition, a lower uh rent,
uh, for these, for these
university owned uh housing
facilities. Um,
And in that, um, still the
position of the university and
The
Sponsors.
Mad, Madam Chair and
Representative, yes, this, this
by affecting this legislation,
it will reduce, uh, what could
be an assessment, an additional
assessment on students, uh, that
would be paid by those students.
The reason is that when these
P3 dorms are built, uh, they,
uh, the costs of those are, are
pro rata assessed to students,
the same as they would be in any
other uh business proposition,
uh, and by doing this bill by
exempting that property tax than
that that assessment is not a
tax credit, but that assessment
would not flow through to the
student.
It wouldn't I out of chair, uh,
Senator, it wouldn't flow
through.
So, so therefore making it
possible to rent them at a lower
price.
Is that right, Madam Chair and
Representative, yes, that is
the, that's the end result here.
OK, and Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator, Mr. Campbell, I we
were carrying some texts the
other night about this.
What guarantee do we have that
the savings.
will be used for reducing the
price these students pay as
opposed to being used.
For some other
I'm assuming valid you by the
university.
Um, I, I, my question really is
what kind of guarantee, Madam
Chair, do we have that by giving
this tax exemption, we are in
fact going to be
Uh, for sure, uh, offering a
lower price.
Uh, to, uh, students who are,
uh, occupy this housing.
Madam, Madam Chair and
representative, I have the head
of residents life, Megan
Chibanga from UNM here, who is
probably the best person to
answer that question. Could I,
uh, with your permission, asked
Miss Chibanga too speak to this.
Ma, I'm, I'm, I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, I think the important
thing to recognize here is that
at present this property tax is
not being charged. And in the
instance the property tax were
to be charged, it is reasonable
to believe that that tax would
be passed on to the students
through an increase in their
monthly rent.
Like I'm sorry, I'm getting, I'm
getting an echo.
Maybe we could
the
microphone around or something.
I'm sorry.
Is that better?
So by not assessing this
property tax as it has not been
assessed for the entirety of the
duration of these properties'
existence.
We believe that this would
result in the.
No increased cost. As a result
of this specific property tax to
the student's rent.
Did that answer your question?
and uh chair, um,
Presenter, I, I don't think it
really does, I, I, I understand
that this is the practice, but
is it, is it something
In the bio I wouldn't be, they
wouldn't be bylaws, but, but the
The laws of the university or
the uh practices of the
university where it's written
that says we're gonna be sure
that this savings is passed on
to our students in their
housing.
Madam, Madam Chair and
Representative, I think we're,
we're unaware that uh of any
requirement that that uh that
that be done. However, um, the,
the whole point here is to, is
to keep the costs of these
facilities that are built with
P3, public-private partnerships,
um, as low as possible and to
eliminate this cost which we
have calculated to be uh
anywhere from
35 to $40 per month or uh nearly
$500 per semester to keep them
off, keep that burden off of the
students, uh, by doing this, um,
indeed, uh, the
The cost of this to students as
representative Parajon has
pointed out, uh, can result in
uh
You know, devastating kinds of
results with people, um, not
being able to afford life as a
student or life as a resident.
Men,
Madam chair, uh.
Presenters, I, I
I appreciate that this is what's
been done and that that's the
intent, but uh I saw a headline
today that uh our new president
has said there's going to be a
recession coming and, you know,
we've been
Just the time in which I've been
a legislator, we have been up
and down financially all over
the place.
And my only concern is that I
just would be more comfortable
if somewhere in this
legislation, there was a
requirement. It said, um,
There will be a pass through to
the tenants.
Uh, the savings to be sure that
that doesn't
Somehow, and I'm not suggesting
anybody's acting in bad faith or
anything, but, uh, you know,
when, when times get tough.
Um, I've seen universities and
all kinds of other people change
what some of their priorities
are in order to save money and
And since we're giving this to
you, we're we're providing this
to you in order to provide for
less less.
Brent to the students, I just
would like to see that in this
bill.
Madam Chair, Representative, if
I could have uh Megan Chibanga,
head of residents life addressed
that.
I think that this bill positions
all of our constitutionally
recognized institutions in a
really good position as they
enter into P3 agreements in the
future, because right now we
have existing P3 agreements in
place at UNM as, as many folks
have recognized, but what we
don't necessarily have our
pieces that position our
institutions really well as we
move into the potential future
for P3 agreements. So I think
you're raising a really
beautiful point and a wonderful
point about how these savings
should be passed through to our
students, and by positioning our
institutions to be able to
positively leverage the fact
that there wouldn't be assessed
property tax on these.
Buildings as they go up, um, it
puts our institutions in a good
negotiating position to work
with that P3 company to require
that in the land lease as those
are generated, so that we can
pass those savings on to the
students.
Um
Man er my all my questions. I
mean, I'm, I'm, I'm not sure
that really is quite the
guarantee that I'm looking for.
Um,
And um,
Um, I guess my one last question
would be is have there been
instances where we have provided
um
Property tax exemption for
construction of a building,
construction of any kind of
facilities at universities.
Um, and, um,
And savings weren't passed on.
To students in some kind of
lower fee or lower payment or
lower something.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
Scott Souder, Deputy counsel for
UNM.
So Madam Chair, um,
Representative Matthews, uh,
when the university builds.
buildings itself, those
buildings are.
Tax exempt under the
Constitution.
And so we don't face the same
uncertainty that when you deal
with a nonprofit or for profit
entity to assist you in getting
capital to build, uh, as
presented in, you know, as
represented by these this
discussion over dormitories. Um,
the, um,
So, uh, and, in many cases, um,
And when we do bond financing,
um.
A source of revenue for bond
repayment is student fees.
Things like that, um, or other
revenues of the university. So,
uh, and, um,
The university over the last
3 years has uh not raised
tuition.
It has had negotiated with the
student body, some fee
increases, um, but we endeavored
to be competitive with the
apartment complexes that are off
campus because we know that um
that graduation rates are tied
uh favorably to folks living on
campus.
And uh so it, uh, so we try to
be as competitive as we can be,
and that's in competitive and
pricing and safety and things
like that.
Um
Madam Chair, that's all my
comments. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Representatives uh just a few
quick questions, uh, this is.
Land owned by the state of New
Mexico, so there are they under
the
State land office.
Property management.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Mason, the land we're talking
about is university land.
It is not under the control of
the state land commissioner.
It is under the control of the
regions of the university in New
Mexico who in turn are under the
control of the state. Don't say
it. I'm, I'm having trouble
following this line of ownership
here, you know, what I thought.
the citizens of New Mexico.
Owned all of these properties I
didn't.
But anyway, uh,
So cause my we hear it all the
time, the state land, especially
the oil and gas mandated the
manage state land.
And uh with the proceeds for
public good.
So, uh, how much tax revenue are
we talking about losing in?
In the county.
I suppose of Barnaleo with
enacting this.
Legislation.
Madam Chair Representative
Mason, um, there are two
properties currently that this
would impact, uh, there is no
fiscal impact to the state of
New Mexico, because this is a
property tax that's distributed
only
locally and in Berlio County and
for each of the two properties,
it the current assessment would
be about $350,000 per year.
For each, for each property.
$700,000 a year box revenue for
the county of Bernalillo.
Uh, is that correct madam, Madam
Chair and representative, um,
it's not currently being
charged, and we're uh we would
like this bill uh to say that it
would not be charged, uh, going
forward, uh, and, and again,
part of this is to encourage
these kinds of public private
partnerships to help us develop
more student housing, which is a
huge need. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair.
I'm sure.
I'm getting really confused now,
so they haven't been paying tax.
We're gonna make a law so they
don't have to pay taxes that's
true,
Madam Chair representative to
try to clarify, um, the, the
constitutionally mandated
universities across the state of
New Mexico. I've never been
assessed to be required to pay
the property tax for these
properties, and that's how it's
always been, and this bill is
just clarifying that that's how
it always should be, so that a
county assessor doesn't suddenly
Consider charging.
Tax on these buildings.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, Madam Chair.
uh, senator, uh.
So, it's brought up by
Representative Mercy properties
like this in the
Other than the 5.
Or they, they're having to pay
property tax on.
But
On properties in their
institutions or are they?
Allowed by the universities.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason, I'm
unfamiliar with any other uh
issues or any other institutions
where those um
Happen the the statute we're
dealing with is called
fractional interests, and it
basically assumes that the uh
the land, the dirt under this is
public property, and the
building itself is developed
using a public private
partnership to to construct it,
but the, the land is, is
university and the uses to which
that building are put are only
public or educational uses. So
Uh, it, it aligns with what a
university of New Mexico built
dormitory right next door.
which doesn't pay taxes and, and
this one by virtue of um
A development agreement with a
private developer would also not
uh pay the property tax, be
assessed the property tax.
Thank you, uh, Senator, uh,
Madam Chair.
So actually, Madam Chair, the
The private partner this is the
one that was gonna get, would
have to pay the tax, not the
state, right?
If the, if the state was
Tax paid, it would be on the.
By the private partnership,
private party of the
partnership.
Madam, Madam Chair and
representative Mason, that is
correct that that that makes
that that assesses the leasehold
interest of the private party.
Thank you, uh.
Senator, Madam Chair, I guess.
Bye.
I don't you talk to uh senator
but I'm sure they talked about
uh, you know, keeping the prices
down.
With the students.
And uh, which is good. I'm not
against that at all. And, uh,
but I don't.
I don't know that I get the
feeling that we're not given.
this university an advantage to
be cheaper than another
university, I, I guess is where
I'm coming from in all of this.
I don't, I want them all to be
cheaper, but I don't want to.
From something I do like it
where you can.
provide something cheaper.
Then
Another
University in the state because
of what I did today.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative, um, the, the
comparison is with university
owned property university built
property and university owned
but univers but privately built
and administered uh properties.
That's the distinction and uh
we, you know, that, that, that
amount will, as we've discussed
before, be passed through.
To the students and that's why
we're saying, uh, this is
helpful to students to be able
to afford their lodging. Uh.
Senators, yes, I understand
that. I like that part. I just
Like I said, I'm having a little
hard time wrapping my writing
rap why this, why we're giving
something to you and them that's
not available to the whole
state.
And also one more thing, you
know, what will this do to?
private
Public partnerships on other
state land in the state of New
Mexico that have nothing to do
with the university.
Madam Chair Representative
Chance, your first question.
This would apply to any of the
state-owned universities, all 5
of them.
So it's not just for you and
them, it'd be eastern, western,
northern Yunnan and NU.
Because there's the state-owned
ones. Madam chair, if I can
address and and represent Mason
if I could address your last
point. I, I runlobolopment,
which is an adjunct to the
university, we develop uh the
university's lands, usually in
commercial uses, and I actually
have a project where I am
building a shopping center and
an in and out burger on
university land. Those would not
fall under this whatsoever
because
have no public purpose. They
have no public exemption or
educational exemption, which is
a requirement of the
Constitution. So, but when
you're talking about a
dormitory, uh, we have the dean
of the vice president in charge
of enrollment, who will, uh, if
asked, say, uh, that living on
campus has a huge benefit for
student success and is part of
their education. So
You, you make a great point that
it's not just for any land
that's public land with a
development on top of it, it is
those that meet the criteria,
the three criteria of the
Constitution.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
still I'm sure that I understand
it completely, uh.
But you know, in these types of
partnerships, Senator.
You're
Whatever group built these.
Uh
Dormitories
did so.
With the idea of making money.
Or they wouldn't have built.
I mean, I mean, or that's my
theory, you know, as a
businessman, I mean, they didn't
come in and build you.
They see
deals on the university
property.
With
figures that showed that they
could
recoup their investment, is that
true?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
yes, they are private businesses
and they are linked in this
public-private partnership with
the university to provide these,
but only students can live in
this in, uh, in these
dormitories and in addition to
students living there, they also
have uh academic programs and
spaces where they operate out
of, uh, as, as students, uh,
need.
Uh, yes, Senator and Madam
Chair, I understand that, but
At the end of the day, they are
for-profit entities.
They're not nonprofit entities
that built these buildings.
That true that.
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason, certainly that's the
nature of the public-private
partnership is they are private
entities we have them all over
the state in different fields of
private and but at the end of
the day, there for economic.
Most of Madam Chair, Senator,
most that I know of or economic
development projects for the
state.
Where we enter into lots of the
private.
The state partnerships.
But that's all my questions for
today, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
have like 3 questions, um, so
this is
This would apply to something
like Lobo Village.
Is it that style, or is it gonna
be like Reddondo 2, the ones
that are actually on campus
owned by UNM. is it? I'm just
trying to figure out is it the
The ones that are privately
owned on human and land, or is
it the ones that are UN owned on
UN land or both.
Um,
Madam Chair, Representative
Fernandez, um, the, the ones
that to which this will apply
are all cited on university
land, Lobo village, while
located on Cesar Chavez, um, is
on university land and is
operated in accordance with all
the university's rules for
student conduct and and so on.
So and Casas del Rio, which is
on the main campus, uh, is also
one.
of these sites.
So I'm sure, but both of those
are privately owned, right?
They're not owned by.
The university or biloba
development or anything to that
effect right there by American
communities something. I forgot
their whole name, but is that,
is that right,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Hernandez, no, the university
owns both the facilities and the
um the land.
Um, but it's operated by a
private entity. Uh, they also
financed um the construction of
those facilities, but the
university owns the facilities.
OK, I guess that's where I was
confused. So yeah, I mean, I
still um as representative
Matthews brought up without
something in the bill that
The guarantees that the savings
is passed on to the students. It
makes me really nervous to pass
this. Um, I love the idea. I
don't want you guys to pay the
extra taxes. I just want to make
sure that that savings.
Actually ends up with the
student rather than.
Not having that explicitly set
in statute that that's where it
has to go, so besides that, I, I
love the idea. I, you know, I
don't want to make it harder for
you guys to get more student
housing. I don't want the
students to pay more. I don't
want any of that. It just makes
me really nervous to not have
that explicitly written
somewhere that it that that
savings goes on to the students,
so it's all I have, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Chairman Lion.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you, folks.
Uh, I'm gonna echo again, uh.
My, my neighbor here represented
Matthews as well as Hernandez,
and I was, I was asking, uh, in
regards to
If if Lobo village using that
example, how did that impact
prices for students if that's
the model that you want to
continue.
Uh
Representative Linda just to be
sure I'm understanding your
question specifically, how would
passing this bill impact the
pricing model or not passing it?
Adam chair and senator, uh, I,
I've heard that, that the reason
for this type of legislation is
to pass on the savings to
students, correct? And so if the
model then is using global
village or any one of your
other, I think the rainforest as
well is is a similar OK.
Well, OK, well I'll get
reinforced then. So global
villages is the example for this
legislation. How did that impact
lowering the prices for
students, in what ways?
At present, the property tax is
not assessed. When the pro forma
for those facilities were
developed, it was developed with
the understanding that the
property tax would not be
assessed and so all of the
annual rent prices for that
facility have been built and
based on the understanding that
there would be no property tax
charged. At the point which we
charge the property tax to the
student, it will increase the
annual cost of owning and
operating those facilities and
the way that that ROI works is
that cost will be passed through
in rent. Got you. And then what,
what's, what's the percentage of
students that actually live.
And I'm, I'm talking to you as,
as you and them, but it this
will affect all the other
universities. So where are all
the other universities in this
discussion, I mean, do they have
representatives here in this
room or why is you and him
pushing this?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
UNM has the current situation
with this because they have
developed these, these two
facilities using the the P3
mechanism to do that. Um, um, I
will defer if it's incorrect to
Miss Chibanga, but 43% of the
on-campus students now live in
these two facilities.
And uh so it is a substantial
amount of our on-campus resident
students who are served by these
uh.
P3 institutions, these P3
buildings, and furthermore down
the road, we would like to
continue to use that technique
of developing using the
financing of the private sector
for these uh for increasing the
number of dormitory rooms.
And Madam Chair and senator.
In a, in a number, what's 42% of
your population then?
There are 1800 students, uh, who
live in, in the privately held
um properties at UNM.
Thank you Madam chair and, and
senator, then what's that,
what's, what's your total
student population.
for you and him.
My name.
I
He said 23,600.
OK
Well that helps, but
here.
Uh, uh, representatives uh in
the fall term it was 3000.
Sorry.
23,600 roughly within 100 or so.
OK. Thank you.
And so then that, that, that
students that are living in
these dormitories that
are receiving, are receiving
this benefit, I guess you can
call it that, right? of having a
lower
Rental space.
For them attending the
university, those students then
are, are a small fraction of
your entire population of
students then.
I can see why you and him is the
one pushing it because you have,
you brought the football team
today.
Um, but it goes then back to
then.
How do those that don't live on
campus receive any benefit from
this.
Madam, Madam Chair
Representative, um,
This, this does not, this does
not impact students who choose
or are forced to live off
campus. Um, what it, what it
does do moving forward is, um,
we believe that this is a, a, a
proper and economically
effective way to develop more
student housing and want to
continue to use this technique,
and we think that it could be
used throughout the, the other
institutions in the state, but
um.
But the, if the question has to
do with how much more expensive
is it to live off campus than
on, I think Miss Chibanga can,
can answer that.
Yeah, on campus properties are
approximately 20% less than the
off-campus market. So students
living on campus are paying
approximately 20% less than
students living off campus. Got
you. And Madam Chair, and
senator, and remind me and
correct me if I'm wrong, uh, UNM
requires that all freshmen have
to live on campus.
Correct. UNM does have um
Madam Chair, Senator, or
Representative Linda, yes, um,
UNM does have
Yeah.
UNM does have a first-year
residency requirement, but it
does have significant exemption,
um.
Leniency within it. Students
living within 30 miles of the
center of campus are not
required to live on campus.
Students over 21 years of age at
the time of um the first day of
class, their first year do not
have to live on campus. And so
there's a generous exemption
policy.
So I'm gonna wrap this manager.
I think we're getting tired, but
I, I'll be honest with you, I, I
appreciate there's a one
referral to this committee. I
think this is a, it's a larger
conversation that really should
probably go to tax so we can
have that in our community as
well.
So, um, appreciate the
conversation, but I'm gonna,
I'll talk to the speaker about
maybe referring this as well to
tax so that we can have a better
discussion on this particular
matter. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions
from the committee?
So I, I, I think we just need to
clarify a couple of things. Um,
when we talk about student
housing and
I think that the
The clarification that needs to
happen is, so we're allowing
private entities to be exempt.
But it's still gonna be
Only for students.
Tell me about eligibility of how
who gets into this housing.
Yeah. So I, Madam Chair at the
University of New Mexico, uh,
right now, in order to be
considered a student, um, within
the current P3 agreement, you
have to be admitted to the
University of New Mexico, um, as
the primary driver, so that is
you have to have been, you have
to have applied and been
admitted to the university to
make you eligible to um sign up
to live there. And then, um,
throughout the academic
we conduct enrollment checks to
make sure that you are actively
enrolled as a student at the
university and that you are
continuing to make progress
towards a degree. OK. And so if
a student at, at say midpoint,
uh, drop classes, they would
have to leave the housing.
It is a little bit different
depending on which housing
entity that they are living
with, but, um, students would
have a period of time in which
they would either no longer be
able to renew their housing or
they would be asked to leave,
correct. Got you. OK. Um,
So I think that
It in
What I'm hearing is that you all
are pushing this because it
Yeah
The housing shortage is so
prevalent, especially with
students. And so we're looking
at ways to bolster um services
for students. Um, why is UNM not
providing the housing.
Um, yourselves.
Madam Chair, UNM is providing
housing itself. However, the
housing, the dormitories that
UNM has, with all due respect to
resident's life in the office
are dated, they're, they're
aging and in this process of
replacement, we really would
like to be able to use uh the
kind of financing that is
available through P3s, which
have been very successful, uh,
for this and and other purposes
and not rely.
on the the university itself on
student tuition or or fees or to
come to the legislature and ask
for specific funding for new
dormitories, and this gives us
the opportunity to, to have
that.
Uh
funded in this relatively um uh
new and effective way and to
upgrade the housing stock that
we have as as dormitories. These
are, these are desirable
dormitories because they're
newer and are equipped with the
kinds of amenities that students
would like to expect.
And I appreciate the
clarification. I think that that
helps me. Um, the only, um, and
I know Senator, this is not
necessarily your bill, um, but
if it were to go on, um, I
would, um, speak to, to Le
Wirth, um, about the
The interesting, um,
Points that representative
Matthew made. Um, there was a
time when, when I first got into
office that we cut lots of
programs, I mean, the budget,
um, and it was slashed and
burned, and so I would, I would
want the, the legislation to be
stronger as to where this texts
were to go and um how it was,
how it would be um part of the
pie because what I have found in
the past is if it's not
specifically in there, and
everybody
in slash and burn mode. Those
are the things that they look at
slashing and burning, so, um, I
would just leave that, um, give
that to you to maybe pass along,
noted.
All right, what's the will of
the committee?
Now you can uh put them on it if
you would like to.
Do we have a second?
Hey, Patrick, to take the role.
Representative Armstrong?
Madam Chair could make a motion
to the table.
substitute
Yeah, she wants.
You, you can make the motion.
OK, I'll, I'll make a motion to
table.
Alrighty. Um,
Motion is to to table is a non
refutable motion. Patrick to do
we have a a second on that?
Representative Armstrong.
Yeah
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Linick.
Yes.
Representative Mason? Yes, to
tell you.
Representative Matthews.
Yes, the table.
Representative Murphy.
Yes
Representative Pajon.
Representative Serrado.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes we do. Representative
Hernandez.
vice chair,
Madam Chair.
No a table, the final tally for
the tabling motion 6 votes, yes,
3 votes no.
Your bill has been tabled.
Thank you committee. Thank you.
Um, representative Paramon.
Can I make a quick appeal to do
Senator's next bill.
That should be very quick, so I
can go to Senate Judiciary.
House Bill 214.
OK, maybe I should run over
there at this point, um, what,
what, what's the bill number?
72.
the impression that camera was
willing to present it, but if
they're in house judiciary.
Yeah, so they gave me the file
to do his also,
OK, thank you.
Go ahead.
Looks like I'm more on my own
for this one.
but Madam Chair members of the
committee, this one should be
simple.
Um, Senate Bill 72.
Seeks to provide regulation for
conducting nonprofit condo
association business remotely.
Via video conference or Zoom.
Currently
In law, nonprofit condo
associations are not allowed to
meet virtually, and this bill is
simply allowing them to meet
virtually.
And with that I'll standard
questions.
I'm sorry, Senator, could you
say that nonprofits are not
allowed to meet nonprofit condo
associations. OK, are not
allowed to meet remotely via
simultaneous electronic means.
So this bill is allowing them to
meet.
Via electronic. Yes, got you.
OK. All righty.
Do we have, and is that your
presentation? Yes, that's all.
OK. Uh, do we have anybody here
in favor of this bill?
you.
Come on up and give me one
minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Brent Moore
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Realtors Association. We
stand in support of this bill.
We discovered during COVID, uh,
that you could, you could do
virtual meetings and that was
very helpful in the statute
right now, there's requirements
that you have to meet in person
and so this bill is updating the
statutes so that you can conduct
virtual meetings.
Extent support. Thank you.
Anybody else?
Eric Martinez Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
registered lobbyists for net
positive LLC and I just more was
trying to say as well too. So we
support the legislation. Thank
you. Thank you. Um, we do seem
to have somebody on Zoom.
Colin Cameron.
Good evening, madam chair,
members of the committee, and,
and special thank you to Senator
Bergmans. I, I am technically
the expert for this bill, um.
I, I think it's a
straightforward and sensible as
it appears on its face, and I'm
happy to stand for any
questions, uh, anyone may have.
Thank you.
Alright. That is all in support,
anybody in opposition to this
bill.
Anybody on Zoom.
No, madam. All righty. Um,
Let's go to committee. Anybody
on committee? Representative
Murphy. One quick question,
Madam Chair, and Senator, um,
and maybe for your expert, it's
titled Nonprofit Condo
Association, but I would assume,
should I, I won't say, does it
also apply to uh homeowners
association is, is.
It would apply to any HOA I, I
would presume. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Representative all
that my expert weigh in.
If you know his answer.
Mr. Cameron. Oh thank you. I
didn't realize I was on muted.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, um.
That is, that is correct under
the there's already an HOA act
where this similar provision was
modernized for homeowners'
associations that act was
enacted in 2013. This has been
updated several times since, so
the condominium Act
unfortunately was was left
behind and left to the default
language from the 1975, uh,
nonprofit corporation Act.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, I rest.
Thank you. Anybody else on the
committee with questions?
Do we have a motion?
venture with the pan.
Second.
OK.
Project to take the role.
Representative Armstrong
Yes. Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Blente, yes.
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy, yes,
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes, Madam
Chair, yes, Madam Chair, final
tally for the Du pass motion. 8
votes yes, 0 votes no. You do.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Thank you.
Representative Pajon.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I do have a committee
substitute today.
And I would like them to move it
for discussion.
Have we seen this? Have we got
this up?
distributed, yeah.
Give us just a minute.
All right. Can we move this up
for discussion?
OK.
Already representative. Great,
thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, we
have already seen this bill
before. Uh, it is to uh allow
members who own their homes in a
mobile home park community to
purchase the land, um,
altogether, and there have been
some changes to the sub based on
the discussion and the feedback
that I heard from this
committee, um, my co-sponsor
Mary Matthews, um, represented
Matthews and I have worked on it
as well as our great drafter
Christina.
Um, so the first change that
you'll see is on page 2, we have
uh changed uh the 51% of the
residents that need to approve
the purchase of the mobile home
park. We've moved it into line
one. It used to reside in sea,
so it just makes it a little bit
more clear, um, and that was
based off some of the feedback
that was uh provided. I'd also
like to make a clarification on
page 3, where, uh, here it says
an owner shall not.
not refuse to enter into or
delay the execution or closing
on a purchase and sale agreement
with residents who have made an
offer to meet the price and
substantially equivalent terms.
Um, and then on the, the, the
largest edition that you'll see,
um in this uh bill is on page 5,
the last page we've added almost
a page of content.
And what this page, what this
section explains is we are
providing exemptions for this
process, so, um, that those
exemptions will include you that
you don't need to give notice to
the residents if for instance, a
bank mortgage company or other
mortgagee has foreclosed the
mobile home park, the
foreclosure of a sale, um,
having purchased the park from a
foreclosure, um.
The transfer from a family
member, owner or trust, uh, the
sale is a transfer to a
partnership, so we have a number
of exemptions that we've listed
in the bill and um those
exemptions were taken from, um,
there are many, many other, um,
bills across the country that
laws that have these exemptions,
we've taken them from New
Hampshire that has some of the
oldest, um, laws on the books
for this, um, for the purchase
of mobile home communities.
And then the last edition is M
and uh this edition was uh from
our conversation that we had
previously with Representative
Mason.
Um, uh, in this committee where
and and also uh rep uh Chairman
De la Cruz, where an owner will
now be allowed to accept a third
party offer.
Um, before providing the
required notice and um as long
as that uh agreement essentially
stipulates that the residents
will be provided notice and, and
have the opportunity, so we hope
that this will allow uh folks
who are selling their parks to
be able to seal the deal, so to
speak, um, as long as that is,
is part of the term of um, of
putting in, you know, the, the.
Uh, provisions of this bill,
Madam Cherry, I have with me my
um virtual experts as well, Mary
O'Hara and Carolyn Carter, um,
who have been here advising.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. OK. Um,
I guess let's go to the others.
Do we have anybody here in favor
of this bill?
Anybody on Zoom? Yes.
Maria Griego.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um, I,
I spoke in favor of this bill
back when it was first heard in
this committee, but um I just
want to reiterate that the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
stands in strong support of this
bill. It's one of our priority
bills, um, manufactured homes
are one of the largest, um,
stocks of natural affordable
housing and in New Mexico we
have um a large share of our
population who depend on mobile
homes.
For, for their affordable
housing.
17% of our uh residents in New
Mexico live in manufactured
homes, uh, compared to just 5%
nationally, um, this is one of
the best ways to ensure that um
residents have a safe and stable
place to live and that they can
keep their homes affordable, and
we strongly urge the committee
to pass this bill. Thank you.
And
M
And yes MK Brady.
Good evening. You all have put
in a very long day, so I will
try to keep this very short. I
am a senior citizen living in a
manufactured home in Las Cruces,
New Mexico, and I appreciate
living in this environment, but
I need your help. I'm concerned
with the change of ownership
that I may not be able to live
in this
home that I purchased 6 years
ago
without the protection of this
rule coming in to allow my
neighbors and I to purchase the
property.
We have any number of private
equity groups and national
corporations that have found out
that we're a cash cow. We own
our house, but we don't own our
land, and we can easily be
forced out. Please help me. I am
concerned that I don't know
which is going to end first.
Whether I'll run out of money,
run out of my life. Thank you.
So I truly appreciate your
support. Thank you. Winter
Torres.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres. I'm an
attorney in um licensed in both
New Mexico and Colorado.
Colorado has enacted this
legislation as has many states
only after um seeing the
dramatic effects of losing a
substantial amount of affordable
housing, and I just want to
remind folks that we are always
number 1 or #2 in the nation for
the number of manufactured
housing that we have and that a
large portion.
at our senior community, which
is our fastest growing homeless
community lives in mobile homes
and ask you to please support
this bill to prevent yet another
pipeline to homelessness. Thank
you.
Joanne De Michel.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, my
name is Joany Michael.
And um I own a home in a 55 plus
land leased community several
years ago.
I, uh, bought a home as a way to
Asian place. I had read an AARP
article making the
recommendation, and I was
thrilled to find a community.
Uh, supportive community and an
affordable home. And then one
day, we all received a letter
that the land under our homes
was sold.
Without notice or an opportunity
to purchase it, and I felt as if
a rug had been pulled out from
under me.
I
Find that these communities are
in some ways are the perfect
solution to uh community living,
my neighbors have the most
diverse religious and political.
Beliefs and we all get along.
Which is enough reason to
support these communities. So I,
I, I thank the sponsor, I think
repair home and, and I, uh,
Appeal to you to please um
Support this bill. Thank you.
We've got one more in person so.
Yeah, yeah,
quickly,
he's mic behind you. You, you
have one minute.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Arturo Castillo,
the director of equity and
culture at Conservation Motors
New Mexico.
as climate and weather
catastroes continue to rage on
in the number of unhoused New
Mexicans continues to increase,
we must do everything we can to
prevent any more New Mexicans
from being evicted from their
homes onto the streets where
they will suffer the harshest
impacts, the worsening climate
crisis.
Conservation voters stands in
strong support of this
legislation because it is one of
the many steps you can take to
continue providing affordable
and stable housing for all New
Mexicans. This would also allow
them to eventually own their
home if given the opportunity to
purchase.
Stable housing is not only a
human right, it is necessary for
our most vulnerable communities
in New Mexico to be.
Party evolutionary political
process.
Oh, and nothing to do with the
comments, just love your job.
And
anybody in that position.
OK. Let's go.
To
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors. We stand in
opposition to the bill. In
general, the realtors stand in
favor of private property rights
and uh the generalized concern
that they have is that this bill
is a restriction on the rights
of the landowner, the mobile
home park owner, uh, to dispose
of the property in a way that
they see fit and as I'm looking
at the committee sub, I I I had
a question about the
interrelation of the new.
Section M, which allows the
property owner to accept the
offer of the third party and the
uh the provisions and I believe
it's subsection C that say that
they cannot accept the offer of
the third party. I'm confused by
the interrelation of those two
sections, but we stand in
opposition to the bill. Doug
Ottersberg. We ought to operate
communities in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque. My wife and I, and
we're against this bill
primarily because it says it's
to, for the residents to buy
this.
But yet it allows a third party
to be assigned this contract
without specifying. So any of
you could be that third party.
And quite often it's a third
party acting as a nonprofit that
can come in and, and delegate,
you have to use this financing,
you have to use that management.
So that's not great. And then
I'm just not quite sure how this
is not the granting of a right
or privilege to another party
that doesn't adhere to anyone
else.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Eric Martinez on behalf of
NetPositive LLC as well and, and
there are concerns about the,
the party that's allowed to do
so. I mean, what are their
qualifications to let these
people know we're gonna help you
finance this.
This piece of property, and then
who's on the deed, who's on the
note, if this, if, if this
person, whoever decides to be
the third party if they default,
then where do these people go
thinking they're paying their
rent on time to this nonprofit
entity, and I mean, I, I, I, I
understand how uh how the bill
is trying to help, but still
without the guardrails, you know
what these third parties are, I
mean, you, you're still doing a
disservice to to a vulnerable
citizens as well too, thinking
they own their home, but they
just don't know what's going on
with the land.
And the payments of whatever's
going on. There's an example in
Massachusetts as well too, where
a group that does this actually,
they, they refuse to uh approve
a balloon payment where they
foreclosed and the owners of,
of, of the properties didn't
know what to do and they were
left out in the cold. That's
just one example. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. All righty. Anybody
on Zoom?
No, madam. All righty, thank
you. Let's go to the committee.
Leader Armstrong.
Oh Lord, have mercy on us all.
Here we go.
So.
You know I love your rap.
You're just so adorable, but
the on page 2 section C.
Contradicts page 6.
M or line 16.
Those are contradictory.
And, and I really, you know, uh,
um,
Moving the goalpost.
After people have already
purchased the property and maybe
you have purchased it for many
years. Um, I'm concerned about
that. I really, um, thank you,
uh, Madam Chair and
representative for working on
this and trying to make it
better, but I just, I feel it's
a little disastrous right now
and um.
I don't wanna, I don't wanna
beat you up or anything else,
but it's very disastrous right
now. And, and I would
Suggest you rolling.
The spell again and trying to
work on it again, or we can
table.
It's your choice. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
tough group once they woke up
and they woke up now.
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Uh
I do, I do appreciate you, you
trying to make this bill better.
I really did represent it Madam
Chair.
But at the end of the day,
Private property rights are
private property rights, both
for the homeowner and for the.
property owner, uh.
Madam chairs representative.
You know, this might sound bad,
but
I own a trailer and I move it in
this part.
I signed an agreement for
giving.
With the stipulations.
That day, so I have signed away
viability.
To some degree, so I don't feel
like
Down the line that I have a
right.
The rights on the property owner
that I didn't agree to the day
that I signed the contract.
But the bit.
They uh
I agree with Peter Armstrong.
We probably, I don't know how to
make this even better like you
tried hard, uh,
chairs representative.
So my first idea to the
To the
Owners of the
Friends, they should be, they
need to get if they're really
worried, they need to be
proactive and buy it now before
anybody else offers.
That would be my, you know,
If I that that would be my
avenue to
To cut it off before it gets
started, but
Intersection him even without
the.
That represent without uh.
The conflict between the two.
By adding uh
This requirement too.
The first purchaser.
Why would he want to agree?
The white
190 days before he knows whether
he's gonna purchase it too.
He has to hold his funding in
place for all that time if he's
gonna agree to purchase it. So,
you know, by adding another
requirement to the third party
purchaser.
If it was me, I would, I would
not agree to those terms, but
anyway.
Don't want to beat up too bad,
you're sweet, she said it.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam.
Representatives rather.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I don't
think you're sweet. I actually
think you're really tough, and I
think I'm a little terrified of
you sometimes, so I'll say that
too if that's any consolation,
which is why I'll kind of ask
you some of these questions that
that are coming up, um, so first
of all we heard from some of the
public comment, um, that you
have, um, the, the, the third
party is too broad of language
right now. Can you, can you give
some clarification on how this
committee sub addresses, uh,
some of those concerns.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair and
Representative Serrado, thank
you for bringing that up. Um, we
previously in the very first
version of this bill that we
went over with, um, many of the
folks in this room, uh, there
was a provision that would allow
the mobile home park, um, the
mobile home owners to assign
their right to a third party,
uh, and that would mean that,
for instance, if a, um, you
know, there was uh someone who
came in with an offer for a
million dollars to buy a mobile
home.
Park, um, and this was Company A
and the landlord intended to
accept it, then, um, the then
you know he let the folks know
and um, then those folks would
then be able to go and we're not
just talking about um ROC or
other financing mechanisms, um,
but that they would also be able
to ask other companies who might
be willing, they would be able
to assign their right to another
company, for instance, to
purchase it. However, after
conversations with, um, the
folks here, many here, uh, we
decided to remove that
provision, so the owners can the
the park, um, a homeowners can
no longer assign that right, so
the reference of the third
party, um, in the bill that I
can see is is the third party
offer that they're talking about
is when there is a third party
asking to purchase the park.
From the mobile home park owner
itself, um, and that previous
provision has been struck in
this sub.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And so just
to clarify, so, so in this
current version though, the
third party aspect is in what
part of the bill itself. So
third party is mentioned on page
3,
Uh, when it references a
substantially equivalent in
price or in the terms and
conditions of the third party
offer, so the third party offer
is referring to the company, for
instance, that would be making
the proposal to the landlord to
purchase that. Um, it doesn't
refer to um.
It doesn't refer to an
organization such as Rock USA,
um, who is here with us today,
um, in Zoom or um the MFA, for
instance, who would provide
financing for this kind of um
purchase.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representative. So this
would be the third party that's
looking to purchase it.
Separately. OK. And then second
of all, this, the concern about
the contradiction, um, because
I, I look at, uh, page two
starting on line 10, and there
are 3 specific, um,
Uh, uh, stipulations within
that, but then I also woke up
it's on page 6, where it looks
like contradictory. Can you walk
us through that language. Yeah,
definitely, madam Chair, and
representative Chairwoman
Sarado, um, so in the first
page, the way that I read this
is in the on the second line and
um my drafter is not here today,
but the way that we put it
together is that on that on that
second page where the residents
shall have the opportunity to
purchase a mobile home park
before the.
The owner can accept a third
party offer, but that is
conditional, um.
If the landlord then skipping
down to page 6 and follows that,
um, there's a lot of content
there and that's part of the way
that it was drafted, but and
then provides an exception,
which is part of all the
exceptions that are listed on
page 5 under L, um, in, in this
um, it says that you know this
is part of that exception
provision where um the landlord
is the owner is able to accept a
third-party offer to purchase
the mobile home park, um, before
providing the required.
Notice if the purchase and sale
agreement stipulates that the
resin shall be provided with
notice and the opportunity to
purchase. So, um, these are
really the this part, right,
these, um.
These, this whole section L and
M where we are giving exceptions
to giving notice, um, those are
part of the exception section,
which is in the in the bottom
half.
Adam chair and represented the
chairwoman Serato.
Madam Chair Representative, and
so we're, so you're saying that
the exceptions
Start on page 5, 22 and you're
saying that they go through to
part M.
Yes, Madam On page 6, line 21.
Yes, ma'am.
And
OK, I'll, I'll leave it.
There, so I actually I'm gonna
ask you that I take that chair.
So when you're saying this, can
you give me an example of where
M would apply and then how
that's different than what's
happening in C. Yeah,
so man and representative. So if
for instance the owner um wanted
to enter into a third party
offer with someone, um, and the
company wanted to come purchase
their park, uh, in sea if that
purchaser, you know, for
instance, the, the purchaser and
the owner can't come to an
agreement that um,
The owner and the purchaser will
freeze the deal that they
currently have for the 75 days
to provide the notice, then M
would apply.
I'm sorry, if they couldn't not
agree to that, then C would
apply, but if they could agree,
for instance, this company says,
yeah, you know what, um, we will
hold, uh, we will be able to
follow this process of 75 days,
um, and we will enter into the
agreement with you, uh, then I
would apply.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and can you
explain why then that M was, was
it in response to some of the
questions in this committee last
time. Can you explain that a
little bit more? Yes, madam
chair and um Madam Chair, um,
essentially there was some
concern that, you know, if uh uh
an owner does get a really good
deal, um, and they want to sign
an agreement in in this case,
um.
Uh, accepting the third party
offer, so before it was before
that the owner could accept it
and even say yes, he had to go
through or she had to go through
this process, um, but now we are
providing that you can accept
the offer if then in the
contract you're stipulating that
you will follow this process, so
there was some concern of being
able to retain the third party
offer and this does provide an
alternative option where you
would be able to retain that
offer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And so I
remember when we were having
this discussion last time, uh,
one of the one of the points
came up with it, what if there's
emergency that this person needs
cash as soon as possible. It
seems to me that M would be that
exception to allow for that to
be the case is that how this is.
Reading to you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Madam Chair, um,
uh.
Other statutes across the states
that have have this provision,
don't have an emergency clause,
um, because, uh, that would
obviously a lot of folks would
use the emergency clause to say
that they they needed this
emergency that would create some
ambiguity in the statute, and
so, um, this does provide in a
sense a form of security because
you are signing a document where
you are in agreement with the
third party, um, but I, I will
be honest.
Like I don't think that this
would this it can substitute as
an emergency clause. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you
representative. So what, and
again I I know I just asked, but
I'm just like if what particular
would you anticipate someone
utilizing this clause here?
Uh, Madam Chair and I'm
representative and I think my
experts are here too. They may
be able to um assist because
they have a lot of experience
with these kind of deals, um,
and helped draft some of this
language, but essentially this
kind of agreement would be, um,
if the owner and the third party
offer could come to an agreement
that they would follow this
process versus if the owner, um,
and the third party offer, the
third party offer is giving the
um.
giving the offer, but doesn't
want to enter into a signed
contract until those 75 days
have elapsed. So it's kind of
providing those those two dual
options and uh Mary, if you
wanna add to that.
Yeah,
I'm.
Uh, yes, thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
um,
exactly as the representative
has said, honestly, it gives the
community owner the opportunity
to sign a contract with a buyer
at a particular price and that
uh contract is just conditional
upon that residents' right to
purchase or opportunity to
purchase. So it does
It really protects the community
owner in the sense that there
and the the third party buyer
from uh another outside company
coming in and saying, oh no, I
wanna purchase the community and
I'll, I'll, um, offer, uh, offer
a sweeter deal, etc. So it, it
does the same thing that a
contract would do at any other
time, simply conditional upon
the residents going through the
purchase process.
Thank you. That's my only
question.
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, madam chair and
Representative. Um,
I think this bill was heard last
Friday. I was, um, on my couch
sick, but I, uh, I'm wondering
if I was gonna make it through
the day, but I, uh, have such a
hard time getting away from this
committee. I was actually
watching as much as I could the
webcast on my iPad. So I heard
some of the debate on this and,
um, I've, I've got a few issues
with it, but I've also got a
solution, which I think you're
going to be glad to hear, and
that is, is that my, my main
problems with it are that
Um, it really does change
private property rights in a
major way, and it worries me if
this would not apply eventually
to other private private
property transfers, but in my
industry, um, there are, and I
believe during that debate, um,
my good friend represented
Matthews called this a first
right of refusal, if I recall.
And it is in a sense, um, in my
business we use it a little bit
different. We call this a
preferential right to purchase.
preferential right to purchase
is something that sort of
happens after you negotiated
with a party, you have a
purchase price, you have the
terms and then you circulate
those terms to the other people,
uh, to the other owners. And so
what we have found, um, in, in
my industry for 30 or 40 years,
we use what's called the the
model form joint operating
agreement. It's an agreement
that's standard in the industry,
and it had as an option, a
preferential right to purchase.
Provision and you can either all
agree to it or not.
And what we found over the
decade or so is that those
interests that were subject to
preferential right to purchase
were consistently valued less.
Because somebody is
representative Mason alluded to,
doesn't want to come in and
necessarily tie their money up,
waiting for 180 days for a
property to close. And so, the
first rider refusal concept, in
at least in my industry is a
little bit different, and that
is where you have an agreement
that you first negotiate with
your existing partners. And you
have a time period to do that
and if you don't, um, then you
can simply move on and offer the
property.
And so, I wanna, one of the
problems with this is with, with
this structure is that many
times properties like this are
bought with under what's called
a 1031 exchange, which is a,
which is a tax-free exchange and
what, what that allows you to do
is let's say I own a office
building in Albuquerque. And
I've sold that office building
to somebody. I have those monies
transferred to a qualified agent
and then I have 180 days to
reinvest those monies.
Into other real property,
tax-free. In other words, if
I've made profit on that, I
don't have to pay those profits,
but I have to transfer that into
another property. That has to be
done in 180 days. You have, I
think 45, it's either 35 or 45
days to ID the property and then
the balance 135 days or so to
close the transaction.
These time frames would prevent
that, and that once again would
devalue the property.
Uh, and put that property owner
in a serious disadvantage. You
just essentially taken some of
his equity. If the state wants
to do this and, and I don't
think the burden ought to be on
the property owner. And so what
I'm going to suggest to you is
you move this to the front end
and you reward the behavior. So
work something like this. I live
trailer park. I send out notice
to all the, the owners or all
all the renters saying,
Um, I'm gonna put this property
up on the market.
But
We have a law now that says I
need to offer it to you first, I
need to enter into good faith
negotiations and we've got some
reasonable time frame for that
to happen, 60 or 90 days.
And great, if I can negotiate
with my tenants and we can work
out that deal, then we go
forward. At some point a
deadline hits, so let's just say
it's 90 days, and I say, you
know what, I haven't been able
to work out a deal with my
tenants. I'm gonna put this up
on the general market, but
because I went through that
process.
I get a tax break when I sell
this. In other words, you're
rewarding good behavior as as
opposed to sort of punishing
somebody, and I think it would,
I think it would basically um
address your issues and some of
the many concerns here, and I'd
be happy to talk to you more
about how that structure might
work, but I think if you, if you
front load the process and you
reward good behavior, then I
think you'll get the outcome you
can, and I, and I believe that
this is a, is a reasonable
thing. I mean, we need
affordable housing.
Uh, certainly our seniors need
it, um, but, um, I think putting
all of this burden on the
private property owner is just
too much. So anyway, long
explanation, not a lot of
questions there, but thank you
very much.
Madam Chairman, I respond to
that, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Murphy, um, this
would be an unfriendly
amendment, I think, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative Mercy
Murphy. I really appreciate your
intent in trying to bring a
different solution and in in
trying to figure out how this
might happen, um, I, uh,
respectfully disagree. I think
the onus is actually on the um
on the mobile home park folks,
uh, to get together to be able
to provide notice.
that to be able to, you know,
fundraise and to be able to
purchase it, um, here it, it, it
stipulates the 75 days, um, that
in those 75 days the um.
You know, the owners need to be
able to uh 51% at least need to
be able to say yes, we would
like to enter into um some kind
of agreement and purchase our
home and then, um, the 90 days
after that is part of the
traditional typical market
valuation, um, I, I think in
that 75 day period, we have
definitely cut down the amount
of time it previously in the
first bill, it was 90 days. Um,
we cut it down to 75, um, other
states have lower numbers, um,
but I think what.
What we are trying to do here
and and maybe that you mentioned
this already in your in the
proposal, but
Um, we want the landlord to
achieve to get the highest
possible um deal that they are
able to get when they go onto
the market, um, rather than
telling the uh.
The folks who are in living in
the in the park, what they
believe the valuation should be,
so does your proposal include,
um, putting it on the market
first and then uh providing that
or that the folks would how how
would they be able to determine
then what the price of that uh
park is, you know, that's a good
question. I, Madam Chairman, a
representative, I mean, the way
I would envision the process as
I, if I was the owner of the
property, I'd send it out to the
tenants and say, because
of this bill, I need to provide
you notice and I need to give
you,
uh, g gives you a reasonable
time to organize and a
reasonable time to negotiate.
And if we're successful, then
great. We we we're successful
and I get some sort of reward at
the end, tax break, um, you
know, you could give a, I mean,
Back to Representative Mason's
issue, um, is in, in mine as
well, and I think Representative
Armstrong is that
If a purchaser comes in and you
enter into the negotiate and
enter into an agreement and
let's just say that that um that
agreement is for $10 million to
purchase this property.
That purchaser has got to keep
those funds locked down for 6
months, essentially, and that's
cost of money is a is a big deal
whereby this way front end
loaded, you basically say the,
the, the property owner says to
the renters. All right, we've
got this process that's a
voluntary process, but by going
through it, I'm rewarded by not
going through it, I'm gonna have
to, I'm not rewarded. And so the
idea would be for them, for them
to give notice. You could even
say in there that we.
I think we have, you know, we
have an appraisal or we think
the property is going to be
valued somewhere in this area,
and that's what we plan to list
it for. And if you all are
interested in sitting down and
talking about you buying it,
then I would love to be rewarded
at the end of the sale whether
um I sell it to you all or to
somebody else, but at least I've
gone through the process. And if
they don't go through that
process, it's once again, it's,
it's, I mean, it's, it's
voluntary, but they're not going
to get rewarded. And so I think
that would, it's, it's the
classic carrot versus a stick,
right?
Either, you know, you don't do
this and I'm gonna punish you
versus, look, take this
approach, talk to the people,
give them a chance, and then,
you know, if you do that, and
you play by the rules, then you
get something out of it when you
sell the property. So it would
be something along those lines
and representative, thank you
for clarifying that. Um, I
think, uh, my expert would like
to weigh in a little bit since
they have seen this, um, uh,
statutes like this across the
country.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, thank you
so much. Members of the
committee, I just wanna reassure
um the representatives and, and
senators that uh that the
experience in other states where
statutes of this type have been
in place. New Hampshire, it's 40
years, 151 mobile home parks are
now owned by the homeowners who
live in those communities and
there's no impact on prices for
Those communities, um, that's
been documented at all and
certainly it's been, it's been
looked at, but there, it clearly
has not driven down the price at
all of these communities, and
they're still active market in
those communities from third
party buyers, Massachusetts is
30 years. There's 30 resident
owned communities in
Massachusetts, Colorado only
recently passed the statute and
there um already uh seeing the
results and again,
Um, Colorado has 12 resident
owned communities and I think
they passed their law in 2019,
I'm gonna say, um, and, uh, so
they're just, it just hasn't uh
resulted in the, the feared loss
of value or loss of activity and
competition in those in those
states.
Amen chair representative would
like to respond to that, and
that is, you know, um, with all
due respect, you don't know, you
don't know about the buyer that
didn't come in and offer a
little bit more because he would
have to wait 6 to 9 months to
close on the deal. There's no
way that the public, all I can
give you is my experience where
I've I've, I've seen this happen
and it will dramatically uh
impact uh the values of these
properties, it's going to be the
property owner that takes the
hit. So I just have to
respectfully.
disagree.
Uh, Representative de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
intrigued by what Representative
Murphy has
As proposed.
I'm curious if uh the expert
that you have online has seen
that anywhere.
Done before or perhaps the
representative has a novel
creative method. Can your expert
weigh in and say, yeah, they
tried out in another state, it
didn't work out.
Madam Chair and uh
representative Dela Cruz and
I'll hand it off shortly to my
expert, um, but just to clarify,
um, uh, Chairman De la Cruz and
Madame Chair, what you are
asking is whether or not a tax
incentive has been provided for
um following through with this
process, Madam Chair, and, uh,
chairman.
Madam Chair Representative.
Exactly as it was just right. I
thought it was quite.
described quite well by
Representative Murphy, and I
just, I just prefer carrot
versus the stick and and
Certainly I as a landowner or
property owner, I would rather
be rewarded with a tax break at
the end, and it's an incentive
for me to really work with, with
the, the group that you want to
help.
And so
If it hasn't been done before. I
knew I'd be looking at something
new in this scenario or this,
this type of deal. So if your
expert could weigh in.
Ma'am sure and um uh chairman
I'll go to Mary O'Hara.
Yes, thank you very much, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you for the
question. Um, there's not a
state that I know of that has
structured something exactly the
way that um representative has
presented there are other states
that provide uh um state, uh,
tax incentive in the form of a
uh waiver of the transfer tax,
if a landowner sells.
the community to the homeowners
who live there, um, and there's
um
Uh, some who have done sales a
portion, a wave, a portion of
state sales tax, um, for
homeowners, um, but it hasn't
been combined with a notice to
the homeowners so that the
homeowners even know that the
community is for sale and that
there's an opportunity to
purchase it, and I think that
that's one of the things that
the the statute as presented
provides is it provides the
homeowners with the
noticed that the property is for
sale and the opportunity to
match a legitimate uh market
offer, um, which I think is what
results in the community owner
getting the best price possible.
Could I add something to Mary's,
uh,
comments,
um, so the, um, uh, Madam Chair,
representatives, um,
I think, uh, Delaware is
something of an example of a um
state that has an opportunity to
purchase a uh option like the
one that was just proposed by
Representative Murphy, I
believe. Um, it's, they call it
right of first offer, where the
um the residents get noticed and
then get an opportunity to make
an offer, and I'm sorry to say
that that has not been
effective. Um, it, and I think
one reason
Um
Well, I'm not exactly, I'm not,
I could speculate why, um, but I
can tell you it, it hasn't, um,
it hasn't produced resident
ownership of communities.
Washington State also had a
provision somewhat like you
described, and it did not
produce resident owned
communities. One of the benefits
of um the structure that the
bill before the committee, um
brings is that it guarantees
that the park owner will get the
price the park owner wants. The
park owner will have uh
negotiated, uh, gotten an offer
that is satisfactory to the park
owner, and only if the residents
can match that offer, um.
Uh, at least, uh, match that
price, um.
Will the um
going to be under an obligation
to sell it to them or negotiate
with them. So uh so setting the
price first through the third
party offer, so the park owner
knows what um
Uh, what the possibilities are,
um, has, um, proven very
effective.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, this,
this.
Bill is, is, uh, it's difficult
for me because I wanna do both.
I wanna help create long term
housing for people that have it,
that have been in a location
that have
Put down roots at the same time,
I've struggled from the very
beginning with the notion that
we are interjecting ourselves
into private property rights,
and that, that's difficult for
me.
At the same time,
Today, uh, for, let me back up,
Madam Chair, I appreciate the
representative,
representative Paar
adjusting the bill to try to
make it more palatable. I
appreciate that. The, the last
part for me was the idea that if
an emergency came up and you had
to sell it and you couldn't wait
and you had somebody that could
be a family friend, whatever
that had the capital by right
now, so you could leave because
you have an emergency, that
still isn't addressed in the
bill, and I understand that it'd
be hard to do that too.
to incorporate at this point.
But I hadn't thought about the
notion that represent Murphy
had, which I just think is a
good idea. Now, I don't know if
it's been done exactly that same
way in Delaware or anywhere
else, but I would rather have
reward rather than punishment.
In a scenario like this, man.
Thank you.
So Robert.
OK. All right, uh, what's the
will of the committee?
I move it do not pass on House
Bill 27426, but if you pass some
house commerce and economic
development company substitute
for Hospital 426.
OK.
Substitute motion to table.
the table motion.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes to table Representative de
la Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
No the table.
Representative Murphy, Yes,
table.
Representative Parajon.
Mm.
Representative Serrado.
of vice chair.
Madam Chair, not a table, Madam
Chair, final tally for the table
motion is 5 votes yes, 6 votes
no.
motion failed back on the bill.
OK.
To have emotion, but do not pass
on House Bill 426 but it do pass
on House Commerce and Econom
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 426.
3
That you take it on.
Representative Armstrong? No.
Representative Dela Cruz? No.
Representative Fernandez? No.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason.
So
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Parajon.
Yes. Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Yes
Madam Chair, final tally for the
Dupaz motion, 6 votes yes, 5
votes no.
OK.
Um, Madam Chair, I'd like to
make a motion.
To take HB 392 from the table.
Alrighty, it's been removed from
the table.
She voted in the affirmative, so
she can bring it back up, but
we're just gonna go straight to
a vote.
OK.
Do you want to get up and
explain.
And I had asked you to get me a
tally before you brought this up
to me, so I'm not pleased.
Um, Madam Chair, I.
When I spoke with you, you said
you were gonna talk with your
vice chair. I'm sorry if that
wasn't.
Thank you.
Um, so the, the bill in front of
us is hospital 392 and it's a
single use plastic bag ban bill.
uh, and we, we was on the, uh
It was voted uh to be tabled and
there was a, I believe.
Uh, 53 votes, uh, to table with
Representative Patterhong voting
with the um majority and she's
made the motion to bring it back
in.
Bill's back, manager.
Not
moved to table.
Representative.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes do. Representative Dela Cruz
has.
Representative Fernandez
Representative Lee.
Representative Mason. Yes,
Representative Matthews.
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Murphy
representative about.
Yes.
Representative Serato
Madam vice chair.
Yes, the table. Oh, I'm sorry,
uh, Representative Dela Cruz.
No the table.
Representative uh vice chair.
Yes this table.
Yes.
Journey.
