Representative
thank you thank you for bringing
this forward to the commitment
to
have a couple of questions
regarding the bit of an
innocent set of site for
specific
managed representatives so
Five hundred thousand.
I think it was last year well
came forward for start with us.
Yeah and that was when they
wanted to make manager is when
you're looking at spite
and remember what I believe that
the included
the whole state of the state
right now to think about any
money please industrial sites
throughout the state
that's not even began to attach
it when you talk about that
until it is the extension water
support whatever is industrial
sites that doesn't mean that the
project applied under the other
special preparation but i'm very
very concerned about that
i'm also very concerned about
the fact that that has the only
puppet one and half the amount
that was requested by the
face
I believe that when we look at
the fact that
much of that cash balance is
already encompared for use with
another project and if it is the
marketing tool for state quite
active development I think
that's an awful shame
that's in the state that you're
to think that they would only
put that was even requested by
the department basically this
better than nothing but I still
have a very serious conspiracy
or something but it comes to the
four thank you
representative does anybody else
want.
The first part of your
presentation what was the reason
that
didn't
put in
representative
the other recommendation for
really took into account the
share actuals for the fund
balance
which I just made three with
eighty four.
Sure how much of that is thirty
percent
it's actually
the agency is that the balance
actually is eighteen million
discrepancy there is in
anticipate like the anticipated
spending of what they're just
putting to twenty four so that
the difference which is like
roughly sixty six million
approved and participate so I
don't have an exact number how
much is fully even just because
a little tricky to try act
because we we.
Manager it's a little concerning
to me with that
initially zero
specially
importance this project is to
every state not just
one.
The.
Thank you.
That's what.
Think about interest
on question is
there any funding with any
before the data has not yet
spent is.
Outside of the balances or with
developments
yes
probably missed that you know
yeah so
doesn't mean three is eighty
four point seven
eighteen million
the two numbers
is accounting for the spending
and if I twenty four so there
are just being designed sixty
six million this year
by twenty three the it is
actually spent thirty eight
point six million dollars that
was a commission might be
actually what that balance
okay thank you so much.
Thank you very much so that
tells us that if the department
was correct there's eighteen
nineteen dollars from japan to
because the budget doesn't
start.
Ridiculous thank you.
Anybody else
okay
just messaged we appreciate you
we also
economic
commitment
because
what's going on and it doesn't
research changing I i'd like to
be updated that we actually
still very much appreciate
you've been here today thank you
already so we need to take one
to make sure we get her in it
for
quick
but if you're taking.
Representative and you know
present representative
representative
representative
representative little
representative lunch from
representative
representative
medical share
medicare
method you have.
Thank you very much after new
object
warmed up
for our presentation
how to fifty two personal income
tax break is restructuring
it's at the most high level this
is the same structure that was
in the house version of house
built five forty seven from the
two thousand and three
legislative session I was
ultimately passed by the
conference committee
last year as well as the doctor
by book was the house in the
senate that was sent up to the
governor but there was
ultimately veteran by the
government
so what has been put again again
exactly
but you need to do a just the
income to ask it to increase
progressivity and hopefully
right for working for families
he proposals text breakfast do
not repeat do not impose a tax
trade increase on the income of
the level
the income tax drugs to proposed
in this section for the decrease
it is for all taxpayers with the
rate decrease targeted again at
the lowest income earners and
the middle income earners.
Below sixty six point five
thousand dollars and five income
below one one hundred thousand
dollars was see absolute tax
rate decreases those with income
the book of those treasure
rockmaintain the same tax rate
as currently in the status which
is I believe by point ninety
percent
and four point nine percent
but the wall but ultimately
we'll see a text like billy
decrease due to the structure of
the personal income texts as
prussia.
And so more pete bill
information will include this
built spread out tax papers
throughout the
racket's meeting a different
income levels approximately
forty six percent of a ball tax
papers are in the four point
nine percent text
thirty nine percent in the one
point seventy percent.
Each other contains less than
seventy percent of the mexico's
tax period.
Under the proposals tax changes
approximately thirty nine
percent of tax peers will be any
one point nine percent tax break
the steam as the current
structure.
Many of these taxpayers do not
earn any income
break it with a protected sweep
between three point two percent.
And four point nine percent each
containing between eleven
percent and sixteen point eighty
percent of the tax period in new
mexico.
At five point ninety percent
contained the proposal only
three point nineteen percent and
mexico's expected but the same
as the current instructor today.
That's burden is also
effectively to be distributed
across the income levels under
this proposal again and
increasing the personal income
progress as well and tax
burpertons rises with income
progressively that income rates
I think right.
It should want income it's paid
to that tax as well as a
different eight introduced.
The current is extremely compact
at the lower end of the of of
the structure and it will be
quickly breaching for nineteen
percent actually as it can rise
it
four point nine percent bracket
covers making between sixteen
thousand dollars and two hundred
and ten thousand dollars.
That corporately
proposal.
The shareable overall statements
tax revenue paper reckon never
exceeds forty three eight
percent.
Single tax bracket while the old
structures saw the majority of
personal income tax
approximately in this case
seventy five percent paid by the
four point nine percent tax
bracket of tax payers.
The lowest tax bracket taxpayers
average a negative tax liability
after claiming eligible tax
credits and refunds under both
of the both of the proposed and
current structures.
The.
And with that madam chair we
would stand for any questions.
Ready do we have anybody in
favor of this bill.
Okay let's start here.
Yeah.
Thank you and very nice the
blazer there
next.
Yeah.
The.
Anybody else in support
we've got somebody on zoom.
Page.
That can be medicare
with the medicine for each other
and
the correct
which provides a match needed to
restructure you are pretty like
in a target the largest benefit
for low and companies you all
have made incredible progressive
equity
and actually
the next step needed to continue
that important work we want to
think that over introducing the
people legislation
thank you
thank you next rich.
But yes thank you madame chair
mister chair
my name is britain or
and I think we all know it in
two thousand and three governor
bill richardson pushed to a flat
hacks
whereby everybody.
Between sixteen thousand and
eighty four point nine percent
previous to that the wealthy tax
runners are paying eight point
two percent and so everybody was
paying pretty much the same
except that people at the very
bottom so we resort some
progress aggressively in in his
text for extra at the low end
since twenty nineteen that's a
good thing to work to your store
even more program city below in
four people is
a chair lender he said about
people six thousand five hundred
and I wrote the members of the
committee last night saying I
think this is a step in the
right
I think it is one of the concern
that I have
in garden supporter to this bill
is that I understand since then
that this would cost us a
hundred and fifty nine million
dollars and revenue this year
and even more in the future it's
not given that big surplus we
have this year hundred and sixty
million dollars is not a big
deal but i'm worried about what
could happen next year in the
following year when it even when
oil reviews start to come down
so I would strongly suggest in
an amendment
either here in the tax rate
the committee to add another tax
crack it between fifty six
thousand and two hundred
thousand say between going from
four point nine million five
point four something in between
maybe even raising the fact that
the high end
of this loss in review I hope
the committee is able to do this
and read from it would do this I
I do want to see this kind of
relief with people at the lower
in the scale much prefer to see
this relief offset by
say the swite increases in and
in the higher rate and with that
I think you much this
opportunity.
Owner.
Good afternoon committee chair
and members of the committee my
name is own a quarter and I am
the clean energy leader and the
founder america for prosperity
works prosperity works works too
close the wealth gap in new
mexico and this measure
adjusting the lower bracket
makes a big difference to those
folks and want to tell you also
that I would probably fall in to
one of the higher levels and i'm
willing to pay that so that low
income people have a fair shot
of their economic systems
sustainability and prosperity I
appreciate that the sponsor
bringing this forward and I hope
you'll pass it.
Thank you anybody opposed to
this bill.
Okay let's go to the committee.
Representative matthews.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you representative for your
presentation
I was reading this last night
and of course.
I have no idea which.
Income right range I mean or
which tax bracket but cause I
can't ever remember that kind of
thing very well but as I was
reading it I came across on page
two of the fiscal implications a
paragraph that I just really
didn't understand i'm hoping you
can explain it to me.
This bill creates or expand a
tax expenditure.
With a cost that is difficult to
determine but likely
significant.
Lfc has serious concerns about
the substantial risk estate
revenues from tax expenditures
and the increase in revenue
volatility from erosion of the
revenue base.
The committee recommends the
bill at here.
To the lfc tax expenditure
policy principles were vetting
targeting and reporting or
action people's bone until the
implications can be more fully
studied i'm not.
Madame chair i'm i'm not real
clear which committee the
committee recommends.
That the bill adhered to less
tax expenditures can you tell me
who that who were what that is
absolutely madam chair and
representative if I could if I
could ask an employee of the.
That is language that ls
includes anything that might a
road are tax space.
Given that we have a baltimore
revenue stores especially from
oil and gas we usually try to
steer away from big tax pets are
expenditures that might erode
more stable revenue sources this
section was actually put into
this fire and err this is
usually for tax expenditures
this is not a tax expenditure
tax expenditures are credit's
deductions and exemptions this.
In contrast is a rate
restructured as a tax policy
belves a targeted credit
exemption or deduction so thank
you representative matthews I
will take that out of the hard
moving forward
then chair thank you so.
So there is no recommendation
just so i'm clear there's no
recommendation from the l c d
that somehow this proposal is
not in compliance with the
vetting targeting and reporting.
Thank you presenters.
Representative
thank you representative dunkin
thank you manager
representative little
mischairman was there any
thought given to indexing for
inflation.
Any of them for that matter.
Madame chairwoman and
representative good question and
and at this point there was not
could want her to be able to
bring back a bill that was
familiar to
to the one that we saw.
Representative.
Thank you manager I do have a
couple questions for
representative landing and for
the lfc staff the first question
I have in regard to this bill is
has the state of new mexico
reached the pre pandemic
employment level.
Madame chair representative
lunch yes or unemployment rates
have dropped down to prepared to
make levels our last published
revenue estimate I believe had
us within one percent of our
employment levels is terms of
raw numbers so we are very close
if if we aren't there yet
last information I saw said we
have not met that employment
level yet it's a different
calculation for unemployment
versus employment
like my concern he as an and I
believe I did vote for this when
it was in the omnibus bill on
the floor last year is that and
i've written articles in the
past of the newspaper that I
thought we're gonna create
strokes for a lot of people but
I don't even know why we're
doing personal income tax in the
state with a kind of revenue
that's being generated in the
state in mexico today it doesn't
make sense to me that
that
there isn't more of a tax
or relief here and I and i'm
serious when I say that it says
that we generate
certain first standards I
thought it said twenty five
percent of the states recurring
general fund is from their
source
but there hasn't been a very
very strong look at personal
income tax as a whole in terms
of potentially eliminating it.
I don't think primarily because
you have such a fluctuation with
employment numbers I think it
does create
creates a real issue for us here
I also had the same question
matter chair that representative
matthew sad regarding that
language that was putting by the
lfc under fiscal implications I
guess it for me jennifer it
create it creates cause then
do we do we can we rely on what
we read
because once you get a check
once somebody says that the
first thing is i'm not voting
for this because it sounds as
others are very serious issue.
Anyway I would like to just say
again that we need to have and
the representative comes to four
allows the same question what's
unemployment that prepared democ
employment level it was a then
where are we now
and just appreciate the time
here today thank you
representative anybody else on
the committee.
The.
Represent little medical cherry
for do pass before we do I I
actually have a couple of
questions.
Chairman
so
why was the marriage penalty not
addressed in this cause
if you file separately you get
charged more.
Absolutely thanks thank you for
the question madam chair so we
we did look at that but given
the the constraints capacity
that we have for this year in
regards to creating tax reform
with the two hund.
That would have.
Well over close to three hundred
million and so it just eat up
all of our capacity doing that
that where and so we took a step
back in and and thought about
things more creatively and so it
kinda just pushed her hand to.
Something that we could obtain
in terms of it being more
reasonable in how we could fit
certain things in terms of in
terms of this here as true tax
policy reform
that was the intent instead of
just doing a whole.
To kind of fill up the gap for
two hundred million we thought
we take a bit bigger chunk here
in this case as as house.
You know I I understand that
when we look at capacity you
mean we we it sounds like a lot
of money but it goes really
quickly with you start looking
at the deductions and so I do
realize that i've been seeing on
the text committee for many
years
also mister chairman you know I
I like this bill and I I like
the fact
that it's a reduction of taxes
for everybody and more money in
people's pockets of course that
that that feels our economy
the one the concern I do have is
because I have been around when
times are lean and so if we
start you know looking at the
deduction of course it starts
like you know what down the line
or building our budgets do you
have any concerns around that
manager woman we looked at all
aspects of what hit bracket
restructuring might do now and
into the future so in out years
we're looking at about a hundred
and seventy two million dollars
impact.
And we looked at other other
matters like like grt reduction
for instance right and and we
looked at those two comparingly
guarantee reduction of a one
eight percent and it was thought
that grt and we'll talk about
shoe reform not n.
Of of any certain thing
regarding tax structures and so
great reform was that to be more
regressive because those are
those at the tub get the most
benefit because these.
And so it would tack pit
restructuring it was one that we
felt at least at that I thought
in terms of proposing this piece
of legislation that affected.
More new mexicans especially
those at the at the at the
bottom in middle of wage earners
and so that's why for me I I
felt it it seems to be more pro.
Those are other questions I have
what's the will of the committee
I think there was already
okay and do we have a.
Budget to take the r.
Representative and you know.
Yes representative dunkin yes
representative hernandez
representative lender
representative little yes
representative lunchtime.
Representative martinez yes
representative mason yes
representative matthews
men and vice chair yes madam
chair yes managed your final
italians eleven votes yes zero
votes now
your bills pass representative
explained about.
Yeah I I just wanted to say that
I think it's important for the
audience to understand tax the
tax capacity is dictated by lfc
it's not just a arbitrary number
they basically set the tax
capacity for the tax committee
and i'll tell you it if they
were more plammering with some
of the other sea members it
would be more availability then
to do more with the tax
committees work but I mean
that's the way it works and you
know there's years like I know
that from personal experience
that we've given a heck of a lot
more to the tax committee to
work with in the past and it
wasn't that many years ago thank
you thank you thank you.
Already.
We are on to.
Each b twenty five.
This.
Think you madam chair members
representative athlete and
category here to present house
bill twenty five if you could
indulge me for a moment I just
want to do a little history are
of our our progress here so in
nineteen sixty eight the federal
government created the fair
housing act which created
protected classes
so that there would not be
housing discrimination the had
consistent issues of individuals
of certain races or religions
only being shown certain
neighborhoods or not even being
allowed to rent or even though
they qualified and and those
areas by nineteen sixty nine the
state of new mexico
they started the human rights
act today I am that my bill i'm
presenting looks before but it's
really the act itself who just
adding a paragraph and adding a
protected class to the human
rights act the human rights act
is just is a state civil rights
law that among other things
guarantees fall in equal
services and accommodations to
all people regardless of and
then it listed a protected
classes today i'm asking to put
in an income source as a
protected classes during the
internet committee we heard
numerous testimonies that
individuals looking to rent
were denied based on their
income this pertains to all
kinds of income
such as tribal are veterans
and active military
section eight voucher
substantial subsidised housing
and that this income should not
be.
Of reason should be protected
and a beliefs that this is
income does not need the other
standards
we believe is a prejudicial the
human rights act also is used
for employment as well we've
heard military families that
employment were we're not hiring
because why they we were
concerned about training and
bringing an employee that may
leave in a year to same thing
with a landlords but running to
our military or active military
so by adding income source will
be able to protect these
individuals this does not hinder
landlords or employers for
creating a criteria to vet their
tenants
so as the human rights act says
that it is
guarantees fallen equal service
and commentations if landlord or
property owner requires a credit
score to be able to rent this
does not hinder that is all it
just requires that the same
credit score be used no matter
what your income sources and
there are other
there are other.
Examples of that but just a unit
just to demonstrate how we have
evolved
the decades they have protected
these classes and have created
more fair housing employment
opportunities you know in the
eighties there are many
prejudicial
barriers for individuals who or
hiv or had aids in the not and
then that became a protected
class in the nineties with
single parented
and that became familiar status
became a protected class and so
today I am asking for income
source to become a protected
class thank you.
The.
I am ready for questions yes.
Anybody in the room in favor of
this legislation.
Yeah.
Next.
Madam chair may we ask the
comments to come forward because
they are online individuals
can't hear us can't hear.
Yeah.
They can come to the to the
front.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee i'm alicia
kenny guyer I moved here about
two to three years ago after
serving as an origin state
legislator for ten years I was
chair of human services and
housing and we did pass this
bill in under my chair
personship we are one of twenty
two states that have passed it
and one of the issues that was
really prevalent in oregon and I
know it's prevalent here is that
often the section housing
batters can't be used someone
has three months to try to use
it they try to find housing in
the and it's not accessible and
it's really important that we
get these vouchers into use so
people can be house and not end
up on the streets with that do
everything we can to increase
supply or due to support this
but I think you do.
Test
passes.
Yeah.
Madam chair.
User
and members of the committee my
name is money silver and i'm the
executive attractor the mexico
coalition
while she just come up to the to
the
we're trying to make it easier
and I think
madame chair and members of the
committee my name is money sober
and i'm the executive director
of the new mexico coalition
the collision is made up of over
eighty organization statewide
and we stands in the support of
house bill twenty five we live
in a state over nineteen
thousand individuals prepare
experience
and forty three percent of new
mexico renters are cost burden
including twenty percent that
are severely cost
and due to this we know that we
are going to have individuals
and families that apply for
housing with various sources of
income.
This must not take away the
landlord's right to use their
regular lawful screening
criteria or charge security
deposits and regular reds what
it does allow people that would
otherwise not be able to be
housed
to be housed so many of the
systems that are in place create
areas for individuals
experiencing homelessness that
are housing and secure and then
have other barriers that
directly impact their ability to
be housed as new mexicans we
should work to make sure that
all the mexicans are able to be
house no matter their situation
and their source of income
because housing as a human right
I urge the commitment to support
to vote in favor of each b
twenty five thank you.
Next.
My name is
here in santa fe.
I am somebody who has its
section eight voucher housing
voucher.
After living thirty years and
one apartment my landlord
decided he had to sell
aging and I had to find a new
place to live here in santa fe
with the housing the way it is
it took me four months I had to
get my housing voucher
renewed but probably two thirds
of the landlords that I spoke
with once I said I had section
eight they were not interested
in renting from me and that's a
huge number and they had no I
finally
figured out that the first thing
I needed to ask was would they
take a section housing voucher
because most of them said no.
And they didn't have a chance to
find out that I was a thirty
year good ten though they would
have liked to have rented to so
I totally supporting this bill
thank you thank you next
nobody else.
I am pretty much
a managing attorney and mexico
legal aids albeque office mexico
legally this free legal services
to lower coming mexicans in the
area of benefits are family
lockers of her protection
attacks disputes
and housing and dumb i'm in the
housing law practice group
and most of our clients that we
represent have some kind of
federally subsidised housing
benefit and the biggest benefit
is a section in housing vouchers
and those vouchers are are paid
for with federal funds and
and most
intersections are three way
relationship between a private
landlord
a public housing that's funded
by hard and a private tenant and
the.
Ten size the lease and housing
authority pays part of the brand
the tenant pays part of the room
the tenants rep set at thirty
percent of their household
income so i'll detend it gets a
better job gets better federal
benefits there share the rate
goes up in the housing
authorities rate goes down and
if the ten experience of
catastrophe or a job loss or
something like that they're
shared goes down and the housing
authorities goes up and that way
the the unit is per se
affordable all the time.
Volunteers are really scarcing
new mexico there are one to
three year waiting less for a
vouchers and and there's more
families that need them and
there are available when the
voucher on his issue the ph
generally gives a ten to or
maybe three months to find a
place and especially over the
past four years I found with my
clients they can't find homes
there are landlord to adverti.
And and and and like science
unable to find homes end up
losing their routers and losing
their voucher means they can't
afford the rant at a market
place and they might end up
living with relatives or they
might end up with their kids on
the streets or in shelters and
it's a big big problem in and
and at best they get to go back
and reapply and we.
Um.
And then it had clients who've
been in stable living situations
without a voucher just barely
affording the red family help
and they get the volume
and in its gods and but what
happens the language is sorry
i'll have to move I don't think
the voucher and the family's
left with choosing between that
voucher which is a secure source
of affordable how affordable
housing assistance and that good
home they've had for a long time
so
studies undertaken before the
passage of albert source of
income ordinance show that many
many landlords were advertising
openly we don't take vouchers
and it was not illegal to do
that
there's a speaking vouchers a
lot of landlord system won't
take vouchers and I think it's
because they're associated with
poverty they're associated with
black espana can native families
and but in my experience voucher
tents can be better tense of
first of all the public housing
agency pays the rat every month
the lionship
and cookie housing authority has
great credit it's a very
reliable source of rent i'm
second these families have to
undergo for a little background
checks it sometimes rental
history checks even join the
program so a landlord accepting
a voucher as a ten if he's
already prescribed you can't get
into the voucher program
if you have a history of violent
crime or drugs.
And can't get into the supreme
court stay in the program if you
have a judgment against you.
So you got to pay that landlord
before you stay get your voucher
back which is a great incentive
to pay your bills.
Third the section eight are
program is the the land were
comfortable to ten looser jr.
Her share of the incomes are the
rents going to go down and the
landlords share I mean the
public algerians shares going to
go up so the really will get
paid and forth and where I
often see because i'm i'm on the
lawyer is we're tenants are
going to get effective attendant
to get a victim from a section
intended they loose the project
so what better incentive instead
So
we feel the effective be twenty
five would be to put families
with vouchers on the same
footing with other new mexican
family since we think it's a
good thing thank you I
appreciate
being cumount sharing committee
my name is just clark limited
director of prevention for the
new mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs.
In the student will income women
participating in the section
eight voucher program sixteen
percent had experience sexual
harassment and other problematic
behavior from landlord are those
only three percent reported that
harassment through institutional
channels due to fear of
retaliation in the context of
already sparse availability of
housing for those using vouchers
the coalition is very much in
support of HB twenty five first
because our sexual salt
providers across the state are
already working to increase
access to transitional housing
and this bill will help
facilitate that access and
second because protecting an
increasing access to safe and
affordable housing access of
protective factor in enough
itself against sexual violence
and contributes to the larger
health equity framework that we
n.
Anybody else in favor of this
bill.
Well
members of the committee by the
stick mason about what we're in
the registered liberties for the
leak of women voters of new
mexico and we have a strong
position on equal opportunity
and you've heard all the stories
of the step away
you know support for hb to
twenty five definitely gets
within opposition and equal
opportunity and we standard
strong support
next.
Yes.
Testify that for me and my
mother pretty much that
we we have we're all in support
of this bill and also that
everyone we know support of it
and also that we
sorry I have a little trouble
speaking publicly
if you're doing great thank you
so and also
we we have like a bunch of
issues with like landlords and
stuff like that it is basic
stuff even just like making sure
like the water is clean you know
what
the
we have all kinds of stories to
tell you but basically work
we're supported and there's all
kinds of horror stories you
could tell you but i'll keep
sure thank you so much anybody
else today in support
okay anybody in our position
oh we've got so
okay yeah
a rich winner.
Yes madam sure thank you
again I am a long time attorney
and housing advocate for low
income and all the tenants and
so I can vouch for what people
are saying about how difficult
it is times to use their voucher
and I support this bill for all
the reasons that i've been put
worth the up up until now I do
want to address a couple of
issues that i'm concerned about
that we addressed in part with
the albuquerque source of income
discrimination ordinance and
that is that.
We should make sure that
landlords can't get around this
by saying that a person has to
have two and a half times their
rent in income and if they do
then we have to figure out what
it means that what what two and
a half times the rant needs so
for example if a person if there
market renters thousand dollars
when I was a seven hundred
dollars and the and the person
is income as a thousand dollars
and they only pay thirty percent
for their section a voucher
they're part of the rental
action voucher if if you've
tried to take two and a half
times the
the the one thousand or with the
seven hundred that is the rent
that's not going to work for
virtually every section a
voucher holder but if you make
it two and a half times that the
amount that the telephone is who
has the voucher then they will
always qualify because
they think three hundred thirty
five hundred with the red that
they have paid so I think it's
really important to see if we
can close that loophole with
with an amendment
that now were the next committee
to
make sure that that some minimum
income and requirement doesn't
basically shut out almost every
single section voucher holder
and at the same time i'm a
little concerned with the idea
that landlord could use the
credit for in the case of the
section eight voucher
because one of the things about
being the section
of ten
is that you're very low income
you're probably gonna have
problems in the past
you know and possibly credit
problems with sure in part of
resolved through these housing
subsidies such as secondary
voucher so I think under the
fair housing we would
call it disproportional impact
on a protected class which in
this case would be sort of the
backup so I hope we can fill out
why the way to close these also.
The source of income
discrimination law would
actually have some teeth and
with that I thank you for the
opportunity to decision
support the bill but wanting to
see it
stronger
and also like to remind
everybody that we've got to pay
ten people on here so I like to
keep the zoom remarks to
a minute or under.
Sapa.
Thank you manage their members
of the committee my name is
johnny a c the american civil
liberties union of new mexico
our purposes to protect an
advanced justice liberty and
equity as guaranteed by the
constitution that we make on the
united states eighty twenty five
was right in line with that
purpose and we believe that it
will help to address the issue
of source income based
discrimination in mexico
as representative mentioned our
history does have a long legacy
of discrimination particularly
when it comes to housing and
this would be one step towards
greater equity there is a step
that is definitely worth taking
and I had more written but
everyone else spoke so well I
just incurred you to you both
yes on this bill and thank you
very much
shall be greaser.
Good afternoon with a chair and
members of the committee my name
is shopping
research I am with medical voice
for children and we stand strong
support of
source of income discrimination
further perpetuates housing
instability
we know that housing stability
is crucial in improving outcomes
for children and educational
team we think the sponsors for
this important bill and urger
support in you.
Rachel bigs
good afternoon man I need to
choose with albert
the cost of housing across new
mexico out of reach for many
people with disabilities
families and seniors that access
to housing based on social
security and can disability
our vouchers only increases
problems that and leaves
essential federal resources
we have a huge test early daily
back in the nineteen seventeenth
of this type of legislation as
you heard over twenty two states
and over a hundred and twenty
cities currently have statutes
protecting managers from source
kind of discrimination and
research is strong that these
policies increase twice and
housing
on the market we urge your
support of each day twenty five
sponsor bringing that forward
senator.
I could afternoon matter some
members of the committee is
johnson
at earth came to new development
organization based on
our use and a family members for
issues impacting their lives
from the local listing level
only recognition that housing is
a basic human right actually get
into the high cost of living in
saturday and a lot of court
houses in the city any of our
members work on on the daily
basis and any reading but I live
in protected check in just a
little here and
this is an issue seem nationwide
and especially now when and
communities were to live with a
possession and economic
downtowns
many people no longer work to
live here at all that i've seen
better families with many hands
that have been here for
generations put up
and due to that but economic
opportunities housing parts have
some discrimination like you
know as a discuss here and we
need to step in and work members
in whatever reason we can and
moving various housing
process to twenty five two
thousand and eight music human
right and was trying to urge you
to go in favor of the services
and communities thank you.
Destiny ray
can
yes
good afternoon madam chergo goes
and members of the committee my
name is destiny i'm twenty one
and i'm representative for you
who represents hundreds of
families and you throughout the
state I live in santa fe and it
wasn't renewed him as in hoping
for over sixty year sixty days
the summer I was homeless and
struggled to find a place to
live that I can afford it was
one of the most stressful
periods of my wife I spent a
week leaving up to becoming
homeless and out of the hospital
urgent car in the earth do the
health complications I was
unable to work and make the
money that was needed for me to
find housing accommodations I
was lucky my sister with
concerns for my health set up
and provided move the place to
stay at her house it wasn't easy
on anyone some if I slipped on
her couch sometimes in a room
and sometimes you recall friends
and stay with them for a week to
give me space and not
overcrowded house she already
had three house remains
internal affordable housing unit
it's not be a word on my sister
but they would all fill with not
come big and sees I want to
organizations that help with
housing and they were so
overburdened with cases they
didn't have the resources to
help me from a stated
desperation the shame I ended
all these that put me in a
situation that was unsafe for me
and I was so scaring in the best
brick that I compromised my own
safety data roof over my head
again I got lucky my sister
loved me to move back into that
receive
this whole time I was working I
had to go back to work before I
had a doctor's claims to be
marriable to barely afford and
barely for food.
The.
Don't have this very story that
everyone has yuckers and support
it and so because accessible and
affordable housing is a basic
human right it is discriminatory
and classes to nine people
housing based on their income or
having support through a voucher
I urge you to vote yes and house
still twenty five thank you.
Rager
good afternoon matter the
chairman of the committee this
is curt regular director of
euthanasia ministry mexico
lutheran advocacy ministry also
represents the position of an
extra conference to charges in
the infant interest of pine
please say that I would echo the
bring the arguments previously
made and support and urge you to
especially remember the personal
stories of insurer already and
madam chairman was the committee
I urge or age for twenty five
maria green go
chair and members of the
committee my name is maria grego
i've been attorney with a new
mexico senator online property
we want to take representative
case for this important bill we
stand at the part of this bill
because new mexico is in the
housing prices as it continues
to worse and with every passing
year housing class are becoming
more and more than some of her
relators with huge sentiments of
our states renter population
unable to meet other basic needs
once when it is paid housing
batters are in a settled
resource to ensuring that renter
families can access safe secure
and affordable housing when they
refuse to direct a family based
on their source of income most
commonly housing it only makes
our current housing problem.
Refusing to rent applicants who
are came with the voucher
problems and leaves a central
federal resources on the table
and housing discrimination gives
voucher there's more choice when
it comes to which neighborhood
is their family thereby
deconcentrating poverty and
reducing homelessness
and other dictions where source
of any company discrimination is
illegal study show that families
were twelve percent more likely
just as exceeded in finding
housing but in places without
such a law
families are also house
who write to after holders can
rely on a regular entirely red
humans else or just want to
upload everything mr pretty many
mexican said about how
this type of protection benefits
and anyone
this is better for the community
members in this huge step in the
right direction for our state
towards addressing the housing
crisis thank you
ready.
Let's now go to those opposed to
the bill.
The.
Manager members
if you get
good a memchair members the
committee my name is brenda I am
a registered obvious for the
mexico association realtors and
we stand in respectful
opposition to the bill and the
first thing that I would tell
you is this bill proposes to
elevate source of income to the
same level of discrimination
that you have for race religion
color national origin the
realtors view this proposal as
elevating source of income
decisions to level that is
unnecessary by inclusion source
of income in the human rights
act what you're doing is your
you're putting that type of
choice into a process that and
the results in
complaints are the human rights
commission and there's actual
damages there's attorney's fees
and there's some unsettled
caseline to mexico as to whether
actual damages includes
emotional distress so it is
definitely elevating that
process above we think is
appropriate and what the bill
also does is that if you look to
the fire you have situations
where
album turkey earlier county and
less cruises have adopted orders
so by considering this bill and
maybe passing this bill you take
away from those local entities
the potential that they can make
a decision that they think is
appropriate for them and so it's
one statement you're taking that
local decision making authority
away and I believe in
understanding I think the
apartment association will
probably address is better than
I can it's simply taking
vouchers under section eight
isn't as simple as just taking
vouchers that there are
additional regulatory birds that
flow from there and for those
reasons mexico realtor stand in
opposition.
I'm sure it was a big steve
rarely twenty year a veteran of
representing
being homewater myself in
landlord russian say a
individual that represents or
houses people that need housing
okay and I think that the the
question we all need to ask
ourselves is is this really
going to move the need on four
million to go we need housing is
very very important to all of us
and so that's the question and
so I wanted to present that to
you and that's one thing that we
need to consider is that is this
going to really move the need
off the right direction
and for what I do and understand
personally what we're doing
doing this over twenty years as
it is there other operator and
talk another independent other
offer is I should say also that
I hope to independent rental
older meeting every month and so
I talked a lot of these
individuals that were not read
properties and their concern
just because there is you know a
lot of paperwork that comes
involved with this and we're
gonna I think um are
member here surrounds going to
show you
it that is involved but it comes
to the process the other thing
is it's restrictive the
guidelines can be very
cumbersome I personally
house many such an eight
individuals but it has gotten
quite competitive over the years
and we just as independent owner
operators we we want a house
want to do what we can is as a
provider to help the community
but we don't need all the the
paperwork in all the things that
retain I guess if you.
It making a mentory for all
property management companies in
independent owners I think can
be very confusing and and really
a not pushing the need on the
right direction with that said I
thank you for listening to me
today and.
Madame chair.
The standard members my name is
chuck sheldon I own eighteen
hundred units plus in album
we have over eight hundred
vouchers and we provide service
to.
So i'm very familiar with the
voucher programs and holy
functioner don't function
we have an overstate some things
I don't really have a court room
against each other many times
one of the things that we have
is there's no basis we look at
saying people were going to have
income absolutely we take
vouchers.
Vouchers are not very.
The people are not vet
you have vouchers given to what
they call home first
all right and I think that's you
know no.
That's given the people that
have been on the street for more
than a year
they give them a voucher sitting
come into your property.
There's no evidence when you
look at that and you go back
against that in evaluate
can this personal live in the
penalty does this person have
emotional
drug relationship.
When you put people in jeopardy
and we had the birth foundation
and I know this the people are
reading off the script I live
this every day.
We were helping the bad
foundation because they help
whim and children were very big
proponent that we created an on
profit the old woman
we had is the city rocker he
says we're going to have
vouchers they picked up this
voucher and they went forward to
help people.
Young lady rents a place who's
working for it they put up prop
person in our property I did not
know what the time they weren't
better
this man tried to pull this
young lady into the apartment
but we had a part we had a
manager there stopped there we
say we need to file against this
person two weeks later they took
somebody out of the body that
another woman.
It took us another sixty days.
Forget that person out of our
part
and we knew he was having
problems we could not yet a
mutual receipt
legal aid was helping him
everybody helped him for the
wrong reasons
I think we need to have vouchers
people talk about saying we're
going to hit vouchers va
vouchers my gosh you're lovely
so securing
the single was so security it
helps somebody.
We have two hundred and fifty
vacant units right now that
represents around fifteen
thousand vacate units in albert.
There was places for people.
The differences were taking
people that are not dead and
we're trying to say you
made a chair in your apartment
you're going to take this person
that no one felt and if they
cause you problems you're going
to have to live with that it
worked through getting the body
place.
The process fixed sixty to
ninety days to get paid
He tried to have a d
every time you read some of the
voucher you have to have a deed
you have to show them that
you're the owner you have to go
through and that the partner
each and every time.
So now you can't see you know
what we have this we're on your
roster here's more information
for a man you gotta give every
time so that admitted minimum
spate of burden and nobody talks
about
then you go when you say
you have people they're going to
hurt somebody in your cake it
help to get them help because
really right now we have
emotional people with the rough
issues people with
the really live on road and
we're putting in our apartments
I represent two hundred and
fifty small owners.
They can't afford not to have
the red paid in weight sixty and
eighty days and make the
mortgage payment it's just
doesn't work.
Yeah.
I'm not against putting vouchers
and having vouchers I am going
without him and criteria to they
said on and how are you going to
accept that or not accept that.
And I should one of the things
lacking in this bill is a you
don't see how you can say then
we step back it's not about
vouchers it's about who was this
individual in front of me I
hired the type
to work for me to interview the
tenants so when they come in we
sit on an interview only comment
on the voucher that's a fifty
thousand our bill we pay out to
be able to look at that and
figure out whether these people
can work or not and live on it
wrong.
We just say catholic charities
friday bringing lady in the
seventy seven years old makes
twenty seven hundred dollars of
security
she has no money
in here.
She doesn't have all our
faculties.
You figured out a way to get her
one of our places today and see
on the first she can move in on
friday to be able to help her
get off the street.
But we have to put him in places
we have oversight we have people
that can manage
you just can't put him on the
side i'll be for all of those
reasons.
Helping people but for all those
reasons this is a bad bill for
us.
It's not going to help get us
done what we need to do so I
would against this bill thank
you.
Madame chair members of the
committee shows registered
lobbyist for nail commercial
real estate developers and the
new mexico chapter we stand in
opposition to this legislation
also for many other reasons
stated we appreciate what the
sponsor is trying to deal and we
do absolutely have a housing
price.
Believe it that the voluntary
participation in this section
housing choice voucher program
should stay that voluntary and
we oppose any effort to make
that mandatory we also have some
concern that this is possibly
creating a new class of
discrimination that is not in
federal lock and we feel that
that may need to be clarified as
well.
Manager committee members my
name is executive director the
apartment association to keep
talking about as much paperwork
at all here so we represent
around seventy thousand
new mexico so I want to talk a
little bit about what this bill
actually said because I this was
not really a bill about
discrimination so we do have
already federal fair housing act
as mentioned we have the human
rights act those do prohibit
discrimination against race
gender like we were talking
about
I agree nobody should
discriminate we should not be
discriminated so our opposition
is not about that it's about the
policy so in the sectioning
housing choice about your
program was creating congress
explicitly made it voluntary
because of all the regulatory
urgents right here is a hundred
and twenty pages that outlines
the house program this defines
the rules of public housing
authorities to find all that
stuff.
You have that first secondly as
an owner you're subject to sixty
eight more pages of fine print
are the determined your
relationship between you and
you're left and your test
you have to sign in thirteen
page housing assistance payment
contract which supersedes your
lease which then you also have
decided
so see were in the real reason
that I bring this up is because
it's challenging and I think
that one of the things that we
also have to understand about
this bill is this is one program
there does a programs run the
soon and execute this is just
one this is high this is where
it's lined out there nonprofit
to provide housing vouchers
there all sorts of assistance
programs their assistance
programs and only provide two
months worth of assistance where
maybe you require a twelve month
lease doesn't say anything about
that in this bill so I think
that's really important to talk
about but I think the main
concern here too is you have to
understand the eighty five
percent of our rental properties
are owned by mom and pop
if you get imagined handing this
to your mother or your sister or
your neighbor and have and
believing that they're going to
understand this and that if they
don't.
They're now discriminating I
think is a shame and so you know
we have housing providers that
specialize that have policy
teams have lawyers that have you
know they're made for this they
understand this they can deal
with the challenges as one of
the mentioned first payment
doesn't come for ninety days
your mortgage company doesn't
wait ninety days for you to pay
your mortgage
for you we have inspections that
take over thirty days at the end
of the year the ten it happened
residents has to be reinspected
you have to pass inspection at
the owners post even if there's
damages third party pace for any
sort of damage to the property
so it's these challenges that we
oppose this bill and so I really
like to ask you to please
consider that it's this is not a
bill about discrimination we
completely agree that you should
not be discriminated it's about
the bureaucracy of the programs
that are associated with this so
with that I will stop talking
but thank you very much thank
you.
My name is bobby griffith i'm an
owner of jogre.
I believe we're close to being
the largest provider of
affordable housing in the state
of new mexico
we have done watch of business
in the state were also in other
states we are right at five
thousand units we do not do
conventional we do not do market
we are only affordable housing
that's all we change to be in
this business and nineteen
ninety four it is our hearts
desire to provide housing for
that group of people that need
assistance and see.
We do not discriminate we do not
turn people away based on any
income issue however dispute
there's a little bit of a
problem I want to first state
that most of our properties have
budget based section.
That would be probably about
sixty percent the rest of our
units are made up largely a
voucher holders we gladly take
that however the spiel doesn't
talk about voucher holders this
is source of income that could
be anybody that could be here at
south that could be a church who
knows how long these people can
provide the needed assistance as
was described that the rest only
pays thirty percent of their
income but the remainder of that
react could be eight hundred
dollars could be five hundred
dollars after this agency no
longer has the money how we got
a get our money now we're in a
position where we're having to
deal with residents who need to
be a victim because the rest of
these becomes a i'm very
concerned when we start talking
about just income
that is way reaching and I do
not think that we should
consider.
At best the agencies that are
going to provide these housing
vouchers should be established
and there should be contracts
the way I read this is that I
can be
filed with the discrimination
lawsuit because I didn't want to
take their sister's money and I
have a lot of problem with that
I also want to say closing that
we oppose this bill but we are
not against what you're trying
to complex I first one of the
largest providers of affordable
housing in the state would like
to see a different approach to
this we have a bacon ceases of
mister sheldon said I don't know
what to keep in people from live
and with us either so I heard
these stories it's deplorable to
me that there are landlords out
there who do not provide the
water that this young man was
talking about or substandard
housing
that does not just mean that we
should start forcing people in
the places we should look at
other options and work very
grateful that you allow us to
speak to day and we vote now
gets this thank you we've got
two people on zoom.
If there's nobody else in the
address that wants to.
We stand in opposition i'm with
the greater outlook association
of realtors registered lobbyists
as well thank you matter chair
members
jean advance.
Matter
a lawyer in the housing industry
for about forty years
I want to echo what mister
was saying and and explained
very well it's just a question
of what you accept money as a
voucher or something money in
cash for example from some other
source
of the issue is that the bill
specifically says you you have
to take vouchers and the voucher
comes with all the regulations
there mr little state talk about
one other aspect because
vouchers are precious
we have to feel in the mexico
for the need that we have for
them
we have
the courts giving voucher rep to
the separate recipients a
different rights and and greater
rights there anybody else has
because if they lose a case a
land work ten case
the housing authorities will
take away the vouchers and that
that means that it taking a
voucher also means you now have
to have an attorney
to do cases that ninety nine
percent of the people that are
mom and pop landlords
so this is there's a serious
burden here and I think that we
we need to really be sure as if
there's not some of the other
way to accomplish this some
other way to put a few people
that have apartments that they
want to renege with voucher
recipients
together with a voucher
recipient because
just telling people who can't
really afford to deal with all
these burdens that they're going
to have to do that is probably
gonna get him out of the houring
housing business.
Because a lot of the small
androids that rang single family
homes don't actually have to be
breaking they could be selling
it then they're selling it into
a hot market so just
I would earn should be careful
about what what the end results
you're going to be because it
may not actually hold our
housing prices thank you
joshua smith.
Thanks for this opportunity to
discuss such an important topic
there is no doubt new mexico
along the other states this is a
missed about how the crisis the
question is who bear with the
brands of the solution
individual property owners
including small moment
have their own money at risk not
the issue not the issuers of
housing vouchers studied stories
only solutions
is more supply.
With egypt every additional new
government requirement you
mexico becomes a less attractive
for about for your development
and this is especially true of
work forced housing at the heart
of this very issue.
It's a savings to a serious
about improving supplied work
with housing developers to build
product don't tell the system
how they should operate their
businesses fundamentally this is
the only way to increase the
supply of new homes going for
thank you.
Thank you for public and point
let's go now go to the committee
do we have we've got
representative lunchtime first.
Thank you
it happens a few questions if I
may and i'd like to start by the
synopsis of the bill to the
representative
what's confusing for me is i'm
not sure if this deals with
rental housing or home
ownership.
I think you madam chair and
representative at any human
rights act it is for housing
it's for employment and
so it is for
all the things that cover the
human rights.
Madame chair in the bill it says
would prohibit loud owners or
home sellers from discriminating
against potential renters or
buyers so if I may amount him
chair may ask them finance msa a
question
is he i'd like to ask your john
a question.
How many housing programs do you
currently operate.
A madam chair and representative
lunch from him if a has about
forty different various housing
programs how often do those
annual budgets fluctuate.
Madame chair and representative
lumps from
just declarify the question
representative lunch from is
that the budget for each of our
funding program yes every year
they fluctuate a little bit
fairly constant but there are
some fluctuation so what we
would anticipate from these
various programs is that the
amount of funding where the
number of vouchers or the amount
of help you can provide for the
people of new mexico is going to
fluctuate
madame chairman representative
lumps from that is correct that
they will fluctuate a little bit
from your so my question is is
if these programs are used
that's all I had issue if these
programs as an example are used
as part of the the due diligence
for a home loan i'd like to know
how a home loan would be given
if you can't tell what the
income is going to be right
thank you I madam chair and
representatives so this is not
unlike what the testimony we
receive from public comment this
is not foreseen you to take any
vouchers this scene you cannot
disqualify anyone by their
income source so if they meet
all the other lending
requirements or rental
requirements then they should be
allowed to purchase or rent you
cannot use their source of
income as a way to disqualify
them so madame chair i'd like to
representative to explain to me
how you can buy a home if you
can't talk about what your
income is going to be so thank
you madam chair think you
represent it said if you
read on page two item it says a
lawful verifiable source of
money used to pay for housing
and further down it says
reocurring and verifiable.
So it would need to be
reoccurring a two month voucher
may not qualify depending on
what the landlords
verifiable processes madam chair
johnson john anderson's banker
don anderson would you give a
loan to somebody they can not
verify their income to purchase
a house.
Alright so my question is is
this bill specifically for home
owners for buying a home or is
it for
leasing an apartment
thank you managed chair think
you representative it is a human
rights bill at that will cover
all sorts of housing and
employment
as a protected class as it does
has been doing since nineteen
sixty nine
so madam chair representative if
the owner still have all their
current screening criteria
why would they ever admit that
they used income as a source of
not allowing at least seeing her
ownership
thank you madame chair and thank
you representative I am not sure
I can't tell you why they would
do that but I will tell you that
as representative who have sat
through five different interim
committees the summer I heard
numerous testimony that that has
been
said so is this complaint driven
madame chair or is there some
way that this could be verified
thank you madame chair well I am
a licensed reality I can
personally testify if you like
me to have over hearing
conversations being denied
housing because of source of
income I can do that madame
chair i'm not asking for
her to verify anything i'm
asking how
is this going to work on the
ground is it complaint driven
and who is it complaining too
thank you madame chair thank you
representative so the human
rights act has the human rights
commission which is set for
complaints on violations of
protected class also the ages
department has fried a
department that this would also
qualify you could put complaints
and if you believe that you had
a discriminatory practi.
Just so many see if it's
employment or representative how
would that be through them
and my my point is to the
earlier question madam chair
when I asked you
if an owner still has all their
current screening criteria why
on earth would they ever admit
that the reason they didn't
allow for a lease or the reason
that they didn't sell the home
is based on income sources thank
you madame chair thank you
representative of the I cannot
answer for why a landlord says
what they say I will say that if
you can prove that a non voucher
or a nine a w two income it was
required a six forty credit
store and another source of
income was required to seven
hundred credit score that would
be a violation of this
disgrumentation if the spell
passes madam chair I still don't
understand it I mean if someone
can use any of their other
screening criteria to deny
either home ownership or or
leasing I don't know how it
could be proven it can be
complaint riven until the cows
come home but if you're going to
file something with the human
rights commission or with
you got to have documentation of
some kind and it's not going to
be here say from a reality it
just doesn't work that way
the other question I had is.
When we have these
ordinances madam chair
representative that have already
been passed in albuquerque done
on a county and bernardly of
county are they consistent or
they different did they have
this language in their how does
that work and has a red
complaints.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you representative so
as we heard earlier from public
comment that we have a numerous
amounts of states who have
passed somewhere bills and the
data is showing that there are
usually complaints within the
first five years and then the
training I and I will say as a
member of the
the greater real estate
association and also new mexico
association of realities they do
an excellent job in training
their licensed realtors and not
violating the fair housing actor
the human rights activate or
trained with both those side by
side to be able to get licenseer
and they're very
I think they do an excellent job
in communicating the seriousness
of the violation
i'm out of chair for me when I
say that there's fluctuation in
the source of income when I say
that is complaint driven and
that we've had a long time
bankers stand up and say without
understanding source of income
clearly that they would not give
a loan anyway i'm not sure what
the i'm not sure what we're
trying to solve and that's
that's i'm i'm trying to get my
my head around it what are what
is the problem that we're trying
to solve is it about section
eight vouchers or is it about in
people buy home in people least
aid apartment i'm not clear on
that thank you so much madame
chair and thank you
representative if you're
absolutely right today we did
here an enormous amount of
public comment regarding section
eight vouchers which is
obviously a very emotional and
something that will be affected
here but understand that there
are tribal vouchers there are
military families who are being
told that you know I want a long
term ten minute i'm not going to
rent to you
because you're only going to be
in town for a year or two there
are individuals who are in
social security who are being
told new may not make the second
or third rent.
I because you're on a fixed
income so we're this bill is not
part of the landlords tenants
act this is the human rights act
just to be able to protect
income source so that and it
does not affect the landlord or
lender to maintain their same
criteria that they are doing
right now to make sure that
there it senates are veteran or
their lender the lindies are
vetted what it is doing is
insuring that they have the same
criteria despite what your
income sources.
Can you give us matter chair and
example of
re occurring lawful and verified
source outside of social
security and government
vouchers.
I mean it says in this FIR
it is long as you can provide
income such as social security
government housing assistance or
any other requiring lawful and
verifiable source i'm not sure
what re occurring lawful and
verifiable source means thank
you madame chair and and thank
you representative
I would I
there are I can tell use a few
examples one would be a who to
job
one would be a housing vote
voucher and just just for our
listeners so people understand a
housing voucher is not a coupon
it's a check just like when you
write a personal cheque only
this woman will never bounce and
if it's late it's because of
this male system
it is a guaranteed amount of
income that you can not spend on
anything but housing
and so that is verifiable and if
it is reoccurring it is recreant
as much as it w two job
manager I agree with that nest
would be government housing
assistance my question is can
you provide another example of
re occurring lawful and
verifiable source that is not
government housing assistance
thank you madame chair in
representative with child
support or alan money payments
is at night government
at not data none that I am not
an attorney chair or and what
else
I said madam chair
representatively alimony or
child support would be some
examples that are reoccurring
and lawful
area that's all here thank you
managed here.
Thank you madame chairman
representative of cats.
I thought I understand the
purposes bill but listening to
the testimonium.
The.
Sort of what is the problem
you're trying to solve with this
bill.
Madame chair and thank you
represented the martinez I am
trying to ensure that
individuals who are seeking
employment or housing are night
discriminated by reoccuring
verifiable income.
That if they need the criteria
that is astablished by a
landlord or their resume as an
employee that they hold the same
criteria for individuals despite
what their income is.
The.
Okay could you explain to me
what yo.
When they're seeking an
employment of this would.
Have anything to do with
with I thought this was about
housing so thank you very much
madame chair and representative
you're absolutely right that the
section that we added we had
some clarifications on it for
housing but it is not in the
landlord ten it act is in the
human rights act which is a
human rights bill that can be
used for a variety of different
things including employment.
Would have what is source of
income.
What is that coming to
employment I mean if i'm gonna
hire you.
I can't I can't not hire you
because.
You get child sport
i'm really confused now about
note thank you madame chairman
representative so we are hearing
a lot of reports that are active
military art seeking housing and
employment and their spouses as
well and that there may be
prejudicial practices in being
able to provide them although we
have federal laws that protect
our active military there is
difficulty in being able to hold
them
a reportable avenue and
accountability avenue and then
have in a state statute
especially since we have such a
strong military state we want to
make sure that our spouses and
are active military have those
same opportunity so if their
resumes are the same as the non
military if which would be a
source of income that if the all
to two things are the same that
they do not want to be
disqualified because of their
military association in their
source of income their spouse or
affiliation
thank you madame chair reserve
cakes or you aware of.
Actual incidents where.
The.
Because somebody is in the
military that source of income.
Has any impact on.
Housing or seeking i'm not sure
what you mean by.
Active duty military seeking it
imployment are you talking about
when they when the ready to
retire.
Or.
That part is
I mean added to the confusion
are there cases where this is
happening
thank you madame chairman
representative there is a
colleague of ours that is
actively working on this issue.
And yes they they have and
they're part of the veterans
caucus and yes they are actively
trying to work on legislation
although they're really looking
at house bill twenty five to be
the foundation for other
legislation to insure and
protect our military families
okay.
Or or you or or is there
verifiable cases of somebody on
active duty military
being discriminated.
In housing or seeking
employment.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative
I was prepared to testify about
specific
incidences but I will be glad to
connect you to more direct
service providers who could get
you more specific incidents
but I wasn't prepared today for
that thank you
madame chair representative I
would be very interested in
seeing that information.
Do you know how many.
People in sound of all county
and burning county or state wide
that have been impacted by.
Been discriminated against
because they have a job.
Have social security.
Because they have a pension.
Or because they have any form of
federal state or local public
assistance so thank you madame
chair and thank you
representative
I believe that each one of those
have an agency that does collect
that data i'm such as the
homeless coalition or maybe
veterans affairs i'm not really
sure all the different but
they're the ones that are
collecting and they're all
different parts in which they're
collecting that data because
they're different groups that is
why we didn't make this
section eight housing voucher
amendments to this bell we made
it income source because we
wanted to make sure that we were
protecting all of our citizens.
Thank you manager
last question when you were
putting this together the due
sit with commercial or private
landlords to get.
Thank you madame chair and
representative I i've been a
landlord that has rented a
section eight i'm a licensed
reality
I spoke to the apartment
association site work for the
property management I would work
for a property manager
he she she's my qualifying
broker
and i've spoke with the
qualifying brokers association
i've also served on the mortgage
finance authority in term
committee and I know that
they're working on a bill
currently that will provide
funding for landlords to be able
to help get there apartments in
their rental units up to hudd
standards because it is true
that hard will require you to
replace a screen if there's a
tiny hole in it in the that
something that is and so they
want to be sure that landlords
are able to access technical
assistance with the paperwork
and to be able to
to any if there's like an outlet
that's bad you cannot rent to
that voucher and so they are
working on that as well so I
worked with a different several
different groups on this
so
so you did get input from either
commercial or private.
The.
You said you talked to the
apartment associat.
Did they have input into this.
Thank you madame chairman
representative they presented to
them we had a long conversation
about it
these said they didn't want it
I explain the logic of that you
know that this would not this
would be a way to resolve and
protect the discrimination with
our to taking away their rights
or their abilities to protect
their property by having
consistent criteria invetting
their attendance I want to make
sure that they are protected I
understand the value of both a
relationship and so if the if
individuals read this bill
that's what it is doing it is
not forcing them to take any
source of income if they do not
need the criteria in which they
are going to apply to all
sources of income.
The.
Thank you madame chair that the
that's.
Thank you madame chair
representative
first of all
on your file ball.
Income you mentioned alamony
child support
w two
your like we too to me as a
clarified source will
retire an income
so scary several better
and old lots of people in this
way known
that alamo and child support can
be very if he sources of income
they can be
able to hurry the one who just
quit paying they have no money.
No resource nobody's not no
government and stable pick up
the paper.
And also
go back to it like the bankers
said you know if i'm body which
is basically what i'm doing if
i'm written off
i'm giving you
the money to revert in giving
you.
Product instead of buying today
there was still a loan.
If I cannot there's a private
investor
why should I be.
Required to take.
Income sources that.
Or not sustainable maybe
verify but are they sustainable
over the twelve month late ten
year long loan thirty year long
way is private the private
industry look at those things we
don't look at what you have in
your bank account today
your work record you.
They look at your work history
the only work simplies in month
you know your w two income is
not much that
but back to one question here.
So a landlord can have a policy
just not to take any sources.
A voucher
if he
decided I wanted I have an
apartment building and I don't
want all of this these rules and
regulations I can as a blanket
policy there's no vouchers and
then I have no problem with this
is that correct
can I choose if I take vouchers
or not.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative
if this bill passes you cannot
disqualify a ten based on their
income which would include
vouchers now you can have other
criteria in which the spill does
not and require you any kind of
criteria so if your criteria is
a credit score or as you mention
months of employment
then you can continue with that
and if they do not qualify based
on that criteria is long as that
criteria is used for other sorts
of income exactly the same then
you would have known
a issue with this qualifying.
Okay
thank you didn't madame chair
in the analyst report that i'm
reading it it states and i'm not
sure
that
section eight vouchers
are not necessarily for the
amount of rent that I ask but
they are
there's a point that they used
to determine
the amount so I could be written
to you without it nature for
thousand dollars
the formula further that you
could say I can only get eight
hundred is that true
thank you madame chair so I
wanted to say first that the the
bill is just to set the
discriminatory um
things but but but I will I I am
an operations person as well
representative so
the
what this bill will say is that
if a tenant a possible ten it
let's say has a nine fifty
voucher and wants an eleven
hundred dollars apartment and
they qualify by all other parts
of your criteria the income in
which you need to verify is the
income over the voucher because
the purpose the reason why the
landlord is in is verifying
income two and a half three
percent three times over is
because they want to insure that
there's enough money coming in
to pay the rent but a voucher is
one I can't spin it on shoes I
have to spend it on how the
unmight rent so it's already
dedicated so in my scenario that
means a hundred and fifty
dollars a month has to be
verifiable and I would in in
this bill would have to show
verifiable reoccurring income of
if you did three times four
hundred and fifty dollars a
month.
Thank you representative
medicare that was really not my
question though my question was
you come in and I have an
apartment rental is one thousand
dollars.
The formula section
for a section eight voucher says
the program doesn't pay whatever
the land or to ask
the calculates a fair market
value for the area then offers a
red in a certain percentile of
that
is that true
managed chair representative I
think a section eight expert
would be better than myself to
answer that question at this
time.
For one apartment in that little
cow so the landlord says my my
right for this unit is a
thousand dollars I don't care if
you got a voucher or not and the
housing thirty six sorry we're
only paying nine hundred in the
landlord's not discriminating by
saying I I would take this if it
is about will pay a thousand
dollars a language.
Madame chair represents that
that is my understanding
representative that it depends
on the neighborhood and the type
of rate so when I was a landlord
and I rented section eight
housing the
voucher that I accepted which is
just a check so we keep using
voucher voucher is just a check
it was for the amount of rent
and in fact sometimes
person in social services I have
advocated for individuals who
actually found housing not
recently but it has seen before
that was under their voucher and
they could actually use some of
their voucher towards utilities
at that time I could
have a chair but I still not
sure that i'm reading this right
that's your
say I accept as this person as
about your market discriminate
as I I take the solemn others
and
my ran is something and the
voucher
amount
doesn't
I mean
the section is yesterday
determined the amount of rep for
that property not necessarily
the mount of the voucher the
matter
so plan at a thousand and eighty
determined that that should be
an eight hundred dollars rental.
Then i'm stuck
no matter madame chair
representative so you're
absolutely right so section
housing and i'm so sorry this
but we're talking in the weeds
of what is section eight housing
when would that's not really
what this bill is it's night I
mean I would love to sit down
with an and more consection
housing but this bill is to
protect
income sources and and I would
love to talk to you outside this
committee more about that
because there is a way you're
absolutely right and there's
some things that we can also
work on thank you like you
represented madame chair
I guess it one thing
made observer representative
wait this bill is all about
protecting the rights of the red
what about any protection in
this bill the rights of the
leisor
I don't see his writes
mentioned at all in this bill
see heavine right through it he
has to just abide by the rights
of the people that he's written
to the way what a better but in
everybody who agreed we need
more affordable thousands they
didn't just in the final
statement i'll get through I
have a problem.
With telling somebody that spent
their own body barred their own
money for paying the
payments on the on the rental
parties that we're leasing their
plan the utilities are paying
the insurance and they have
investors that require
a return on their income and I
just have a problem with putting
more burdens more cost on them
if if we
need you
if we're going to require all of
this then there should be
compensation to the.
The lease or also
it is not covered in this deal.
Thank you so much madame
chairman representative I would
like to address that so
at this bill is just protecting
income source and to assume that
people's income source
means automatically that they
are more likely to damage a
landlord's property it would be
exactly the prejudicial in which
we're trying to cover in this
income in this bill
that you represent it manager
and I appreciate what you're
saying but in reality to me
it is putting burgers and wreck
regulations on the people
rending the properties
thank thank you madame chair
representative that's why
we're really going to support
the mfa new bill it's going to
help landlords because I want to
help landlords as well thank
you.
Okay representative dunkin.
Thank you madame chair
this is bad policy
that's when i'm gonna start off
with.
You can tell a landlord what he
can and cannot do.
We were next winners and losers
were going to pick.
But that's what we're doing here
that's what we're this is head
your income source absolutely
scares me to.
I i'm an old real estate agent.
I thought I knew this bill
before.
Before we got talking about it
and so I was hidden right where
lunchtime.
What's driving this
and
the statement you said while go
lots of people have said things
I mean do you have verifiable
things I mean do you have a list
of eight hundred people would
have signed a piece of paper
that said i've been denied
because of my source of income
somewhere.
Thank you madame chair any
representative I can provide
that for you I will just need to
go back to the agencies that
have been tracking that.
You're presenting today I would
almost think that you want that
here today so that those who
were sasking questions could get
an answer to th.
All right
I was a landlord night I thought
I had a lot of rentals until a
couple of these guys so I had a
very small amount of rentals
a at section eight I had my
understand it was with me for
twenty two years.
One day.
Lady that I had been running to
let her wife beat her husband
back in any destroyed my
property that was a last section
a.
Never take another one after
that.
So.
The.
This bill would say that I have
to regardless you know we've got
a general back to the has two
hundred and fifty apartments
that are not being taken and he
accepts section eight so tell me
what is driving this forward
this is an albuquerque jail
grace in farmington albuquerque
so they're into the state he's
all over as well so what is
driving this I just don't
understand.
A manager represent i'm not III
may not understand the question
I am not
although I heard the testimony
today
the i've heard other test money
that we do not have a large
amount of vacancies
but the weather we have
vacancies or night
this bill is to protect income
source it's not
it's not a housing tenant and
as a response to your personal
which I am very respectfully
madam chair and representatives
I mean i've been a landlord they
said I work for a property
management I know the horror
stories and they are real they
are not made up and I understand
that but I can say that about
every type of protected class
does that mean that i'm allowed
to discriminate them based on
those stories.
I cannot it has to have the same
criteria no matter what your
income sources just like we do
with the other protected
sources.
Hey
i'm still not sure that I
am more confused now than when I
walked into the room today
and I I don't understand where
we're going with this and so.
I'm sure i'll leave it at that
i'm still confused thank you.
Thank you representative
matthews
thank you madame chair
i've tried it grelatively.
The.
Mancher
representative I appreciate your
concern about housing obviously
from albuquerque not obviously
i'm from america but i'm from
alba currently and honestness is
absolutely assumed
I was the attorney general's
representative on the mortgage
finance authorities some time
ago I have spent a lot of time
working with housing groups in
albany works and others
and there's a couple things that
that current problem on the
housing is it's not we don't
have enough are the.
We don't always have enough of
it that available for rental a
lot of it is now be.
So
housing is truly a complex
problem.
Absolutely representative madam
chair thank you
so but when I look at this bill
I have a couple questions and
madame chair
particularly on defining
the sources of money and i'm
looking at part four alamoni
were percentage of cases
to representative is alamoma.
Madam chair representative can
you see what percentage of cases
are what.
I I have no idea manager
representative madam cherry
representative you you know
alamo.
Manager representative i'm i'm
familiar with what alan only is
I don't understand what
percentage is in the divorce I
don't know this statistics of
what percentage of divorces
award alimony I know that when
you purchase a car they accept
alimony and child support as
part of your proof of income and
that is a verifiable linder.
And do you know what percentage
of alamoni
paid.
But
madame chair representative i'm
afraid to say
um no I have no personal
information about alimony
and chair representative do you
know in uh child support cases
how often in jet generally is
going to be divorced cases but
custody cases how often child s.
Mancher representative I know I
do not so it represented I think
we're getting off the bill and
so I think okay that was a bit
too back on the bill and
well madam shoot shared on page
two it's one of the verifiable
and so my question one of my
questions is in and would it be
fair to say that you don't know
what percentage of child support
that is awarded as every.
A manager representative I I
would know that statistic for
the city of santa fe or the
state in new mexico or for the
united states and I suspect that
those would be different
percentages well man chair
representative I got as we began
this discussion and I saw that
those were some of the income
sources
and I
went online and
and I came across in order to
find out what percentage is paid
charles support I went to the
website and new mexico child
support division this is a sta.
Yes manager yes representative
and.
Man share representative I won't
read you some of the comments
that people were making
about that agency but I would
say that you'd have a terrible
customer service rating and
apparently does a terrible job
of helping new mexicans secure
the money that is due to them
through court orders
as part of new mexico
chow support.
My question is.
It occurs to well not exactly a
question
but manager representative it
occurs to me that if this state
again did a better job of doing
its job to help people collect
it to the child support that
they're awarded then that might
be a far more reliable kind
source of income than it may be.
Which agreed at your government
is job better in this area it
might help people have more
income to qualify.
A manager representative
I
am uncurtainable answering
questions that I believe that a
licensed re- lender would be
answering I just know that if
you were purchasing a car
one of the list of incomes that
they will accept our almoney and
child support and they are
licensed lenders I am not and
and so that is why it's there um
but it but if you
if if the efficiency of
the stage child support division
is a concern i.
I can agree with you
I just don't know.
It an and I don't feel that it
is necessarily part of the spell
man chair representative the
reason I raise it is because.
If
I read your bill you will
somebody with a voucher would
these took the potential
landlord be able to ask
questions about well support
being.
Is the child support being paid
because you simply these are
these are not.
Um
you can't verify that this
actually is a source of income
if I understand your bill it
would be discrimination to say
they really paying you the money
and managed to representative
this build as night show lending
or rental criteria practices in
my past of renting yes the they
I need to show bank statements
when I am renting a place which
would show if alamonian child's
support were coming into my bank
account on a verifiable reacrean
manner.
But I am not a linder nor a line
i'm not creating a the the
landlord can create this
criteria or not.
The.
And my last comment madame and
chair and representative is and
working with really innovative
and creative some of the
agencies that private agencies
non profits that are doing the
best.
Did you talk with the city
housing authority in alberto he
ended determined why groups like
hope works are included from
being part of the solution
because
if this is supposed to be per a
solution horror solution is also
rowing this the amount of
housing stock we have to.
Thank you madame chair and think
you represent I one hundred
percent agree with you
representative this is not a
bill that will resolve all our
housing issues this is to
protect income source from
discriminatory practices that's
all it is.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you representative
strategy thinking madam chair
thank you for this bill
it's it seemed pretty like a
simple building so I just cannot
get to what I think it says so
if if I feel that madam chair
and wrapped it up ha doesn't
accept my offer and a house
because i'm a litina
then I would do both of the same
process then I felt that they
didn't accept it because I have
almoney is that is that the same
process
thank you madame chair and
representative yes you were
protected under the federal fair
housing act and understates
human rights and madam charter
than so then if the houses for
sale or the house that are
renting let's say is a thousand
dollars the voucher I have
alamonia or whatever I have is
her five hundred dollars no
landlord or or or seller would
be forced to take only that
amount i'd have to show that I
could pay that full amount is
that also correct yes managed
here and yes representative you
need to show your full income
cranky amount of chair think you
representative and i'm just
again you know we're we live in
twenty twenty four and i'm just
I I think what this bill is
trying to do is break some of
the correlations the people have
between certain vouchers and
behavior so for example I have a
solar job my husband has a solid
job we could be doing terrible
things you know you can't can't
tell just because we have a sole
job that were great and same
with the voucher person invite
vice versa where else I would
say were pretty good people I
would say we've run pretty good
so when we have jobs but if we
are forced to be on some sort of
vouchers because we don't have a
family safety net or what help
us which we luckily do then we
be treated that that I feel like
what this is trying to do is is
part that right that our
behavior is different than that
the money that we're showing is
that also part of what's what
this is madame chairman
representative
yes thank you very much yes and
thank you manager the
representative and so when I
sign up for a twelve months.
And my job gets rid of me
because we're an outwill state
sorry we we have our labor
unions have significantly
decreased right so I I work at
will as an i'm sure number one
you'll do and I lose my job part
way just like all the money may
stop coming in part of the way
that I was an agreement I came
to in the beginning of what was
originally a source of income
that we had all determined based
on what we knew so as budget
shift with a department or as
budget shifted a job I feel like
we also they can also shipped as
well so to me those agreements
are in there what is interesting
to me is in one of the analysis
but not necessarily don't think
is the fire because one of the
other agency is they mentioned
that sixty five percent of the
rentals listed in albuquerque
arms don't take section that
means a few section eight sixty
five percent of gone of our
already very limited
housing market is that correct.
Yes thank you madame chairman
and yes thank you representative
think you represent thinking
madam chair for that and so if
that's the case so that I was
really small amount to work out
and then so I also looked on the
bill previously the fire was
discussing the number of people
that would be it would receive
the lowest income
in contact's rate and said
thirty nine percent of new
mexicans would be relevant
eligible for the lowest income
and I I
indeed said a number of them
have no income sources also the
also mentioned that so we also
don't we have a state where a
significant number of people
madam chair representative
probably rely on some mixture of
of of these subsidies and we
also know that housing makes a
dramatic difference and the
ability for her children to
learn our ability for children
into the workforce ability for
children to get
higher education everything I
mean I mean III my family always
writers to solid home and we
were able all three of us able
to go to good colleges then got
losing that housing they have
been different so I I look at
those numbers and I say there is
that there is a need to treat
this in a different way than we
have in the past because what
we're doing right now is not
working out housing I think
we've all agreed is is not a one
size fits or this is not
necessarily for people who are
buying the you know mansions in
in town and even if it was the
against ought to have a
quainting income to match all
the necessity necessities
my concern right now madam
chairman representative is that
we're looking at
red tape and paperwork
preventing from people from
having home and am I town where
i'm glad you're all here in my
town it's been getting really
low and temperatures were to
twenty two degrees and as our
kids are sleeping in cars and
our kids are trying to get by
and our kids are putting
themselves in dangerous living
situations I think it's better
for our entire work force if
they are considered further
entire package if who they are
because we know that their
sources of income cannot
determine if they're violent or
drug users or whatever so that I
see is that that's.
That doesn't determine it and we
can't have red tape blocking
people's ability
so my concern also is that we're
looking at the the the
the housing market values just
go to that minute the housing
market is a lucrative place to
to be invested in madame chair
representative would you agree
and manage her representative
yes they can be thinking ma'am
sure thing representative might
the growth on my the house that
I recently
returned i've received if that
is significantly higher than my
four or one k which I hope one
day will catch up so you know
again the the there is still
weighing the the cost of of red
tape and administrative burden
and i'm weighing but the benefit
the revenues that come in from
out from only homes and renting
out homes and my concern is that
I I own not make it with what
leave is this is that it's all
this will be my last question
but I just want to make sure so
again this is just ensuring the
people in a modern economy are
treating funds equally and not
attaching historic
discrimination to the the source
of that's my last question is
that is that the case just
managed her yes representative
thank you manager thank you
represented our new new I
will give you phonetic sticky
madam chair
manager representing
we got really kind out into the
woods with with some of the
questioning so I apologize if
this was asked previously are
covered previously
but just for my invocation under
the language of this bill is a
renter prohibited from or sorry
is a lamb word prohibited from
asking a renter if any of their
income is supplemental under
section eight housing
thank you madame chairman thank
you representative of a landlord
has every right to.
Ask and confirm sources of
income okay so thank you madame
chair representative so
there's no circumstance under
this bill where a renter would
be entitled to
hide the fact that they receive
a voucher or
receive section eight housing
and a landlord can ask if any of
the payment of the rent would be
supplemental at just to make
things resistable clear madame
check representative thank you
madame chair and represent
absolutely the landlord has
every right to confirm
a reliable reach rain income
okay thank you very much for
your representative so because
there has been a lot of.
Question and concern about the
scope of this bill even though
i'm i'm pretty certain that I
that I understand what you're
trying to do here
but because of the the myriad
concerns that we've heard in the
room in the in committee would
you
prefer to take some time to work
on this bill may be rolled to a
later date or
would you like to continue with
the process as it is.
So madam share representative I
have not heard any viable
suggestions that would indicate
how I would change this build to
come back after it is rolled I
do appreciate offering and I
thank you but I would like to
see how the committee votes and
I think that our listeners would
like to see too thank you madam
chair representative I can
certainly respect the answer
thank you
representative hernandez thank
you madame chair
quick question and one
statement.
Okay so housing has been are a
lot of our minds especially in
our communities I mean you know
the shortages that were facing
so why should we go this route
of putting more mandate on
private owners rather than
focusing on
a purpose bill affordable
housing throughout the state
like we have been talking about
thank you manager and thank you
very much represented hernandez
I absolutely agree with you
there needs to be fifty bills
about housing housing is in a
crisis this is not going to
resolve actually no one bill is
going to resolve and I look
forward to working on future
bills that you just talked about
this is only protecting it the
prejudicial practice of saying I
will not rent to you because I
don't like your income source
that's all this building but we
need many more other bills to
address our housing crisis
and representative thank you for
that
I think my biggest problem with
this bill is I don't think it's.
I think there needs to be some
protections for
that is the big ones to that's
impressive
protection for landlords like in
berlio county that if someone
you know comes in and damages
the property there have a
seventy five hundred dollar
grand program for repairs I
think that would make it a lot
more palatable to private owners
if they had a way to protect
their investment there you know
their property
I am also worried that by
foreseeing private owners to
you know take certain whether
it's sectionator other types of
vouchers that they will take it
off of the rental market into
short term rentals or sell the
properties and then it'll become
you know of a family home rather
than rental and we already have
such a shortage of rental cell
with them that's all I got thank
you
so thank you representative
what i'll say is I think in
listening to the testimony today
that
I think that there's
a lot of confusion about your
bill
I think what happened what I can
see how many is you know could
this go to the landlord tenant
act instead of the human rights
act because I think that there's
in hearing who testified and
what was testified on
I could see the merging and I
see that that's where the
confusion is I also see that
when you have as the social
worker I believe in doctors and
I see that there that there's a
need for that I also see that as
and i'm not a o nine e I don't
on any type of home they rent
out but I can also see wanting
to make sure that as
somebody who had read that a
home that I would want to have
the last saver.
Who gets to read my home and
make insured that looking at
history
it would be important there
would be criteria and I a
somewhat heard you tested by to
that but I don't know that that
was made clear to the committee
and I think that when I when you
see are the piles of paper that
somebody brought in that that
would need to to go along with
that I don't know that
that worried your bill and so I
I just want to make sure that
you're aware that there was a
lot of confusion about that and
so would you like to maybe
clarify some some things for us
today thank you very much madame
chair and representative yes so
this one of the many income
sources the this bill would
protect is for section eight
housing which is run by the
federal government through hard
how does have a very high
standard you have a small hole
in the screen you have to fix
For landlords to be able to
access to make sure that the
rental properties are up to hudd
standards this also section
hounding the common and inspect
the place before they moved in
and then they inspected every
year so your insured that long
term abuses not happening within
your apartment this bill does
not prevent landlords from
having security deposits
requiring different criteria
credit scores or certain amount
of whatever the percentages for
income down I want landlords to
be able to protect their party
nor does it force landlords to
accept an old and and have to
accept a voucher housing if
you're only renting four
thousand dollars house
you you're a person with the
voucher is not going to be able
to show income above that rent
above their voucher to be able
to show that they can abide by
and need the the obligations of
that rent so this does not force
landlords to accept vouchers
what it does is it forces land
roads not to disqualify
individuals because of their
income source which also
includes vouchers
already that's all I have to say
what's the wish of the
committee.
Okay we've got a motion for a do
pass.
The.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin no.
Representative hernandez
representative lender.
Represent the
yes.
Representative little yes
representative lunchtime
representative martinez.
Representative mason no
representative matthews
now when I died explained my b.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes
madame chair the final tally is
five votes yes six votes now for
the past motion you've got your
building up has today thank you
for presenting thank you very
much for your time and attention
and at the table
we still need to
case.
Yeah
sorry I was sponsored with here
it was it would have been very
very helpful to have someone
explained the price of this
perception eight and how that
relates to
the landlord ten relationship um
it was difficult to
sort through this in the way it
was presented and particularly
as a discrimination bill is
supposed to something to do with
and I do appreciate that I think
she was given the option and I I
think I interested in but I
could tell the last people that
are so
that was it thank you.
Yeah.
Well.
This.
Thank you representative
go he didn't start with your
bill
ma'am chair members of the
committee um.
That's for forty eight.
I i'm joined by stewart
commissioner operations office.
Just think mister for mineral
resources so hospital forty
eight with increase the maximum
royalty re that statement office
can charge
in certain uncertain leases
that we we set the terms of
these lease by statute and there
is a range of orialty rates that
they can charge that range would
would remain but the upper limit
would increase.
It would make these royalty
reads for the best tracks so
we're not talking about all the
tracks we're really take out
premium tracks to clean the
premium based on it would make
these rates comparable to
whether private land owner or
the state of texas might receive
for comparable track.
It would result in increase in
revenue to the language
permanent phone after a couple
years after the the leases start
production of up to fifty
million dollars a year
and that could be result in an
increase over the life of these
leases they stay and products
they stay in the fact as long as
they are production
in the amount of as much as a
billion dollars so this is money
going into our language
so something snow about it's
it's a cap staff floor or set
rate it's just a cap in the
range it only affects future
leases so we're not you know
existing leases are already
written contracts and those will
remain the same.
And it really this is a premium
that oil companies will pay for
the best tracks so again not all
tracks in the if attract didn't
lease at this rate it could be
related different rate or tracks
in other areas wouldn't
necessarily support the street.
So something something keep in
mind when you're thinking about
this is the state land office
the seatling commissioner has a
traditionally duty to maximize
the return on the seat trust
lands in their state trust and
that were trust is important
they were interested to the
state for this purpose for
raising money for her schools
and the other beneficiaries.
This this bill simply allows
the lancome as her two.
Put up a frauction the premium
tray and ask for that top rate
uhm it without all they did
have mister stewartz if you were
made
madame chair members of the
committee I I just really want
to emphasize really quickly what
the representative said our
mission is to make money for
public schools universities and
hospitals the federal government
gave us my own specifically for
this purpose government can wear
a lot of hats in this specific
instance we're wearing the heart
of basically a private market
actor and under the current
system we are unable to charge
what is the market rate and
put up for auction
a track that we know would
receive that twenty five percent
lease rate
so it's not a matter of us
requiring any companies to do
anything it's simply allowing us
to charge that market rate and
with that happening so many
questions may have
so just the reiterate not
attacks now the fee.
It's a royalty rate on minerals
that we the state of new mexico
thank you representative mcclean
and expert do you have anybody
here in the support of the bill
okay
and I will I guess I will limit
your comments to one minute
you want to start from
if we're start from the side of
the room ma'am.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Gas
negligible with the impact of
the future new mexico students.
Is higher here stakes the truth
is all the total cost
of doing business year has a
very very low pack so so over
there it's almost not existent
wild gas in the street new
mexico is doing extremely well
the best in the world amongst
extremely lucrative business
current argues calls
last year
billion dollars billion dollars
to buy another oil company with
assets in new mexico.
Marketplace start work at not
international magazine about
business says the army invasion
notes the prominent basic
produce nearly six million germs
of oil a day and twenty twenty
three that's more than iraq I do
emerge wait and then it has a
quote from real estate expert
the permanent basic has an
everything going for it's almost
like a realistic location
location location.
The small international costs
in new mexico for oil companies
is absolutely minimal under the
spill and huge first benefits
are huge.
I'm actually gonna pause for a
moment because I think we may
have lost our chorum
sorry I thought representative
matthew stepped out
you're so sneaky ok
continuing to the same
of the room
good afternoon members may need
something yeah
pretty and today I hear the
support each forty eight she'll
feel that busy oil in guess
we're not too right to twenty
five percent and that's that
concerns citizen in
environmental available I
believe this bill is a crucial
step towards
eighteen or states natural
resources.
The.
The current twenty percent of
realty rate is not enough
environmental effects of oil in
gas extraction by increasing the
royalty rate we can hold
industry economical for
environmental cost of their
operations in this conservation
and
each forty eight is not only a
matter of responsibility with us
a critical staff in combat
sorry in committing climate
change as we will developing
effects of oil in desert
structure on order water in
there it is we're doing to take
action and I watch your chances
I health offer communities well
life in natural resources by
supporting each
let us insure live off
or generation.
First of all the second friend
these beautiful persons raise a
real to rate for oil guys from
twenty to twenty five percent of
the like this when someone uses
a resource to all of them all of
us they should be a fair share.
Now these rates haven't been
updated since.
Crisis for anything today it
does doesn't make sense right I
wish they in gas potentially has
grown missing them and I would
lost these to catch up these
bill it's enough open to
companies it's about up to what
spread into these markets we
should be charging what these
resources are
the statement office has a duty
to make money for a couple of
schools in other institutions by
sticking to updated rates we are
leaving money on the table
kitchen system and public
services lastly let's remember
that these is not as long as you
everything we don't update this
rates we are not a concept that
could be supported our
communities so we are asking for
your support for extra forty
eight it's a step the worst
weather you station and ensuring
that I were not to resources
benefit on the mexicans
especially the next year.
Good afternoon members of the
committee was going over with
the circle of the chapter for
presenting our thirty five
thousand members of supporters
in the state of mexico we stand
the support of this bill for the
reasons that have a read bits
needed just when I reiterate
that there are claims.
If they have
these rates were actually put us
on part.
Well as the the factors is used
indicate where it's direction
with the quality of the world.
Yeah.
Kailey's shoop.
The.
Hello my name is key issue and I
am a community organizer with
citizens care for the future a
small grass through the
environmental app kissing group
in south east new mexico we
strongly support HB forty eight
it is simply good a governance
that we can get advantage of
having a driving oil industry by
ensuring that we earn the
appropriate amount of money to
partner education system more
than thirty four thousand
children in south east and
northwest new mexico go to
school surrounded by oil and gas
facilities when those children
go up and leave our education
system they not only leave with
an education but also with
health problems such as asthma
near developmental disorders
reproductive issues increases
risk
and sometimes even cancer the
sacrifice of their health which
you could not put a price on
must not be in being our state
is not only showing a bill
europe leadership when we
subsidise multibillion dollar
companies by charging an
insufficient royalty rate but we
are also be trained after the
under privileged children in our
receipt that are I know making
the automatic advertised so that
other children may get a proper
education that is why I am for
you to step up to the twenty
first century prepared for the
future follow the lead of our
text neighbors and build for
this comment thank you
cow.
Thank you madame chairman is the
committee my name is damni cow I
climber editor director with
conservation butters mexico and
for reasons already stated in
the room we are also instructive
thank you
destiny ray.
Okay those vice chairs are ado
and representatives my name is
destiny and i'm represented a
free younger which represents
hundreds of youth and families
throughout the state
we said it's wrong support with
the spell we want behind other
states and appropriate royalty
rates we believe that
appropriate costs for only gas
productions are critical in this
time transition will believe
that the shape should invest in
oil and gas revenue in the
transition process to pay the
cost for workers
and revenue transition this
funny transition will be more
possible if we aren't giving
away any excesses yet continues
to play a leading wrong movement
and we are building to hold the
state of new mexico accountable
for its home dependent
over lines on the oil and gas
and the extracted industry yeah
organized five highly visible
direct action this past year
oldising hundreds making front
page news and helping drive
public discourse around climate
crisis.
Insurance we just believe that
you should support this bill.
Page night.
The.
Good afternoon members of the
cleaning my name is page night
and I am a senior research and
policy analyst mexico voices for
children and we stand into the
board of hospital
forty eight increasing the road
for new research and state trust
lanes is cynically and
environmentally responsible and
wouldn't show that the line
permanent finance january as
much revenue is possible for
example our children and our
schools through increased
transfers and investments in the
sponsors in this date for this
important bell and we urge your
support thank you
joan brown
good afternoon share committee
members and sponsors of this
bill and thank you for
sponsoring it
my name is a sister john brown
i'm the executive director of
new mexico on your past
interference power
in the state land office does
have the response ability for
the common trust of these lands
and of new mexicans and i'm glad
someone emphasised that were
trust because new mexicans are
shrusty there the state land are
office will continue to add to
the cape for fair and just
royalties for new mexicans in
for our children and for people
and the people are faith really
do support the children support
the people of new mexico but we
do not support subsidizing the
oil and gas industries nor
should we as a state with this
precious land water air and our
communities the subsidising the
industries
we cannot continue to sacrifice
our state and our people this
proposal is not outrageous it
would just put on a par with a
private market rates so thank
you very much for considering
this and police offer your
support
need benefits
my name is
I am part of it but the claim a
team from the center for civic
policy.
And for other reasons stated in
the room and that you've heard
previously we stand in strong
support of HB forty eight and
encourage your vote in support
also think you have a great day.
Thank you now do we have anybody
in opposition
sir
step forward i'm not sure books
thank you for this opportunity
my name is jim winchester
representing the small size
operators
through the independent patrol
association of new mexico we due
to dates respectively a powers
are proud of the billions of
dollars for the beneficiaries
raised royalties from our
industry but we need to little
consider the other side of the
coin
for majors in major offering
from twenty twenty five percent
probably doesn't hurt but for
smaller open readers like the
ones I represent they do operate
until march is kind of raised
does disproportionately hurt.
I'd like to also point two the
committee to this which was run
a couple years ago by the new
mexico tax research institute a
compared to analysis of petrol
producing sticks and it shows
that operators hear new mexico
actually paid the highest
percentage in overall taxes
compared to all producing states
and I guess that makes sense
when you think that in new
mexico operators pay taxes such
as severance tax one the out of
warm taxes the oil reconvention
fund and i'm sure there's many
more than people in this room
belove out a while in taxes
operators do paying a state call
to rate of twenty five percent
it's not an apples to apples
comparison when you put in all
the expenses here in new mexico
i'll also remind you that the
federal loyalty rate right now
just raised is eighteen point
seventy five percent and most of
the producing states in the
country charge wealthy rates
between sixteen and eighteen
percent mexico its high steer
already does pay twenty.
Finally with the increases like
this and many other
interindustry bills we see a
death thousand cuts to the small
producers.
With less producers the lease
bids will go down and price
representing boston revenue to
the beneficiaries in least bonus
payments to the states so again
we stand in respect the
opposition thank you.
The.
Thank you that's good to the
committee.
Any questions from the
committee.
Representative mason.
Thank you madame representative.
The.
In.
Friday did you go to the.
Producers and as for any and but
on what they thought.
Would be the consequences of
rising this
this rate is this just in our
while we decided or because
through the land office that we
should charge
him come up with this
man chairs had based in we'll
start
this reflects what's essentially
a market rate.
You know and we heard even
mister winchester say that large
producers will pay this rate.
We have a duty three's phones
for the language permanent time
for the beneficiaries of that
fun
that's you know we shouldn't be
offering discounts when we have
that that legal duty and when we
have this resource.
The people are eager eager to
bit for.
Madame chair representative of
the only thing I would add is
texas charges twenty five
percent too
when we look at an energy that
for example it's an online
auction site the private sector
is charging twenty five percent
so as was stated this wasn't
just pulled out of hat this is a
representative figure of the
market and what many of the
independence that
are represented if they had a
track in the premium and they
were to put it up on bed they
would do so at twenty five cause
that's the market rate.
Thank you absolutely madame
chair and I I guess it came
across the bad but you know
and
they said all the old we all
know that the mexican has.
Of large other.
We are hired.
We have a lot more taxes on our
operators than texas even though
the senate is the same as far as
the world
the different taxes the
different funds the different
and just the
process of getting the firm
there's so much harder.
You're the produce that I know
anyway though they get a.
In texas
half the time it takes for him
to get
the
others they should develop well
in mexico but my thing that's
question actually will you don't
think this will slow the capital
investment in rising a rate.
Manager sang let the student
answer that question but
I do know that people are bid on
the premium tracks and that's
that's what we're talking about
we're not talking about across
the board and increase their
attracts at once or this but we
know these tracks are in demand
mister
madam chair representative
that's exactly right I think
when example this last
word this month january we had a
lease sale where we had one
track in the premium go for
twelve million dollars.
There is zero possibility of
that track not going for twenty
five percent but we have to go
to auction at a capped rate of
twenty
the market would would pay and
if if it didn't then we would
take it off the auction block
and and reduce the royalty rate
because as we state it earlier
we have a span of between
eighteen seventy five and twenty
five percent to choose from in
terms of available
like you website thank you
matter to
the
so this will only this will only
know this might be better at any
of the other laces that are
already in effect
mancherobs and mason correct
only other note I saw in one of
the year analysis said that last
year twenty twenty three SB one
sixty four
was pretty much a mirror
did this bill are not sure if
that's correct or not but it may
remain out.
Is that true
to ever send me some
this isn't the first try at this
bill.
That's all I have today thank
you madame.
Thank you manager.
In on you go second or third
representative some of the
question drawing taken so you
can
see here figure out what you can
ask you
can you tell me who's in support
of this bill.
Manager intention
I know the statement office is
in sport of this bill
and they're the ones brought it
to me and they have this legal
duty to maximise the return I
was just coming to mister
stewart that you know in in if
if we get this bill through and
go that get off for incentive to
say we should have some of the
beneficiaries avoid grand
permanent phone show up and and
testify
there give me it's part of this
bill to this is a significant
impact over a long period of
time
for the phone.
I know there are many different
civic and conservation groups
that are in sport of the spill.
And you know
I was listening to the public
testimony um.
Yeah I I appreciate the concern
by climate change this is now I
find a change bill that this is
realty bill and this is about
charging a market rate for
minerals we are.
Thank manager thank you
representative
i'm not really sure if some of
those folks understand that the
oil and gas is paying for lots
and lots of environmental issues
in the states involved in.
So
this question I get it
on the good tracks will you and
to speak on the poor track.
For someone counting for
example.
Medical chair representative I
think that's a great question
and gives me a little bit of an
opportunity to break down how we
pick this so via scatch umm
that's been in place from for
many years I nineteen thirties
actually in then be a rule and
are leases or categorized when
they are put up for auction and
that's based on you know what
the resource in the ground how
easy are they able to get it to
market
uhm the marketability what are
similar tracks right next or
going for all of those things
those assessments are made by
our class five staff totally
imensionary specialist are
looking at that I did then put
forward a recommendation and
there's a whole point system in
there that ranks the differently
says by points that's how you
determine
if it's gonna be twenty five
percent.
Eighteen point seventy five
twenty percent so there is a
different resources in the same
that is your very well aware it
is as a gas play primarily uhm
the premium based on this
primarily an oil there they're
different economics of getting
product to market all of those
different things so and I think
that the twenty five percent is
is really going to public
innocent and the premium when
you see these delaware tracks
coming out that are that are
really good
if the market down the road
shows that everybody is doing
twenty five percent in the sand
one then I think that would be
something that would be
appropriate for the land
commissioner to seek that.
Thank you absolute do you know
what that radio.
Manager representative it's hard
to say because it depends on
that specific leaks
and you know they really do look
at are you talking about a forty
are you looking at a three
twenty you know what it's like
development potential is it part
of a playword bunch of companies
are competing for a particular
area is it within the basin but
kind of more frontier that it's
not a developed resource and a
company is going to you know put
more money into it all those
things go into
play there and make him
determinations of what that rate
is so get my pay some five
sometimes or it might be twenty
percent
thank manager so according to
the.
The oil gas lease rates for
trustline select states
we will now be the second
highest long texas all the
states surrounding.
Madam chair representative
absolutely and there's a reason
because it is premium basing is
the best play in the united
states it's one of the best
place in the entire world and
manhattan rental rates we are
talking about housing
they're different than albert
rookie because of location
because the resource in the
ground we have a very affordable
rate that companies can bring
that wealth market they can make
it a problem profit in the the
premium when gas or i'm sorry
when oil is say twenty eight a
barrel you know it's in the
seventies now so yes it will be
reflective of what texas pays
also for the premium with a
private market it's in the
premium but that's because it's
so good and right now we're
essentially subsidising witness
with his cat.
Think manager so you could you
reiterate how are you
subsidising oil and guess with
this.
Mentioners and taking with the
billion or with the the current
situation
he just said that it were
subsidizing i'm just curious if
you'd follow up on that and tell
me how
madam chairman representative
absolutely so the oil and gas
resource in the ground is owned
a hundred percent by the public
and it's putting trust for the
purpose of generating revenue
right we own that resource
we make a deal with the private
sector that if they are willing
to get that oil out of the
ground I guess out of the ground
and to get it to market that
were willing to give them a
percentage of the the value of
that resource.
Currently
eighty percent in the public
schools universities hospitals
school for the blind school from
the dash you know all of her
beneficiaries they get twenty
percent but we're saying is that
field shake is what the private
market says that the public gets
twenty five percent of that
value of the public resource and
the company is get to remain in
seventy five only for the best
tracks only moving forward in
the future it doesn't impact at
all in existing operations
and don't you know if I may so
the sensity as I as I do it is
we're charging a below market
rate for minerals we own that's
a certain.
Thank you manager
you know I would agree
representative that probably
some of these are to be.
Touched him in many many years.
I just don't know that we need
to be at the ti.
Thank you thank you manager.
Think thank you madame chair
or something
just a couple of quick questions
you talk about fair market rates
can you tell me how those are
set.
Ma'am chair rivers emergency to
give you all happens to answer
that
madame chair representative well
at auction normally so
i.
We didn't take our leases every
month and we bring them to
auction and the private sector
competes for the to get
and and pays and you know to be
able to get it
so the market is reflective we
look you know for other sales in
the private sector for example
where those listens are being
sold that twenty five percent
in texas they do twenty five I
mean really if if this were a
free market bill
you don't have a cap in an
auction
seems a little counter intuition
from what you normally would
have when you're trying to when
you're mission is to make money
for education and end these
lands are conscreened
the requirements for the federal
government when we got the lands
so what we're not going there
we're not removing it all we're
just simply saying let's move
that cap up a little bit more to
be reflective of what others are
charging for these new says in
the
in the area.
Thank you matter
representative
there's a lot of federal lens in
the mexico or those rates the
same
can you can you tell me what the
comparison is to the leases on
federal land
for madame chairman
representative so b l m charges
eighteen seventy five um
so a couple of things on that
one I think there's you know
often risk as well walked back
mean that companies are just
going to drill on on federal
lands and anybody who's worked
with the federal government
understand there are their
permitting their turn around
times are completely different
i'm often cut up in litigation
in terms of development and then
there's just frankly the
operational reality on the
ground and in the premium you
know now we're talking about
four mile later that company is
condrit
it is unusual that you don't
have to actually put together
plays where you have been stayed
federal private and and come up
with units to be able to develop
so I think I on a practical side
uhm that's not a really a
concern that we have that that
folks will move to the beyond
but they also they don't have
the requirement that they're
missing is to make money
like we do.
Thank you medicare and um.
The.
How many leases.
Or currently available on the
market.
Madame chairman representative
in the constitute lands but most
of our lands have been least up
so if you look at the
uh send one it might be about
half but if you look at the
permian basin
probably about ninety nine
percent because this leases are
held by production there
continuing from the nineteen
fifties with those terms so
actually are effective lease
rate right now is about fifteen
percent because our lease rate
used to be twelve and half
percent and we have fifty seven
percent of our leases that have
been producing for so long
producing at that lower rate so
we actually have a very few
number but the bang for the book
because they're so good in terms
of out years
in generating the fifty eight
eighty five million a year going
into the permanent find.
A florida four time turnaround
return on investment so you know
for every dollar we put in the
permanent fund we get four back
over life so when those dollars
are coming out of the permanent
find you I think the question
was who really benefits from
this what are the biggest
benefits it's just taxpayers
because when the permanent fund
distributes I think this year
it's but a a billion dollars
it's a billion dollars that the
taxpayers and the legislature
don't need to come up with to
fund public services
so
a lot but it's it's it's a very
little percentage of land but
the impact financially is huge.
Thank you madame chair
representative.
Agree with
and I think that
this state and especially this
body needs to really
protect it
that industry since it provides
so much money for everything
that we.
Are spending money on
schools roads everything.
And I think that it
would be better if we change the
attitude of wednesday the
industry
I think that
this date would benefit a lot
more if we sat down came up with
a balance
policy when it comes to.
But I appreciate the answers it
it cleared up a lot.
Representative.
Thank you manager it have a
couple of questions the first
question I have was for the
agency
it was so picked my my attention
on I at heard about the
potential of reducing the
royalty rate how many times as a
state land office reduced the
role.
Madame chairman representative
i'm i'm not sure exactly what
you're referring to in in
statute or do you mean
it sounds to me that you have an
administrative ability to do
that how many times have you
ever done that
madame chairman representative
in the history land office and
many many times because five
years
we leave primarily at twenty
percent right now because the
tracks primarily are there been
least have been in the permian
basin and that's as much as we
can charge and that's the market
rate
have you ever reduced out of
chair.
Madam chairman representative
hey I would have to go back to
see when the last lease at
eighteen seventy five was
we have a leasing range from
eighteen seventy five to twenty
percent and based on the
individual characteristics of
the tracks we are set it there
to be clear and and maybe this
is to your question twenty
percent is generally at the rate
that we're leasing because
that's as much as we can in gets
us is close to the market as we
can
some out of chair that would be
my point when you're doing some
kind of a projection on how much
money you're going to raise my
assumption as is that this bill
goes through and it's
specifically for primarily to
come up with fifty million to
seventy five million of
additional money I would imagine
that it would be at the maximum
rate of twenty five percent is
that the correlation madame
chairman representative just to
answer that last question I
guess ten months ago was the
last time we did one at eight
seven five so it does occur
there move in forward
most so what we did in terms of
the fiscal analysis was we
looked back to see if twenty
five percent was in effect for
the best tracks to premium
tracks what would be the delta
and that's how we came up with
that
to be very clear it would be our
intent you know if we have a
great track in the premium basin
and the market is twenty five
percent
absolutely we would put it up at
at that amount
the other thing is is of
interest I think for the
committee to think about just
today the committee approved a
a pit bracket change that
reduces the amount.
To the general phone we just did
that earlier.
Which a hundred percent of
operating costs for a public
schools comes out of the general
fund of the general preparations
act.
Now work considering increasing
royalty rates
to ensure money goes to schools
that's it's it's been an
interesting dynamic today when
we start out with one bill that
lowers money going to th.
Rates to make.
The.
I generally don't like to see
those kind of increases
particularly.
When the comparison is between
between new mexico in the state
of texas.
I'm not sure what all those
additional expenses are for
texas drillers or texas oil
companies I I don't know what
they're with their system looks
like.
But I don't believe that it is a
direct one correlation they
charge twenty five percent so
we're gonna charge twenty five
percent.
I think I should be based on
what the economics of the day
are
what the futures tell us how
much money who we think that
we're going to need.
I just feel that way mounted
chair I don't think that just
because another state as
something is necessarily.
The best model for us i'd like
to see a little bit more
information on that with that
true comparison house I don't
think it is apples to.
But that's just my observation
thank you very much
thank you representative
representative her name is.
Thank you madame
one quick question
are there any safeguards in this
bill to prevent a non pram lease
or explaration lease that will
keep the state land office from
charging disproportionately high
rates in the exploratory.
And madame chairman
representative absolutely cause
it doesn't amend that lease so
this is a unique area where the
legislature actually has put in
statue are specifically lease we
don't have that in any other
area normally the land
commissioner can negotiate deals
to be able to meet their trust
responsibilities i'm so the
changes here are only with
respect to the development lease
which only can be used in that
when I talk about the premium
for premium tracks it does not
apply to exploratory or
discovery I think exploratory is
still twelve and half percent
for example so and we are not
amending does other leases or in
those other scenarios were only
talking about development
get there by that ranking system
and previously mentioned thank
you for that answer I mean I
start my concerns about this
bill I don't think they're just
because someone's doing it.
The same percentage but thank
you guys for all of your answers
thank you manager thank you
anybody else from the committee
what's the the will of the
committee.
Okay we have a motion for a do
you pass it and the second.
Could you take the rule.
Representative and you know
yes
representative dunkin.
The.
Representative hernandez.
Representative lending
representative little
yes
representative lunch from.
Representative martinez
representative mason no
representative matthews yeah yes
chair yes
madam chair.
Manager final telling his five
boats yes five votes no.
So we have a typo
at this time.
We're not going to move right
there all right require call
them.
That.
Would you like to vote
notable.
No no then I bought yes.
The.
All right now within the final
tallies six votes yes five votes
that do pass your bills past
thank you in terms of committee
and before we go anywhere
and we get representative case
back up
now.
So so representative I apologize
to bring you back i've I called
role and he said the way we did
the motion would be fine some of
the staff is uncomfortable that
it was it's not clear so at this
time we were gonna have to be
checked again and I appreciate
you coming back so I wanted to
be as clean as possible so would
anybody like to make a motion
madame chair I would like to
motion for a do not pass for HB
twenty.
Or a table in motion for hb
twenty five.
Move to table
and you have a second second of
a second address to take the
role.
Representative and in order.
No to table and house bill
twenty five.
Representative dunkin yes to
table
representative hernandez
yesterday representative lender
notar table.
Representative little no
representative lunchtime.
Representative martinez yes
representative mason yes the
table representative matthews
yesterday
made a vice chair table madam
chair to table I managed the
table motion as the tally of six
votes yes by votes now I
apologize to bring you back to
that but I appreciate you thank
you so much
and with that we're going to
conclude
yes.
Yeah.
Just for clarification on
wednesday we have one bill I
know that we're going to be
getting lots of
people that want to speak on the
bill so what I set up is that we
will give every public comment
one minute for her person
and we will have twenty five
minutes on both sides and after
that we will then go to the
committee if if there's more
people that want to speak after
that we will that's going to be
the limit that we that we stop
it it is
he sick let's still number them
to be six.
So
I just wanted to set those
boundaries I had a time for the
committee i've also put it out
so that the public knows and we
want to make sure that them
everybody knows what the ground
