do introductions. Um, I actually
wanted to make sure we got all
staff, staff introduced and um
kind of talk a little bit about
protocol once we kind of we'll
be seeing through through the uh
session, and then we're gonna
have a guest speaker to, to talk
a little bit about his agency.
And so, um, with that we're
gonna go ahead and start with
roll call.
And then, um, well then I'm
gonna hand it to you to start
introducing some of the staff,
or at least pointing them out so
they can introduce themselves
that work?
All right.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
I
Representative Hernandez.
here.
lee
Presentative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy here.
Senator Pare
Yeah
Representative Serrado.
here.
and vice chair.
Here
and
Representative Lee.
And Madam chair.
And I'm sure you have a quorum.
Thank you
All right, um, can we go ahead
and get the staff to introduce
themselves. We'll start with the
back over here, uh, with our
attendants.
We appreciate it. Thank you.
OK.
Start on this side here.
I
OK.
Thank you.
Really
The senior senior worker here.
Uh, representative Murphy, which
is
oh I'm sorry, one more, sorry.
Uh, my name is Patrick Flan.
I'm uh the committee assistant
and legislative assistant for
Representative Doreen Gallegos,
uh, this is my 3rd year here.
I'm in charge of all official
committee communication
amendments and substitutes. So
if you get anything from.
to the official committee.
to be here.
Representative for me.
So I'm representing Mark Murphy
from Chavis County.
used to the microphones,
obviously.
I am the the newbie of the
newbies certainly on this
committee and in this house, so,
um thank you all very much for
being so welcoming.
Small business owner, uh, have
had the business for over 37
years, 22 employees, uh,
commerce and economic
development is very close to my
heart. I participate that
extensively in Roswell and
Chavis County.
My experience has been when
commerce is good, business is
good, and business is good, good
jobs are good, and that's what
we really need.
state. So I
Also, I got a bit of a selfish
reason for being so excited
about being here is that there
were no air races have relocated
to Roswell, and that is a big
deal for our part of the state
and I look forward to talking
and.
with all of you on that, so, and
In any matter
impacting economic development
throughout the state. Thank you.
Representative Jimmy Mason
District 66, Davis, Eddie and
Lee County's a little bit of
each so they won't give me all
of one.
But uh this is my 2nd session
here.
In this committee, I was on it.
My first committee and it's my
2nd committee and I hope that my
committee as long as I'm here.
Good afternoon, everyone. I'm so
excited to be on this committee.
I'm Gail Armstrong. Uh, I
represent Hell District 49, uh,
largest house district in the
state.
Uh, with the least amount of
people or cosing people, which
is OK with me.
Uh, my husband and I owned
several businesses across the
state, uh, also when we started
from scratch.
Uh, about 1000 employees
altogether.
And I couldn't echo.
Representative Murphy's
sentiments more.
Uh, when we have jobs created by
private industry here in the
state of New Mexico. We thrive.
And uh
excited to be here.
Um
to work with all of you and I
get to have Art De la Cruz on
two of my committees.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I'm a
Representative Joshua Hernandez,
I represent districts.
60. There we go.
I'm not used to.
Uh,
uh, sorry, District 16, which is
the south and we rancho.
Um, I am also a small business
owner, um.
with my partner who owns several
Um,
not that committee.
years now.
Um, and I'm super excited to
keep.
with everyone to bring economic
development.
We can go to representative uh
Matthews.
Uh, thank you.
And here, um, uh, my name is
Marian Matthews, and I
appreciate having Mark Murphy
sit right across from me.
And then if you say rap and man,
we'll both go.
Um
I am uh uh sometimes I call
myself a recovering lawyer. I'm
a retired lawyer, for sure, and
um I have owned small
businesses, um,
And I also
Ah
Business at CNN for a number of
years.
Uh, which was a great
opportunity to meet people who
are interested in being
entrepreneurs.
Um, I told entrepreneurship.
Yes, an entrepreneurship and
Uh, business law and other kinds
of things like that, uh, to
people who
Just wanted to
Had the had the urge to go out
and
Great
Wealth and
Be in control of their lives and
it was a great experience and I
Glad to be on this committee
again.
Thank you.
Chairman London.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Good afternoon, good afternoon,
uh, vice manager look at you.
Yeah. And uh all the committee
members, all those that are
tuning in online, our audience
in the room, and our attendants,
thank you for joining us this
afternoon. I'm Representative
Derekente. I've been a part of
this, uh, ministry or this body
for the past 9 years of my life,
starting 9 years this year, and
I started on, on business and
industries is what it used to be
called my first year, and I came
back last last year.
And I'm, I'm proud to be a part
of this, this, uh, body, this,
this committee is really one
that I appreciate.
Well, I'm not here, I also chair
the House of Taxation and
Revenue Committee.
And
as well, so glad to be here.
De la Cruz.
After afternoon chairwoman vice
chair, happy to be here. I echo
the sentiments of my colleagues
about really.
pumped up about being on this
committee, and I have to also
complement the wonderful article
I read today in the Albuquerque
Journal regarding leader
Armstrong.
Beautiful.
Uh
And also representative
Matthews, I also taught intro of
business and principles of
management at CNM, so I can
appreciate what you're talking
about. Look forward to the good
work.
Thank you.
Represented Paho.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, I'm so
thrilled to be on this
committee, um, I'm the
representative for Health
District 25, which is in
Albuquerque, Lomas to
Montgomery, if you know the
streets, and it includes the
mall, so that's important and
related to commerce. Um, I'm
also the youngest woman in the
New Mexico State legislature in
almost 90 years, which I'm very
proud of. Um, and one of the
reasons why I really wanted to
be on this committee is I was a
young person who
Um, left, I got a great
education. And then I came back
to my state because I wanted to
serve. I wanted to make it
better and what will really
motivate our youth to come back
to our state if they've left and
to stay in our state is having
those good jobs and have good
businesses. And so this has um
You know, real personal
significance to me, uh, here
sitting on commerce today and
super excited to be here.
Wonderful chairs with such an
incredible group of legislators,
um, and, uh,
And yeah, thank you so much for
having me and, and welcome
everyone.
Serato.
Thank you chair. Thank you. uh,
glad to see everybody on the
committee. If you're new, there
will be a quiz at the end.
One back from everyone.
Uh, I proudly represent Santa Fe
Southside, but I really enjoyed
our time on this video
collaborating and working
together on good bills. I think
we get a lot of good work done
here, um, you know, and I look
forward to the continued
collaboration between so many of
us, uh, and similar to uh the
floor uh minority leader, uh, I
get the pleasure of having
Jimmy, uh, representative Mason
on two of my committees, so you
could enjoy that more. Thank
you.
All right, this is the big quiz.
Um,
Vice chair Anya Nor you.
Thank you very much, chair, yes,
I'm representative Janelle.
And Nornu.
Beautifully said, Madam Chair.
I represent House District 19 in
Albuquerque is the southeast
metro portion of the city. It's
the international district and
the fairgrounds. So being on
this committee is when the
committee I specifically
requested when I was a freshman
was this committee, and I'm so
honored to serve on it for the
3rd year and this year as vice
chair, and I'm just
So happy to be back and very
much.
And um I'm Doreen Dago I
represent District 52 down in
the southern part of the state,
um, very happy to be chairing
this committee, um, also very
proud to chair this committee.
Uh, I think that we've, we've
demonstrate.
Uh, I have demonstrated in the
past couple of years being able
to work across the aisle to be
able to work with each other,
uh, to really work at making
bills better.
And um
It, it not necessarily being if
there was a day behind your name
or an R. So, um, I, I just, I,
and I'm proud of that. I want us
to continue uh to produce good
legislation that benefits the
people of New Mexico. So, um,
really glad everybody is here.
Uh, motivated to work, um, one
of the things I do want to
announce is that if we have any
amendments or substitutions, we
need at least, we need to have
those at least 24 hours ahead of
time.
I know once um we get down to
maybe the last week, last week
and a half, uh, we will have to
change that a little bit, but
for this, I want to make sure
that the analysts have time to
look at that, to look at any
changes, any substitutions, um,
because we want to have the most
up to-date um information before
us. So, um, I think that was my
big announcement, uh, just to
make sure that from day one
we're, we're all on that all on
the same page with that. Um, we
also, um, want to make sure
Sure that we are all
communicating, um, we're gonna
put everybody on a, on a chain,
so if there is uh if we're
running late or something's
going on that we communicate
with each other just because I
want to be respectful of
people's time. I know that
people are gonna be trying to
join in through Zoom or if
there's
that come in, we wanna make sure
that we're, we're being mindful
of, of that as well. So, uh,
once again, I'm glad to be
chairing, very, very honored to
be chairing and very um happy
that you all are on the
committee and looking forward to
to working with you all.
So, uh, with that we have uh Mr.
Roper.
That will be doing a
presentation today, um, and I
think we have his boss coming in
on Friday, is that correct? OK,
so, um, and if there's anything
that you all are needing some
extra information on or would
like uh one of the secretaries
to be invited to come in if
you'll let us know that.
If there's any um.
This additional information that
you all think you're that you
need or would like us to try to
get, let us know that as well,
so we'll, we'll try to make it
available to everybody, so with
that, Mr. Oprah, I'm gonna turn
it over to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Um
As the chair mentioned,
Secretary Rob Black will be here
Friday with a uh with a
presentation for you.
I'm not quite sure why I'm here,
why I'm here. Uh, I can
speculate it's because I'm the
old guy that's been with the
department for 14 years.
I've held various titles in that
in that time frame.
Or it might be that I used to be
Mark Murphy's neighbor when I
lived in Roswell and.
Uh, I'm speculating here, but
um.
In, in, in all honesty, um,
it's, it's a pleasure to be
here. Uh, I've been in front of
this committee many times in my
14 years with the state.
Um, and as much as it is uh.
A passion of yours, it's
obviously 30+ years across New
Mexico.
Um
I'm going to say a couple of
things about where we where
we're focused this year and and
I'm not gonna mention budget
stuff because.
House appropriations has already
heard that and you'll, you'll,
you'll get your chance to.
Work on that, but, but a couple
of things that I think that are
really important to.
And I'm gonna start by thanking
representative uh Hernandez.
And his support of legislation
that got us $500,000 last year.
To do a study.
On publicly held industrial
sites.
That study helped us to
identify.
A were those sites were in New
Mexico that were publicly held
and we're mostly talking about.
Properties that are owned by
cities, uh, counties, and in
some instances, universities,
but mostly cities and counties.
And as those that are in rural
New Mexico know very well, um.
We hang uh an industrial park
sign on dirt.
Um, and not much else, uh, with,
with the hope that we're someday
going to get something to move
in there, so the other part of
this study is it it allowed us
to look at what what are the
gaps in the infrastructure?
You know, does this site have
water, does it have sewer, does
it have electricity and what are
the capacities of those things
if it does, does it have roads,
does it have curbs, gutters, all
of those infrastructure needs
for.
Uh, for those, and what came out
of that study was a was a couple
of things that are really
important.
One is we identified.
Approximately 35 sites in New
Mexico.
That potentially could be
industrial parks and various
parts of the state.
We also identified the serious
gaps that are there.
And, and so in order for us to
advance economic development.
We need, we need to focus on the
industrial base because the
industrial base will then drive.
Uh, the retail base and the
commercial base, so uh.
That's why we need to focus on
the industrial base and we need
to address those infrastructure
shortfalls.
Uh, and that, that is why you're
going to see a very strong piece
of legislation that comes
through.
asking for additional funds to
do.
A complete site readiness study.
Beyond what we've already done
on the public sector to also
include private sector sites
that are.
Suited for industrial purposes.
And I, I focus on the industrial
because.
It's a big enough animal just
focusing on industrial if we
start working on commercial
sites that are going to be strip
malls and we're going to dilute
what we really need to do, so
it's only going to focus on
industrial sites and we're going
to do another broader, more
intense study on what the
infrastructure needs are across
New Mexico.
And diving into what do those
numbers really look like?
So, how, what is that gap?
It's a really big number, but,
but in order to.
Uh, tackle it, we need to know
what, you know what the
potential of that number is and
then we also need to know what
the potential of those sites
are, what are the highest and
best uses within the industrial
sector so that then we can a
market them.
And promote them in their best
sector, but be also addressed
the infrastructure needs in a,
in a category that's more
important to them. Does this
site need more fiber because of
its highest and best use.
doesn't need more power, uh,
because it's going to end up
being in a heavy uh heavy power
use sector because of because of
its location or is it one of the
other things such as water and
sewer.
I know I've said it in front of
this committee and I've said it
in front of many, many
committees and interim if you
don't have electricity and you
don't have water, you don't have
economic development.
Now I know roads are important,
fiber is important, all those
things are important, but if you
don't have electric development.
And that and that and so you're
going to see that being a strong
focus of this uh of this
session, uh, coming.
Uh, beyond that, again, I'm I'm
not gonna get into the budget.
You'll see our budget, uh, our
budget requests, um, the science
and technology department.
portion of our department is is
seen a very interesting.
Um, change in my career with the
department 14 years ago when I
started with the department, we
had 0 people.
0 people doing science and
technology.
In a state with 3 national labs.
Research universities.
We had 0 the first
administration I worked for
worked to.
But one person in that position.
Uh, we've now got 3 people in
that, uh, working in that
department and you're going to
see a
Additional requests for
additional people to really
start focusing on.
There's really 5 sectors within
science and technology.
So we're trying to get to where
we have experts in each of those
sectors and not broadly two
bullet points deep in each of
those sectors, but truly start
to find experts in those areas
so we can really start working
with those sectors.
And helping them grow and
expand, but to truly understand
what those sectors really are,
whether whether it be things is
out there.
And my brain is quantum.
Uh, which you heard the governor
had a very happy uh exciting
announcement about quantum,
things that don't really work in
my brain, but they do in
somebody else's, uh, to, uh,
things as uh such as bioscience,
uh.
And then aerospace and the other
things that fit within that
science and technology.
So that's, that's going to be
our goal, that's going to be our
folk, our main two focuses as we
as we go through the session.
Economic development.
is an easy work and you'll see
legislation throughout.
They always say economic
development, it'll talk about
economic, but it'll talk about
how it's going to drive and
there is a difference between
what I would consider economic
development and what.
is considered community
development. They're both
important.
Economic development is the
industry.
To drive the economy, meaning
bringing money from outside of
your boundaries in our case,
we're talking about outside of
the state of New Mexico.
Bringing money into the state of
New Mexico from outside from
outside of our boundaries and in
order to drive the economy.
Once that money's in here, then
it will drive the service
sector. It will drive the retail
sector to where those those jobs
and those, uh those things will
happen, but if you're not
bringing in that economic base
money, the service sector will
suffer.
Uh, because there won't be
people that need those services
that the service HVAC
technicians because they don't
have houses to.
Or businesses that need those
services, so that's why it's.
Community development is the
development of a community,
better place, better, better
thing, it's, it's talking about
developing, you know, uh,
infrastructure for
transportation.
Could be developing parks,
libraries, those outdoor spaces
to have a better sense of place,
uh, a place to recreate when
you're not at work.
That's an important part of the
community development.
But it is not economic
development. They're equally
important.
But they're different and they
are two different things.
Uh, I'm not saying that they're
not important, but they, they
don't, they don't really coexist
and complement each other very
much. If we have good economic
development, we'll have the
resources to do those community
development things. If we have
good community development, and
we also have good places to
expand those businesses in New
Mexico.
Um, and then the, the final
thing I'll, I'll mention about.
Uh
about that expanding the
economy.
Is that people get really
focused on the ones that make
headlines, um, and we like
those.
Uh, we like good publicity.
When we land a big company and
it makes headlines and.
But the true growth with uh with
economic development and within
New Mexico always comes from the
expansion of existing companies.
Make headlines for the
recruitment of somebody coming
from outside of the state, but
the true nuts and bolts of of
chemical business.
Adding
50% more of their employees.
They got 10, they're adding 5
more. That's a huge growth for
their business in their
community if they're cutting 50,
you know, it makes a big
difference and.
We've got one
What I would call poster child
of that in New Mexico and it's a
company called Vitality Works in
Albuquerque. Most of you have
probably heard of them.
And it's the story of Mitch Covi
parking his VW in Albuquerque
and deciding to start a
business, and now he has over
300 employees. We've
successfully helped him with a
couple of different Lita grants
as he has expanded and uh he's
now expanding again.
Adding additional square footage
and adding additional employees
and a company that started with
him and an idea is now uh.
Most a true success story in New
Mexico and and what we need to
focus on from.
You'll hear a lot about Lita,
JTip, those those functions I'm
happy to answer any questions,
uh, but at this point I think
it's probably more important
that you ask me questions.
That, that you have about the
department and I thank you
madam. And actually, Mr. Rober,
before we move on to the
questions, if you would just
give a quick um just maybe
definition of what Lita and Jy
Tipper and then if there's some
questions that lead off of that,
we can go there. Absolutely. I
fell into that bureaucrat trap
of using an acronym and not
properly.
GTI is our longest and deepest
uh incentive in New Mexico, it
stands for the job training
incentive program.
It was originally established
and statute in 1972.
And as you can see just by that
statement right there, it's had,
it's had great support through
multiple administrations, uh,
regardless of party.
And ultimately what the job
training incentive program does
J tip is it reimburses a company
or an employee's wages during
their initial training period
from the date of that period can
be as short as 2 months. It can
be as long as 6 months.
Depending on how complex the job
is and, and we have a process
and and the.
Reimbursement rate depends on
the location of the business.
If it's in an urban setting in
New Mexico, it starts at 50% if
it's a rural setting r defined
as a community under 60,000 and
about 15,000.
It's 65% unincorporated areas,
uh, the base rate starts at 75%
reimbursement.
Uh, you can get some bonus, um.
Bumps of 5% if the job meets the
high wage threshold of 40,000 in
rural areas and frontier areas
of 60,000.
urban area
You can also get a 5% bump in
the reimbursement rate if the
job.
Goes to a New Mexican that is a
veteran.
Goes to the New Mexican that is
a recent graduate of New Mexico
Institute of Higher Education.
And also if the person has aged
out of the foster program that
meets any of those three
criteria you can get, and then
the final, the final 5% was a
change we made to policy.
2 years ago.
And that's if the company
utilizes either the New Mexico
Department of Workforce
Solutions and to an independent
third party to help with
recruitment.
Of that posi of the positions
are offering.
And we did that because we saw
that there were a lot of the
smaller companies that were
really struggling and recruiting
employees when they when they
got J tip money and actually
getting the people to hire
because they didn't have the HR
resources or.
The full skill knowledge of
really how to recruit and.
All these other types of
mechanisms out there, uh, so we
put that in there to to really
encourage them, OK, it's you're
gonna get a 5% bump, just reach
out and utilize these sources
around there, so.
Uh, that's, you know, in a very
quick nutshell how it works. The
local economic Development Act
is a little newer. It was
established uh circa 1992.
Uh, it's an exception to
article.
9 section 14 of the New Mexico
Constitution that we all
lovingly call the anti-donation
clause.
Uh, that exception, uh,
specifically states and statute
that.
Local communities, meaning
cities and counties may invest
into.
Projects for the purpose of
economic development as long as
those investments go to land, to
building and to infrastructure.
Meaning that the the public
investments made can't leave the
state of New Mexico regardless
of the success of the business.
So, uh, you can't invest in
rolling stock, meaning cars and
trucks and those that can't
invest in computers or other,
other equipment that can be
hauled off.
The investments must be made to
land building and infrastructure
so that the investment may be
made.
Uh, in, uh, and stay in New
Mexico.
Uh, by statute is that it is a
discretionary fund, so it
doesn't have a form, a formula
that says X + y equals Z.
Um, it's at the discretion of
the governor's office.
That has changed dramatically
since 1992, what that means and
and how it goes.
Um, but
Currently we have established
and rule of process which
companies have to go through,
uh, to get Lita.
And that process means first
being vetted by the regional
rep.
Uh, and that team to make sure
they're eligible.
be then if they are determined
uh deemed eligible then they
have to process of providing
some uh preliminary information,
uh, to talking about the capital
investment proposed talking
about the number of jobs and
potential wages.
Those, those types of things,
then that evaluation is, is, is
done.
If it is then determined by the
executive branch that there's
going to be a lead to offer a
formal lead to offer is made.
Then the formal application
actually begins.
Uh, I, I know it sounds like a
lot, but it, it does, it does
allow for a good conversation
happening to where we can really
help the company figure out
where their best site is if they
don't know, uh, and really
determine what the other
incentives are to to formulate
this.
And then during that full uh.
Process of actually applying,
then we're going to look at all
those things capex jobs uh job
titles.
Job salaries.
Uh, as well as the company's
financial capabilities. We'll
look at 3 years of their
financial information.
Um
Or
In the event that they are a
newer objections and um we'll
look at where's the cash,
where's the money?
Are you borrowing the money? Are
you bringing cash to the table,
do you have?
Potential contracts um that
integrate we we look at where
the money's going to be, and we
go to the public process, which
is at the local level, the city
or the county.
Uh, introduces an ordinance,
adopts an ordinance, in that
there's a contractual agreement
we call a project participation
agreement.
It says
You're going to get 10 number of
dollars of public money in
exchange for X jobs, X capital
investment, if you don't do
that, here's how the clawbacks
work.
There's a 2nd document that if
their state money involves says,
here's how the state my local
fiscal agent and how we expect
that money to be handled, uh,
and then there's a final
document that's called uh the
security agreement in statute,
it says that we must hold
security equal to the amount of
the grant award.
Meaning that we must have some
sort of collateral.
Against the backs that we have
something that back.
Sounded like a lot, being in
explaining, uh, but to be
honest, we can get through that
process in about 90 days from
start to finish, and you know,
that's even with the 30 day
notice for.
Right, we're going to start with
the committee has any questions,
we've got uh Representative
Matthews first on the list.
I mean, that, um.
Just a few kind of basic
questions if you don't mind, um,
here is what our current
unemployment rate is.
That's a good question, and I,
and I don't know what this
month's number says, but I, I
would, uh, speculate it's, it's
4.9%.
OK.
Um, and is that been going up or
going down, steady it has been
fairly static.
For the last 6 months. OK.
Uh, next question is, um,
What's our percentage?
These days of workforce
participation.
And
Excellent question, uh, Madam
Chair, um.
Members of the committee,
Representative Matthews.
It's not good. It's about 55%.
It, I'm sorry? It's about 55%.
Um
How much, Madam chair, I'm
sorry.
forgot all my
Ref rules.
Um, Madam Chair.
Um
How much of a state now has
Reliable Internet
infrastructure.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I don't know that
answer.
Um,
I
I, I just, I just don't know
that answer and and and it's
also a little speculative when
you talk about reliable to them.
It says.
I mean there's,
but I honestly don't know the
answer to that question.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Um
Mr. Roper, um.
What's the outlook for Intel.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, excellent question.
So, uh, it's been widely
reported that Intel is going
through a major restructuring
globally.
Uh, the good news is that's not
having a negative impact in New
Mexico. Uh, we're still seeing
growth uh in Intel.
As with their most recent
expansion.
And there's look to another
expansion that could happen, uh,
within their Sandoval County,
so.
until it is now, uh, over 3200
total employees and, and that
number has been climbing, uh,
consistently over the last 3
years.
And we anticipate that to uh
stay or even grow in the future.
Madam Chair,
Mr. Roper, that's good news, um.
Another question, um.
We have a number of immigrants
in the state who are in the
labor force.
What impact
Um, on our workforce and
economy.
Would
The new president's deportation
policy.
Perhaps cause it in our economy.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I don't know that I
answer to that, um, but.
Uh, I, I will say this
especially at the chairs part of
the state.
Uh, where agriculture is a very
strong portion um of.
So
Western New Mexico, it's going
to have a negative impact.
Beyond that, uh, you know, I.
I don't know.
There, there's a lot of workers
in New Mexico that are working
on visas which are not and so I
don't.
I don't have the data, nor could
I speculate as to what the
negative impacts of illegal
deportation with me.
Um, and I'm sure Mr. Roper,
thank you, and my last question.
Uh, you mentioned that in the
science and tech.
Part of the office, you have 3
workers now.
And I'm curious how many you
have in the film part of the
office.
Well, the Madam Chair, members
of the committee, the film is an
entire division.
Uh, and they currently have 6
people.
Science and science and tech
department sits under the
economic development division of
which I'm the division director
for.
Uh, that economic development
division.
Uh, currently has 31 people
within it that includes the
three from science and tech,
includes the 3 from JTip.
Includes the 12 people from the
regional rep team, it includes
the 4 people from the main
street, uh, admin support, but
that's all under the.
I do believe you will see
legislation to create a division
uh for science and tech, which
would then put them in the same
category as film, outdoor wreck.
Creative industries, economic
development and uh.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank and Mr.
Roper, thank you. Uh, I'll quit
badgering you now.
Thank you, uh, Representative uh
de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You
mentioned Lea earlier. I know
that, uh, counties and cities
participate in LIA, they have
their own.
ability to ratlita.
But my question is this
Are they bound by the same rules
and regulations that the state
is when it issues data, rats.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, it's all under
the same statute.
Uh, so they're bound to the same
we have to have a project
participation, they have to have
security equal to the amount of
grant toward.
He goes on to say in the cities
and the counties that they may.
Ran up to 10% of their general
fund on an annual basis for
leader projects.
Uh, there's also language in the
statute that will, that they can
uh ask for a vote of the people.
To establish and lead a fund
through grocery receipts tax.
Uh, but that has to be done by.
Thank you, Madam Cir is uh.
Our retail establishments,
businesses that want to locate
into a community that they that
they qualify for LIDA.
Madam Chair members of the
committee.
Yes, there were changes to the
leader of statute.
Uh, that a lot, there used to be
a population limit communities
that could grant leader for.
Retail that that limit was
lifted, so there is now no no
population limit on whether it
may invest in retail.
That is uh
Not including state funds,
that's local funds, but they may
invest in retail, uh, if, if
they do that, and then, you
know, just to add on to that.
That's it, that's a very
important part of rural New
Mexico you already heard my
speech about.
Economic base, but
Uh, when you're in a place like
We'll go back to to my roots
here a little bit, you go to a
place like Roy, New Mexico.
Getting a new um.
Convenience store can make a
huge impact.
On the community just from a
grocery receipts tax collection,
which communities live in live
and die by, uh, so that is an
important economic factor in
rural New Mexico. I would say
less of a factor in the urban
setting, but
Um, still a factor.
Manager, I think you're
absolutely correct.
Uh, I have family in Carrizozo
where they lost their local
small grocery store.
They were wit's end of what they
were going to do, ultimately a
family dollar store moved in and
they actually carry some produce
and those sorts of things. But
even for larger communities I
represent District 12 South
Valley, and for the longest time
we did not have much retail.
And having grocery stores and
places to buy.
A pair of shoes is important
sometimes. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you for the all the
information. I'm really excited
that you, uh, talked about
biotech, bioscience, um, I, I'm,
I appreciate the definition of
the economic development.
Uh, difference between that and
the community development
because I personally think a lot
of people get that confused, um,
and I really appreciate the
expansion of uh existing
businesses.
Uh, because it seems like
sometimes we just focus on
bringing new.
In Mexico when we have a lot of
businesses here in New Mexico
that can expand and uh and
sometimes, uh, the regulatory
burden on that is, is part of
the problem.
One of the things, um, uh, Mr.
Secretary, that I'd like to ask
you about is the electric grid
and your new, uh, the bill that
you're that you talked about in
the beginning, and is there uh
anything.
That is prohibiting.
In statute now that needs to be
fixed so that we can expand the
the.
Looking out above and beyond for
our electric grid specifically
like PNM, I, I know, uh, we had
a business we, it took a lot, it
took 2 years.
To get it off the ground, uh,
mainly because of the uh waiting
on the electric. Was there
anything in statute that we need
to be looking at or are you
already doing that?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um.
Again, a very excellent
question. I do believe you'll
see legislation, uh, coming,
coming out that will address a
portion I believe this this
legislation is going to address
the ability of.
Invest your own end for that
matter, co-ops, but more likely
the investor utilities in New
Mexico, meaning.
Uh, PNM, El Paso, the ability
to.
Build capacity whether that be
transmission capacity or
generation capacity above.
Right now they are reached
capacity that they need.
And so they really can't start
working on additional capacity
until they have your business.
On the hook
To hook up there and so then you
have those delays.
Uh, there's going to be
legislation that allows them um.
An area of, I believe it's going
to say 10%, don't hold me to
that.
I believe it's going to say a
10% capacity to add on over
that, and that's going to take
some legislative action to
change that statute.
And it's also it's.
Way more complicated than I'm
going to simplify it, but it's
going to basically get
preapproval from the PRC to
allow that to happen.
Uh, so that the
industry can then
Start progressing and investing
that money to do the studies and
everything necessary to build
that capacity.
This and and so then when it is
completed, that it can become
part of the base rate structure.
And they don't have to go back.
And ask again permission. I
oversimplified what it says
biology, but ultimately to give
them the capacity to build 10%
that will address part of the,
part of the issue.
Uh, it's a national issue that
with the uh with the things that
are happening globally, mostly
due to AI.
And the things of autonomous
vehicles.
Quantum, but
Those types of things are really
or more data capacity.
Uh, and we all know data centers
use a lot of a lot of
electricity, so it's, it's, it's
not a New Mexico, it's a it's a,
it's a national issue that that
that we lack the transmission
and generation capacity at this
moment.
To support that, so there's
going to have to be a, uh, some
other things that are going to
have to, uh, to address that.
Uh, I think there's, I think
there's some good uh thoughts
going out there about um.
Micro grids to where then maybe
private sector money.
And get in and build microgrids
for specific business knowing
that knowing that in the future.
Down the road after they get it
built and you de-risk it to the
investor owns that they can then
buy it. I, I think there's some,
I think there's some
oversimplifying a a very complex
subject, but I, I, I do think
that there are some things
coming that are going to relieve
some of that pressure.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
really good to hear, uh, because
with economic development, you
know, we were thinking about all
this, um, the other portion that
that people need to know about
is the capacity.
Or
Solar
Going back into the grid.
As is, is an issue.
Uh, where you can put in a salt,
you know, it's very, it's being
promoted a lot for solar. Let's
do solar, solar, solar. Well, a
lot of rural New Mexico co-ops.
Have not, uh, opt in or opened
up to be able to sell that
energy back.
And so, um, I just want this
committee to know that that's an
issue in rural New Mexico, uh,
and, and not only in rural New
Mexico, but in in fairly urban
where it's, it's, it's PNM they
don't have the capacity to buy
the electricity. And so, um,
Selling, you know, the, the fact
everybody should go solar,
things like that, or people are
trying and being denied because
there's no capacity. So I just
want to make sure people know
that. The other thing that I
want to talk a little bit about
is the uh local economic
development.
Uh, certification in, I know,
you know what I'm talking about.
And I wondered if that process
is being um.
I know, uh, Madam Chair, that
you all take it very seriously,
as do so many others, but that
they until they're certified,
they cannot access any of that.
The grant money to expand the
local economic development in
some communities. And so I
wanted to uh see if there's
anything going on the on the
process, uh, if the process has
changed at all, or if it's uh
the same process.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um.
We're, we're talking about two
processes here, so uh.
One is the certification of a
local economic development
organization.
And one is Lita itself, uh, both
important.
Uh, this, the certification of a
local economic, we have adopted
the criteria established by the
uh International Economic
Development.
commerce
As the criteria to become a
certified local economic
development organization.
Uh, and if you achieve those
things, say $40,000 grant that
is granted to that nation. It is
a very uh intensive deep list
that's that's there that need
that needs to be.
It is following the guidelines
from uh set forth on a on a
nationally recognized basis by
IEDC.
Uh
That doesn't preclude a
community or from.
Adopting or improving or
Uh, there existing leader
statute.
Um
Right now, the majority and when
I say the majority, we're
talking about 98% of the.
Incorporated municipal
governments.
And county governments have a
local economic of sorts.
A lot of them are probably as
old ever since.
Um, but, uh,
But they
Do have an ordinance of sorts.
They all need to and and.
They all need to work on keeping
that up to date, especially on
the changes that uh.
If you haven't adopted those
changes.
To allow for retail.
You still can't do it until.
Um
So
We at the department, the local,
the.
Community business and rural
development team that we all,
uh, affectionately call the
regional reps that is part of
their charge.
Beyond working with local
businesses and how it is up to
date.
Um, and, uh.
Functional for their purposes
within that community.
Uh, it is one of the focuses
that we've put on the team this
year, so I, I expect to see.
I expect to see some
improvements across the places
that haven't touched their
leader for 20 years and it's
time to take a look at it.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you so much, and I just
wanted to let, uh,
Representative Matthews know
that the workforce participation
rate as of January 17th was
57.9%.
57.9%.
Thank you, uh, Madam Leader. Uh,
do we have any other questions
from the committee?
All righty. Well,
XID,
I'm sorry, Madam Chairwoman, I'm
sorry, I was a little slow on
the microphone there I think.
So a couple of quick questions.
First, let me begin by
apologizing to Mr. Roper, uh,
during the time that he lived
with me, my daughters may have
toilet paper at his house. I'm
not completely sure about that
if that did occur, I I do
apologize, um, being a new, um,
I'm not completely sure about
all the aspects of the division.
Of course, I know a lot about,
well not a lot, but I'm aware of
the film division because of the
of the press that it gets.
But could you run through, uh,
and you did quickly, but I
didn't take the notes fast
enough. I know you mentioned
outdoor recreation, uh, a film,
obviously we've talked about
science and technology.
Or are there some other areas of
focus areas or divisions, how
you're structured that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Murphy.
Uh, the overall structure of the
economic development department.
Uh, then has separate divisions
or main divisions are economic
development.
Uh, which, as I mentioned, has
31 currently.
Under that, it's about half of
the department.
Outdoor recreation division that
currently has 3 employees.
Creative industries division,
which was created by.
This body 2 years ago.
Uh, now, now has 2 employees
within it.
Um, and then the film division,
which currently has 6.
And we have our account services
division, which is basically are
the people that take care of our
money and keep us, keep us out
of trouble with procurement.
So those are the divisions under
under the department.
Science and technology and
division.
Under the economic development
division, science and
technology.
Job training incentive program.
The community business and rural
development team, which we call
the regional reps.
Uh, Main Street.
All exist underneath that.
And then we also over Madam
Chair, Mr. Roper, thank you very
much. Um, I did have a a a
number of other questions but
perhaps we can take these up,
um, at another time, so I'll
just roll them into one, and
that is
Um, and this really goes to the
point of attracting new talent
and companies into the state,
not so much the expansion of
existing businesses, although
I'm sure that applies as well.
And one of the things as a
business owner I would think
coming into a state you're
worried about things perhaps
beyond the purview of this
committee, but are you asked by
companies as they come in about
are they concerned about our
crime rate first.
Um, are they concerned about not
only the grid stability, but the
ability to continue to feed that
grid with reliable energy. Are
they concerned about the tax
rates and the regulation rates
in New Mexico.
Do you hear these things from
from from businesses.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Murphy, uh, that's a really good
question.
Um, so I
Try to put it this way, in most
instances.
The first question that uh that
usually comes up.
Where, you know, what, what's
the availability of workforce?
How many people are there,
what's, what's the age of the
working workforce.
Um, and what's the education
level of the workforce.
That's almost always the first
question when a when a company
is looking to expand.
Uh, or come into the state as
workforce.
Um
Obviously, electricity is
usually very high on the list
infrastructure needs are most
manufacturing settings, uh,
electricity is a very big
portion of what they do, so the
availability extremely
important.
Um
Is it the right place
logistically?
Where my raw materials come from
where my market is, is this the
right location for me to just
to, to, to locate my business
and if you've answered all of
those questions and in a in a
positive way, then they'll start
to, then they'll start asking
about.
Incentives in the value.
Uh, of what
What comes to be, uh, which also
then includes, you know, how
does, how do taxes work in New
Mexico and uh and then.
To be honest, uh, I know crimes
in the in the headlines a lot,
and I'm not saying it shouldn't
be, uh, but that's usually sense
of place, type of places.
Is one of the final contributing
factors, but it's usually not
top of mind 1st 1st question out
of their mouth.
Um, and then I'll just add that
when we do.
Compete
We compete with other places,
uh, for obvious reasons we can,
we compete against Texas,
Arizona, Utah.
Colorado a lot because they're
looking to the southwest of the
United States from a logistical
standpoint.
For whatever reason, we also
seem to compete a lot with uh
South Carolina.
And Georgia in the manufacturing
centers, um.
And in all those instances.
When you consider
Taxation across the board in
Mexico is extremely competitive
and, and, uh, we compete very
well, uh, you know, and that is
a combination of how we tax.
combination of our incentives
and all that, but we do compete,
we do so, you know, that's,
that's a very positive thing for
us is that cost of doing
business in New Mexico is.
Madam Chair, Mr. Oper, thank you
very much. I take it there's,
if, you know, theoretically,
there was a community in the
state that was very interested
in attracting aviation
manufacturing, um, perhaps
repair centers, that sort of
thing. I suspect there's
probably somebody in your office
they can talk to.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee Mercy
familiar with Roswell.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Alrighty and um Representative
Murphy, will you, uh, Rob Black
will be here on Friday, so uh
you'll have another opportunity
to to get more information at
that point as well, so, um, with
that, we'll go ahead and end uh
today's session. We will be
hearing a couple of bills on
Wednesday, so I asked the
community to get here, uh, on,
on a timely, in a timely manner,
um, and.
We have neither announcements.
Oh, we'll get to that, yeah.
