Here.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Dow.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Vice chair Figueroa.
Here.
Chairman Maestas and I am here
so we have a quorum of were up
folks are just a.
I mean into the to the zoom room
want to thank everybody for
their patients there was a
series of meetings that kept us
away and it delayed the.
Delayed the meeting so we want
to welcome folks there's
thirteen attendees in the zoom
room and I would imagine a bunch
more of watching via webcast
we're awaiting Representative
Dixon with house bill eighty but
are you ready to percent
Representative set up the yeah I
can I can get just started
absolutely and then take it away
you have the floor thank you one
of my expert witnesses Jason
Espinoza I believe it's in the
attendees
Apologies I.
The panelists Justin as we see
is name in the in.
That's that's great I do have a
committee substitute I'd like to
include for.
Lunch.
My heart of you could mute.
With your computer okay all
right great so up for.
Chance to see the house
committee substitute for house
bill eighty alerted a motion to
move for discussion.
I move the committee substitute
chair for discussion correct.
All right great then the we'll
take that motion what are you
going to explain the committee
substance thank you.
Thank you chairman and members
the committee and just to be
clear this is committee
substitute point two two two two
three three point two.
So it should be the same page on
so today I'm bringing forward at
this H. B. eighty amending them
and angel tax credit and the kid
this substitute would amend the
current angel tax credit which
is set to expire in twenty
twenty six this place at this
point on by increasing the cap
on eligible.
The company annual gross revenue
to ten million from five million
it increases the annual
aggregate to ten million from
two million which is been stuck
at it for about fifteen years
and then it also increases the
credit available to angel
investors accredited angel
investors to be clear on up to
forty percent of the investment
and then up to fifty percent for
those businesses who are a
majority owned by women or owned
by communities of color
Representative and then finally
it would make the tax credit
refundable which the objective
here that we anticipate was it
and and also you know kind of
also considered by the FIR would
increase a new investments from
beyond our state on and so this
bill does all those pieces and
it's really about supporting our
entrepreneurial community that
we've heard from time and again
that there's just not enough
there's none of capital and
there's so many great ideas that
our guest parking in New Mexico
we want to make sure we're
tracking the spokes and so it
you know again
this is actually right time to
do this is the last thing on.
I'm sorry chairman your.
I need.
What I want to I'm sorry with
that.
what I was going to say was this
is the ample time to do it you
know from that from the recovery
that center for venture research
out of the universe in New
Hampshire the bill researching
on venture funds into funds all
all these movements since the
nineteen eighties and bees what
they've noticed there's been a
significant increase in active
investors a number of
investments in amounts invested
into while these are bold moves
to really increase what the
angel investment activity we see
in the start up community on
this is really the right time
for us to be doing it and
especially because we have these
three fiscal years will be able
to do it so that is my opening
statement it seems as my expert
witness Jason Espinoza has
joined us Jason did you have
anything that you wanted to add
as well.
Chairman members the committee
thank you Representative Serrato
I just just just just a few
comments to add so my name's
dismissed as on the register
lobbyist I would both the New
Mexico technology council as
well as New Mexico idea.
Which is the association
economic development
professionals across the state.
And I think as representatives
Serrato mentioned really we have
a lack of access to capital here
in New Mexico this bill is
really about the entrepreneurs
and making sure that they have
access to capital you know what
two thousand nineteen report
from the LFC noted you know the
lack of the amount of early
stage funding available to
businesses in New Mexico there
was another report by the
department of workforce
solutions noting the same issue
and then lastly even the
Kauffman foundation talking
about access to capital with the
biggest barrier French menores
is the lack of access to capital
in really one thing that this
bill does is it broadens the
pool of qualified investors to
increase the flow of risk
capital here in New Mexico to
really support our
entrepreneurial ecosystem we
talked many times about growing
our own helping support New
Mexico businesses and really
that is what this bill is about
is increasing that flow of
capital to our entrepreneurial
ecosystem to make it more robust
can provide valuable tool to
help.
You know entrepreneurs like
start ups doing business here in
New Mexico March act are happy
to answer any technical
questions as well thank you Mr
chair.
One thing I just wanted to Mr
chair before it closes that I
just also want to express a lot
of kind of gratitude for
Representative Powdrell Culbert
who's really been a leader on
this issue for you know more
than a decade and you know we're
having that kind of foresight
into understanding that we want
to continue to expand this on
the her leadership on that I
just really want to recognize
that as well and with that you
know we're we're ready for any.
Austin the dignity health.
I'm sorry before we go I cannot
find the committee substitute I
don't see in the Here file you I
don't have it okay thank you for
that check your email check your
email it may not have made the
share file but it.
Check your email and we'll get
you right now let me go to the
audience and then we'll see if
that problem solved by the time
public comment is done.
All right thank you we are we
have seventeen attendees.
hopefully folks are used to this
garden or put the right hand
button if you wish to speak in
favor when we go with those
folks in favor please go out and
raise your hands and then we
will up bring you in as a
panelist we on you you you are
not yourself and then you
address the committee so we're
gonna start with the Mr stew
rose followed by Eric
Montgomery.
So the committee.
Administrator is a million the
substitute and then chill then
we'll start.
Mr rose speaking yes Sir Mr rose
up the floor okay thank you just
a background I'm the founder of
the bioscience Center and
curator for companies in
biotechnology start ups in
biotechnology I'm also the
founder of the fat pipe New
Mexico network of collaboration
and co working spaces around the
state and and we're the largest
co working space in the state R.
as a because of these two
ventures I am heavily involved
with entrepreneurs all over the
state and what we're seeing
right now is an explosion of
entrepreneurs especially in in
technologies like space
aerospace biosciences Ag tech
and and advanced manufacturing
and what we're running into is
the investors who are currently
in the state can't raise enough
capital as you've heard many
times but what we're seeing is
the the sophisticated and
experienced investors are
actually saying to us they are
seeing more investable deals
good excuse me good companies
that deserve investment and I
just don't have enough money to
invest in and so we have to find
a way to to expand the pool on
there's really no way other than
going out of state so that's why
I support this bill let me just
give you quickly three examples
we have one company called pain
scam that has come up with a way
to measure paying the and people
so the doctor treats the patient
and they can actually besides
the patient in the.
What level of pain they have
instead of asking a person
please tell us your pain level
on a scale of one to ten I I
it's not necessarily the same as
your I I have another company
that that that has technology
will solve the problem of excess
wild horses yeah even in the
state Senate chairman just
simply not enough money to fund
that and I have a company in
California that's actually come
on board with a a a new kind of
tampons and they'll consider
moving to the state but their
tampon well actually treat
gynecological diseases like
entry endometriosis and other
diseases so with this will this
kind of this bill will not only
help.
Companies the state you know as
as well as help with these are
in the state thank you for.
Thank you and etcetera so few
folks relatively speaking we're
gonna have a time limit but you
know please be cognizant of.
Of everyone else's time I'm Erik
Montgomery followed by rob
black.
Welcome Mr chairman.
You Mr chair thank you members
of the committee thank you to
the sponsors of the bill my
name's Eric Montgomery
registered lobbyists for el Paso
electric but today I'm coming to
you as the policy chair for New
Mexico idea as Jason Espinoza
pointed out we are.
Professionalization of economic
developers across the state two
days ago I had the pleasure of
speaking to this committee which
unanimously gave a do pass on an
exemption for small business
assistance through the national
lapse on the G. R. T. component
to date however we have an
opportunity to talk about the
biggest entrepreneurial gap that
we have in the state and that is
access to risk capital since two
thousand eighteen this is my
fifth consecutive year of
testifying in favor of the angel
investment tax credit becoming a
refundable tax credit the risk
in this this risk investment
tool has been maximized to its
capacity in New Mexico as the FY
are correctly highlighted
because there is a limited pool
of available in semesters with
in New Mexico and the expertise
of the investors matching the
entrepreneurial.
Receipts within the state has
grown as as a gap.
Raising the fund cap will draw
the attention of the angel
investor community however this
piece is only valuable if the
credit is refundable because
most outside investors will not
have the tax liability in New
Mexico without a tax liability
and under our current system
there is no motivation to invest
in New Mexico companies we need
to entice those investors to
take the risk capital here and
making a refundable is the way
to do it raising the valuation
the credit is also essential for
the same reason that I just
stated it all allows
entrepreneurs to further lower
the risk placed by investors by
granting higher value to their
investment up front that's a
peach tool that entrepreneurs
can bring to investors and allow
them to win investments over
other companies that they are
competing with to receive those
same levels of investment can
also help entice any investors
in New Mexico that have been on
the fence about participating in
this tax credit by opening up
their portfolio to more New
Mexico companies and then
finally I know the FY are
discussed the anti donation
clause I think this is
definitely worth the risk of
moving this discussion forward
and if you believe that the
entrepreneurial system need to
fix that and we should have that
discussion to move this forward
and not and not worry about the
anti donation clause as I see
can do this so can we thank you
so much for your time Mr chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Sir Mr rob black
followed by Sarah fitz Gerald.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is rob black I am the president
and CEO The New Mexico chamber
of commerce I'm very happy to be
here today and committee it's
very rare that other the
committee that everything on the
on your agenda today we're very
happy to support
M. here but you know on this
item I just be eighty which
increases in experience existing
investment tax credit helping
create much needed investment
dollars for New Mexico start ups
both the chambers recent
economic competitive analysis
driving New Mexico's future in
the state's twenty year economic
strategy highlighted the need to
increase venture funding for New
Mexico in order to build out our
entrepreneurial ecosystem and to
create new business this is an
jobs nationally the amount of
venture capital disbursed by one
million dollars of GDP is just
over six thousand dollars in New
Mexico is around twenty four
hundred dollars we only have
about a third as much venture
capital on average as the rest
of the COVID company's country I
want to look at if we want to
leverage our laboratories the
entrepreneurial spirit of New
Mexicans and develop small
businesses local.
HB eighty helps make New Mexico
start ups much more competitive
so we from the chamber ask for
your support today thank you.
Thank you Sir miss Sarah fitz
Gerald followed by Adam green
hood.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
Sarah fitzgerald senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we support this bill and we
thank the sponsors for bringing
it today one investors have
turned our friends and loved
ones side hustles our dreams
into reality real businesses
that offer something new we need
to employer community members
and of course contribute to our
local economy by increasing the
amount of this tax credit and
making it refundable house bill
eighty will encourage more
entrepreneurial minded investors
to take note of New Mexico start
ups and support their launch and
early growth and by increasing
the aggregate amount of tax
credits per year this will boost
the programs potential to start
and grow enterprises statewide
we're in strong support of this
bill as well as the economic
growth that will invite and we
are taking the support as well
thank you.
Thank you and now we heard from
Adam green hood also when you're
a panelist if if your electronic
device allows please of.
Please show your video thanks.
Mr green had welcome.
But in a on mute your device
will do the same on our end.
Okay we've unmuted on our side
there you go welcome distributed
sorry about that I uh was home
with my little son some minutes
away.
we all know that these says
Speak again in favor of this on
the presidency add wallet sort
of here to Mexico collectively
raised nearly five million
dollars in the last three or
four years about eighty percent
of it from New Mexico investment
by
I cannot tell you how what a
fantastic instrument the tax
credit is been up to this point
I can also not underscore enough
how her workable it would be if
it was only refundable because I
I had just countless meetings
with investors out of state
where that type of benefit you
know it again would just tip
them over the edge for
investment in our wallet and
there are so many fantastic
start ups in ideas here in New
Mexico I feel like our state has
a you know a in their estimate
of riches when it comes to
intellect and ideas billion
dollar ideas of the change the
face of New Mexicos economics
and then ironically we
unfortunate mistake just doesn't
quite have the liquidity of
wealth to to tap into to make
those things a reality so I
guess I stand deeply in favor
of this bill moving forward I
think would unlock enormous
amount of potential and I think
it's the risk definitely
outweighs the reward.
Thank you Sir anyone else wish
to speak in favor of.
House Bill AT anyone wish to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand in the.
In the zoom Representative set
up to before we go to committee
would you mind up up everyone
got the email of the substitute
if you hadn't seen it before the
analysts have been done their
work on the such to could you
briefly explain the destroying
the original bill and the
substitute.
Thank you chairman so there's
one specific changes that and we
we took this idea that from
Minnesota's.
A refundable tax credit Ingle
test and test your tax credit
there but what we have done is
that we made it to that there is
an additional benefit to
supporting major women or
committees of color owned
businesses and that was very
specific because we are major
major state and in addition to
that we you know we that the
model they have in Minnesota
hasn't produce what they wanted
which is and and they
essentially put aside half of
their fund for those particular
businesses and then released at
the end that hasn't resulted in
in in what they wanted to to see
is an increase in equity in this
industry however we're we're
hopeful that that ten percent
additional refundable amount
will encourage you know angel
investors to look at our
incredible communities that are
exists and you know off the top
my head I know a cosmetic
company at as dementia research
company and.
A restaurant to your company
that are all you know would
qualify for that additional
amount so that's that was
intense there one other thing
that we were going to but it was
unnecessary and we were going to
limit this to be more of a pilot
project because we do understand
that it is a very aggressive
effort to to really enhance how
many people see New Mexico isn't
as a place of great ideas and
the dissents already the though
the the statute is set to expire
and twenty twenty six we felt
that that three year fiscal year
would be enough time to start to
get some results on how the
refundable credit was was
performing.
Thank you and of course.
Folks back home up the committee
substitute as a sub to the
entire bill it merely
incorporates that one amendment
that we have a clean copy to
review as a committee.
Thank you for that explanation
members of the committee.
By your Figueroa.
Sh thank you Mr chair appreciate
that.
Thank you sponsors for bringing
this forward this is been an
ongoing program for a long time
that is brought some investment
to the state I'm wondering if
you could talk a little bit
about what successes it had in
the past that make you think it
should be expanded in this way
generally when we have the sun
Center and and date on a tax
credit that's when we stop and
look at it and say what has it
produced and is it worth
continuing in anyway so can you
talk a little bit about that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
chairman and thank you madam
vice chair chasing can I have
this too because I know you've
been having a lot of these
communications in the past about
this.
Yes.
Madam Mr chair madam vice chair
members of the committee
you know we've seen the usage of
the tax credit based on the
fiscal impact report in the tax
and expenditure report the
certainly is increased capital
here in New Mexico in the
investment flow B. as before as
been stated you know sort of cap
data we need those additional
investments I can't speak to any
specific companies that that's
what you're asking about and I
think some of those were
mentioned on by some of the
support comments about their
companies that have received our
initial investment funding but
we've seen great success in
getting those flaws one of
things that we need to remember
to when we're looking at capital
investment investing and
entrepreneurial ecosystem not
every company is going to be the
big win or will make it but what
we want to do is incentivise our
entrepreneurs to take a risk so
that they create these
companies.
Right jobs with your tend to be
high paying jobs for these types
of investments I'm moving
forward.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Espinoza I appreciate that I
want to make sure that I have
all of the elements correct in
this bill that it's increasing
the percentage from twenty five
percent to forty or possibly
fifty to incentivize certain
kinds of investment so an
increase from twenty five to
forty or fifty
increasing the cap from two
million to ten.
And changing the.
Changing it from a tax credit to
refundable.
So three if three major changes
to this program
and I appreciate the fact that
the sponsor Mr chair talked
about that it's got a three year
window up here to see what will
happen so it's got a sense that
kind of built in and I think
that's good tax policy good good
credit policy I am.
Eager to expand access to
capital in New Mexico I'm a
little concerned that this bill
does those three major things
all at the same time it's my
understanding that only two
states.
Mr chair have refundable angel
investment credits and those are
at twenty five percent so we
would be war a out of the norm
with a fifty percent fully
refundable I'd be more
comfortable with this if it were
the jump up and percentage but
stated tax credit or state that
the percentage twenty five and
became refundable but both at
the same time is a little risky
for me I wondered if you could
address why using both of those
are essential or which one is
really more important to
bringing capital to New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr the garage as well and I I
may go off of camera might seems
like my internet's being a
little hazy but I want to give
you an example of one of those
two states is New Jersey hi and
senators he does have a twenty
percent cap with a five percent
bonus so around twenty five
percent and what's interesting
about their that they had just
recently made there is
refundable and lose twenty
nineteen that it came into
effect for that and the I have
never maxed out on their on
their you know I could get total
of people take advantage of
their tax credit which is that
twenty five million so it's more
than double what this is this
with is going to be doing but
what they found was that once
they need a refundable then that
entire credit was actually
completely utilized and they did
see and significant investment
from out of state into their
their businesses there and so
for those for those two reasons
we're really trying to attract
new investors New Mexico to look
at New Mexico as possibility
which is one part of the fifty
percent but then we're also
increasing
increasing our cap to actually
be I mean it's the capital
significantly lower than many
other states however you know
giving us that opportunity to
see if you know if we can kind
of hit those numbers as well so
that there is a that's part of
the reason why I know the
percentages may shift but those
details are a little bit
different.
David K. and did you have
something that they didn't
Mr chairman madam vice chair
just wanted to add to I think
rob black in New Mexico chamber
really touched on it and we have
you know I I think you said a
third less capital than most
other states and based on our
research so taxes alone has four
percent of the angel investors
in the country but when you look
at New Mexico Colorado Arizona
Utah Nevada together we only
account for three point eight
percent of the angel investors
in the country so we really need
to create in a an incentive to
draw that those outside
investments and again we're
competing against other states
we want to create you know sort
of tip the scale so that they
make those investments are New
Mexico so we think it's it's
it's appropriate to take that
big step because we need capital
here in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
sponsor Representative and Mr
Espinoza I'm gonna circle back
then to the piece of the
question that I'd really like to
know the answer to what is the
most important or how would you
rank these three changes that
you're making is it the
refundable pace is that the
increase in the percentage risen
the increase in the cash.
Mr chairman and madam chair you
know for me in a lot of ways it
I have to say that the
refundable aspect is incredibly
important and the reason is is
that when I would talk to
individual investors that are
across the board you know
somebody managed had funds of
hedge funds are been denture
capitalists are been angel
investors you know there's at
the reserve folks that now
called New Mexico home are are
from here what have you what was
interesting was that.
About angel investors there are
a lot of times and in specific
fields are or have their needs
areas and what came back a lot
of times was that they would
re invest their funds back so
yeah any any refund will taxed
again I'm just gonna keep using
it for this effort and so that's
really exciting that yes you
know that would be a tax cut
elements this or a refundable
credit but there's a potentially
keeps getting used to help for
New Mexico businesses.
Thank you thank you sponsor
thank you.
Mr thank you chair and those are
all my questions.
Not a budget you could try the
meeting I'm awaiting up.
Eight a bill Representative
ability of the committee.
Absolutely Mr chair.
I am skimming for other
questions from the committee.
Representative Ferrary.
I'm madam chair like to move the
past motion.
We are the past Representative
Fajardo Rebecca Dow second and.
Representative Dow.
You do passed motion a committee
substitute I apologize.
Thank you Representative this is
a do pass motion on the
committee substitute for House
Bill eighty.
I do not I do not pass on house
bill eighty they do pass on
house and committee House.
In finance I apologize and
committee substitute for house
bill eighty.
Thank you Representative.
And I am sure Representative Dow
wants to repeat all that a
second when they did not passed
house bill eighty in a do passed
the committee House commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill
eighty.
Sh.
Amy would roll out and share
what she said.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr.
Representative Dow.
Yes please.
Representative at the heart of.
Yes.
Representative bangles yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
By checking Arora.
I'm gonna be and no on the spot.
And chairman Maestas yes did you
all hear me.
Chair.
Yes Representative Powdrell
Culbert we heard you as a test
was that correct.
No you should read more is a no.
I just have some concerns about
doing it all at one time should
you it was perfectly my concerns
and so that is the only reason I
think it's a lot and one time in
changing but the original intent
of the angel investments.
We're.
Thank you Representative for
your vote any would you read it
back to make sure it's clear.
Yes I share I have
Representative doubt as a yes
Representative Fajardo as a test
representative gave us as a yes
Representative Hernandez as yes
Representative Johnson as yes
Representative Martinez and yes
Representative Powdrell Culbert
as no.
Representative Serrato as test
vice chair Figueroa as no and
chairman I just this is a yes I
have a eight to to vote in
favor.
Thank you Amy and thank you
sponsors you have a do pass on
the house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill eighty.
Thank you chairman thank you the
committee.
Thank you.
Will give everyone a moment to
switch their documents to house
bill one zero four.
It was one zero two.
To.
We have to do both and I got a
text.
With a little requests so if
okay let's go to one oh four.
My apologies.
Madam chair.
Would you be able to move over
at Mr Ismael Torres as the
expert witness for house bill
one of four.
Yes my L. toward is yes Amy will
move him in and let's take a
couple more minutes I need a
couple minutes to switch my
documents.
Madam chair while you're doing
that I thought I was next on the
agenda I'm supposed to be
due to Sharma pop back there
since we're flipping things up
but I will be close.
Thank thank you
Representative for being
flexible.
All right thank you for your
patience Representative would
you like to present your bill.
Thank you madam chair yes I
would like to present house bill
one oh for to this committee and
just as a I'd like to begin by
acknowledging.
The other co hosts who are also
as it happens members of this
committee Representative Serrato
Martinez and Maestas.
And I'd also like to note that
this is an LFC and doors bill
of for your consideration.
and to his Mr Thorez
was he located so perfect
perfect excellent so he will
serve as the expert.
For an overview for folks who do
not have a copy of the bill in
front of them this bill creates
that venture capital investment
act and the venture capital
investment fund under the
authority of the New Mexico
finance authority the purpose of
the fund is to make investments
in new emerging or expanding
businesses in New Mexico that
create new job opportunities
these investments are required
to be made with venture private
equity funds for with New Mexico
businesses in early stages of
development where the
investments enhance the Economic
development objectives of the
State.
The LFC recommendation for house
bill two includes a hundred and
five million dollars
appropriated for this purpose
contingent on the enactment of
this legislation.
I'd also like to our site R.
comments from the Economic
development department they say
this program could fill gaps
within the current landscape and
look to assessed under served
New Mexico business owners and
address shortfalls in available
capital in early seed stage and
series a funding.
It could help address the
significant shortcomings in the
state's ability to assist start
up companies form and grow.
As noted in the state recent
twenty year economic development
strategic plan.
The results could be an improved
entrepreneurial ecosystem more
jobs more investment and more
opportunities for New Mexicans
to create new careers and so
with that madam chair I believe
will stand for questions.
Thank you Representative.
We will go to our attendees for
public comment at this time and
just to shake things up and see
if everyone's wake.
if you are in opposition to
house bill one of four would you
please raise your hand will take
opposition first.
And we're gonna move right on to
support if you are in the end
attendee list to support house
bill one zero four four please
raise your hand.
And let's start with rob lack of
the New Mexico chamber.
Good afternoon Madam chairwoman
and members of the committee it
is a pleasure to be here again
much of my testimony that why I
gave in the previous item is is
relevant to this one you know
again it gets to the idea that
in New Mexico per per GDP
numbers we're about a third of
of of where other states are out
we saw we see this as a key area
for opportunity in New Mexico
you know we as a state have five
to ten years to really
diversify our economy in a way
that we're not so reliant on oil
and gas and we need this sort of
investment in order to trigger
that if we don't have it if we
if we don't do those sorts of
investments
in some ways it's a signal that
we're okay with the status quo
and I don't think anyone's okay
with where we are in our economy
today and where we want to be as
we go to diversify we think this
is a really unique and an
opportunity for the state and we
applaud that the bill's sponsor
for bringing this forward we
stand and support thank you for
the opportunity.
Thank you.
Sarah fitz Gerald.
Representative Herald Levitre.
Was updated I apologize.
Thank you Mr lavender.
Good afternoon under lavender hi
and that this particular bill is
before the this this body and
one of of course my absolute
support
I've been involved with venture
capital since twenty sixteen
first as part of a two Q. I do
and then following our merger
with CNM ingenuity and a roll of
business and finance development
I think that it's really clear
that venture capital and Fund
available venture capital is one
of the real keys to New Mexico's
economic future
I think it the I do possibility
of job creation the possibility
of developing the tax base all
of these particular measures are
really critical for our future.
This bill creates a framework
that I think it's been a really
well thought out to develop
venture capital in such a way
that can be effectively and
legitimately deployed putting it
in the hands of New Mexico
finance authority I think is a
great move and I think that the
of the the potential here is
just tremendous would that we
New Mexico needs venture capital
there's just absolutely no
question about it the lack of
that is really Ernest.
Putting this in place will help
us not only develop these
companies and jobs will really I
think help keep these companies
in New Mexico it's really sad
when we see a company someone
has a great idea the business
starts here then there's no
money to follow on so they sell
the business to someone and then
they take it out of state and we
lose all of the benefits of that
particular business so I just
really would like to urge this
committee is support for this
bill and I'm really pleased to
be able to support it thank you
madam chair and madam vice chair
and committee.
Thank you Sir thank you for your
work with any.
Amy says I can't see them on my
screen you want to announce the
next speaker in favor.
Yes Sarah fitzgerald Mr.
Good afternoon again madam chair
and members of the committee I'm
Sarah fitzgerald senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
you know we support most any
effort designed to increase the
amount of venture capital
available to companies in New
Mexico it's not enough of it
here as we've heard a few folks
mention today and New Mexico
companies could really use a
fund like this to launch grow
and compete we think this is a
jobs bill of growth bills and
invest in ourselves bill and we
have faith in NMFA to properly
manage this new fund so that it
contributes to a more diverse
and dynamic economy in the
future we thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward and
we urge you to approve it thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I share.
Jason Espinoza has embraced.
Thank you.
Mr Espinoza.
Madam chair members the
committee just less than as a
registered lobbyist with both
the New Mexico technology
council as well as New Mexico
idea the states economic
development professional
association I won't belabor the
point but we stand in strong
support of the legislation thank
you.
Mr has been announced.
Does that conclude our speakers
and support.
Madam I sure yes that that is
thank you David let's go to
committee.
That's a hard.
Thank you madam chair
I guess my question my questions
I'm I'm I guess I'm trying to
understand how the program works
I'm in state money.
That that's coming from.
The general fund the going to
NMFA.
Then applied for through NMFA is
that correct Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Fajardo
I do actually like if Mr Torah's
could go ahead and just give a
very brief summary of the
process I think that would be
wonderful.
Madam chair representative
Fajardo that that concept is
basically right the general fund
amount would be deposited into
the venture capital program act
fund at the NMFA and NMFA then
would be making those
investments in individual
companies through their property
investment remains or through
other private equity funds.
And
what how long do we have until
this bill signed to NMFA has to
promulgate rules and create a
system for that to happen.
Madam chair representative part
of there is no.
Time requirement on as to how
quickly they need to get it done
so they'll get the money it
would be effective I believe FY
twenty two so that they can
begin hiring staff and we get
the rules process.
This.
My heart permit my heartburn is
we have given NMFA a lot of
money to help small businesses.
A lot of money and they can't
get the money out right one of
the reasons they can't get the
money out is we've there's
there's their computer system is
a nightmare.
the rules we put on it are so
restricted to small business you
have to there so many small
businesses that have survived
COVID they had and they did
without firing anybody the
checkout people allows me to get
you to the ideology took at so
much that they could do and I
did without hiring anybody but
in order to get the NMFA loans
even the grant you have to hire
somebody so you don't have
companies that have reported.
We're staying open in spite of
everything I'm I'm I'm I'm
vendor for you know several
companies small businesses
around round round save
Albuquerque I can't tell you how
many of them come to me and said
you know we we we we survived
somehow or another we should we
survive this but we can't get
help and so.
This heartburn with that with
NMFA I have is hard for a moment
with the way we don't get the
money out with their all this
into it and so I'm really
struggling with supporting this
bill for that very reason.
Madam chair and and
Representative Fajardo let me
try to answer some of that and
then if Mr Taurus wants to add
on one of the big differences is
you know so if you look at the
small business funding and if
you'll recall it was sort of
broken into two different pots
of money there is there is money
that NMFA pushed out and then
there is a hundred million
dollars that was put through sun
mountain capital I believe and
that was a bit of a different
program and so.
What for me the big distinction
about this effort is that it's
working with the venture private
equity companies you know so so
the state can put funds into a
private venture equity fund here
that has that expertise and that
can get the money out to the
people that.
Are really in the best position
to use that and I think that's
what we saw with some of the
leader funds in the small
business money when it was done
in those two different ways the
other thing.
I think actually sorry that
would be my main point Mr
Torah's would do you have
anything you want to elaborate
on that.
Sure you madam vice chair and
Representative Fajardo I'll just
point out that the program that
you're talking about we're
pandemic really programs and
those did come with quite a few
restrictions on them that we
revenue losses might have been
one of them as well so this
program doesn't have those kinds
of restrictions so it could go
to businesses like you describe.
Thank you for that and actually
Representative Dixon I'm
actually glad that you your
reference Lida
because my heart burn with with
this bill it's it's basically
you know the government giving
capital and I don't like that
but when you mention late at
that's basically what we're
doing.
It's government giving capital
and there is a system and so
actually appreciate that that
actually helps me a lot and
in understanding better what
we're doing I'm.
And thank you very much for that
thank you are
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
if if I could just.
Continue on that
this you know this funded bills
a really different void that
exists in the state and you know
what the previous bill that was
introduced and just discussed
you know that's talking about
private funds and investments
and we know New Mexico is a
small state and we just don't
have the same opportunities and
players and so this is an
opportunity to inject some of
these one time funds into our
small businesses and our economy
and it is a separate program
with distinct objectives from
Lida and some of the other
things so I'm it's designed to
fill a specific call thank you.
Thank you and you actually maybe
one more questions you don't
have some more questions.
The question I'm Representative
huh just all my papers anything
in front of me right now.
And so do we have any reporting
requirements do they report to
to one of our committees
and then also met with the
leader that we have callbacks do
we have anything like that in in
the bill.
Mr Thorez would you like to
answer that.
You madam vice chair
representative part of there is
reporting to actually to interim
committees for finance and
revenue stabilisation committees
and those are annual reporting
based on jobs and and other
impact indicators and as to the
second question the contact is
of course is an equity
investment so I could grant they
could pool their investment
back.
For for plenty of reasons.
Okay thank you so much for your
time I appreciate it.
Any further questions from the
committee.
I'm gonna throw in a couple
while you all think it's more.
Sh wondering we have in
existence in the state
investment council we have a New
Mexico private equity investment
program and how does this fit
with that would they be
competing
what message does this bill that
that doesn't.
Thank you madam chair I'll give
a brief answer and then asked if
Mr Taurus wants to supplement
I'm the state investment council
has a much different perspective
which is really a return on
investment and
increasing the fund value where
is this is to help economic
development and so it has
different criteria that it's
going to be looking act.
And madam vice chair
representative Dixon a great job
of covering that I'll just add
that this bill was the result of
a months worth of work at the
LFC during the interim and we're
hearing from the economic
development community that often
times for small businesses or
businesses that are attending
rapid growth that kind of
opportunity through the S. I. C.
isn't quite available to them as
the return on investment
Representative Dixon mentioned
might not be as attractive as as
other more well established
businesses.
Thank you.
My other question then would be
about I have.
NMFA is tasked in this bill with
running quite a lot and I am
checking the attendee list and I
don't know if I see anyone from
an MFA
but I wonder if we could get
some input from them about their
capacity to take on this job
and whether they have sufficient
support funding to do the work.
Thank is on on that their hands
to raise excellence Amy if you
would move them into panelists.
Thank you and madam chair I
think one of the things that we
can say is that it'll it'll be
great to hear from NMFA but also
there is a provision in this
fund that allows NMFA to use
funds to do these operations and
to hire necessary staff.
Thank you.
I actually raise my hand I'm not
in the and then seven.
And if the NMAA sorry about
that.
No.
I'm just a small business owner
sorry about that that's all
right.
I believe.
She to Russell Madam chair
Marquita Russel is here thank
you Marquita.
And I was busy joining as a
panelists like I think I'd like
to ask what it is you'd like me
to address I'd like you to
address
Your.
Capacity to take on this work
for two reasons one it's
additional work and and.
Wisely the bill allows funds to
be used for you to find
I'm and frontier staff for the
work but can you find the staff
can you do this in a timely
manner is one question and my
second question is this is a
little outside the previous
bailiwick of NMFA's I had a
proposed
training.
The NMFA board to should be
prepared for this kind of work.
Madam chair those are excellent
questions let me start first
with the staffing capacity I
think one of the things that we
talked about earlier was NMFA's
role in
of administering the recovery
funds those rules are wrapping
up the small business recovery
loan fund currently the last
application date is may thirty
first there is a bill to extend
that but it would only extend by
about six months
to December thirty first so the
staff that we currently have
that are overseeing that are
starting to wrap up their work
there there's gonna be some
continual work but we do have
some additional capacity that
will be freed up just from those
programs running of kind of are
coming to its natural end the
other is the leader recovery
grant and that again so we have
right now I full time if you
know the folks working on those
two programs in addition to some
temporary staff they'll become
free.
The other is that we have really
organized the NMFA over the last
two years so we used to have
these programs silos were
basically all the operations of
any program ran through a
specific group we re organized
about two years ago and broke up
a number of functions number of
the departments into functions
so that we could have the
ability to ramp up quickly for
certain areas or to expand
capacity greatly for things like
this so I have for instance a
lending group and they deal with
all public and private loan
requests and I have a separate
credit group that deals with
particularly enterprise risk of
and monitoring those kinds of
credits the woman that I've
hired a serendipitously to head
up our credit group is actually
has a background in impact
investing so her her prior work
was in actually the the work
that we're discussing now and
again I say serendipitously
because I found out about this
initiative about four days
before the LFC endorsed the bill
so we we did not have a hand in
the policy conversation or
anything else but you know we do
have your existing staff that
have significant knowledge of
the industry and what it would
take to ramp up operations on
the compliance side I have a
legal counsel and compliance
officer who is a spent years at
the S. I see is it's W. as its
our general counsel so we do
have some existing staff that we
understand the the the framework
in which we're working and
that'll help us implement a
program should this be something
that the legislature decides and
I'm they want to MFA to handle
you know we could ramp up
operations relatively quickly
and smartly right the second I
would say is that NMFA sees
itself as someone that provides
gap capital.
And this is yet another instance
in which you have existing
systems that aren't fully
serving all the intended targets
and so this would be a
broadening of the program doing
something differently than
existing of facilities offer so
we do that with direct lending
and economic development or
lending through banks with
economic development we see this
is sort of a you know a bigger
stretch then we would have
anticipated but certainly
something that still fits within
the framework of providing gap
capital we're we're is there
equity where is there of in the
funding staff are there some of.
Lapses in and here's an existing
system so we have statewide
outreach we do have you know
Well established financial
systems which this would take
you know you need to have
really well established systems
to be able to monitor risk and
that is something that we've
developed over the last two
years so I you know I can't
answer specifically how we would
staff up I think that would be
largely dependent on the kind of
a program that is ultimately
implemented whether it's you
know direct whether it goes
through manager or to
combination there in but
certainly NMFA has slow because
we sit outside of the personnel
system the upside is that we
have a we have a little more
flexibility in the way in which
we higher you know the downside
is obviously we don't
participate in para so that will
be we we are able to sometimes
get folks from the private
sector a little easier as a
result so I hope that answers
your question it's certainly.
Be happy to answer any others.
Thank you again thank you for
stepping and thank you sponsor
for answering these questions I
eight
I'm gonna
call on Representative Dow she's
raise your hand and you have
some questions as well.
My turn.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair for sheet
that
So I have a couple of questions
and and I get madam chair and
representative could you tell me
what sector what sectors are
eligible for this.
Madam chair that Mr Thorez would
you be able to answer that.
By Representative Dow there are
no limitations on particular
industry sectors.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and is it tied to a twenty year
economic development plan.
Chair Representative Dow.
It.
You include those that are are
stated in the economic
development.
That so with that include I'm
sorry Madam chair representative
of mistrust with that include
I'm tourism region related
projects.
By Representative out yes.
Okay.
And then what about technologies
related to oil and gas.
Madam vice chair representative
down.
I guess you might depend I know
that the economic development
statewide plan is pretty broad
in scope and if they could fall
under any of the I believe.
One thing twenty categories than
yes.
Okay.
So so what Madam chair
representative Mr Taurus what
what pods you have we talk about
technologies or oil and gas.
Madam chair representative out
Bramley positive that I I'd hate
to speak without knowing the
specifics okay all right thank
you I'm and and what thank you
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Dow.
And what is the will of the
committee.
That.
You madam chair.
We do pass on house bill one
zero four.
Second that motion.
We have a second from
Representative and it's.
Amy would you call the roll.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative thanks yes.
All Representative Hernandez
yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Or.
Always.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Madam chair Figueroa.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Of eight two zero we have a due
pass.
Thank you unanimous vote if they
do pass on house bill one zero
four congratulations thank you
madam chair thank you committee
members.
Thank you and take a moment
everyone switch your
documentation to house bill one
zero two.
And will look for Representative
matic and the non.
I'm here madam chair.
Thank you and thank you for your
patience would you like to tell
us about house bill one hundred
to yes madam chair and if
appropriate and like to have my
experts John Chavis pulled in
and Jim o'neill maybe on as
wealthy figured out some
internet issues and stuff thank
you this afternoon I am grateful
for the opportunity to present
house bill one oh two this is a
pass through entity tax I'm
proud to introduce this bill in
collaboration with the New
Mexico chamber of commerce
because this proposal will allow
businesses that function as pass
through entities including
partnerships LLCs and S.
corporations the option of
either paying their business
entity tax on the income it
earns or having the individual
partners are owners pay on their
share of the business income as
they currently do today for
those business entities that
elects to pay the tax it will
remove that amount of tax paid
from the inclusion and the
individual partner or the owners
taxpayers SALT deductions the
federal state and local tax
amount currently because of
federal changes that amount is
capped at ten thousand dollars
for most tax filers and then it
would also provide a tax
deduction amount on the
businesses federal taxes what's
really important is I'm bringing
you a unicorn this is an
economic development bill a tax
bill that will have no impact on
New Mexico's revenue stream
I believe this legislation is
needed because federal tax
changes went into effect in
December of twenty seventeen
that like I named limited the
itemized deduction for SALT
taxes to ten thousand for a
married person filing a separate
return and excuse me five
thousand for a married person
filing a separate return and ten
thousand for all other tax
filers so what I really see here
is that again our hope is that
without impacting net new.
Mexico revenue streams we are
creating additional economic
development opportunities so
that folks when their tax
liability changes at the federal
level have more room to re
invest those dollars back into
our New Mexico businesses SO I'm
joined today madam chair by John
Thomas he's the VP treasurer and
CFO for Sandia peak tram and ski
company and I'd like to turn to
him for a quick comment before
we move on.
Mr Johnis.
Yes
I appreciate the opportunity to
speak today and the
representative can get could any
and did a very good job of
explaining that act this this
issue my hats off to her
and taxes and her.
her forte but that would have in
our tax department at any time.
She's doing very well for us I
do want to take this opportunity
to say that this is much needed
legislation for the reason that
it keeps New Mexico competitive
as it seems to be the case too
often New Mexico is behind the
power curve on this up we are
one of only eleven states that
are not taking advantage of this
really a gift by the IRS to
allow us to have it the
deduction at the federal level
and not in reduce our state
revenues
states are jumping on the on the
bandwagon on this and
and as such a to keep our
businesses competitive this
would would be beneficial to
everybody I'd like to mention
though that it's not only
beneficial some subset and this
legislation that it's beneficial
to only hi incomers in New
Mexico this is particularly not
true.
And the reason that being is
because of the exemption on the
individual income tax returns
exemptions on individual income
tax return is twenty five
thousand dollars what that means
is that most meet New Mexicans
and most people in the United
States really do not itemize
their deductions which means
they do not take advantage of
the state tax deduction.
That's particularly true in as I
said in New Mexico and because
of that they don't get
advantages for their businesses
are small businesses that
operate as partnerships or S.
corporations in the New Mexico
tax deduction because they're
using the exemption this.
What will also help those people
at the lower income levels
because they will be able to
take advantage of the deduction
at the entity level so with that
though I think again
Representative could and did a
very good job of explaining this
and I would be available for
questions shouldn't be asked.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative get in and did
you want to add anything further
no I don't we're ready for the
rest of the process thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative we will
go to public testimony in the
attendee list if you are here to
speak in opposition to house
bill one zero two.
Please raise your hand.
And if you're here to speak in
support of house bill one zero
two please raise your hand.
And it's.
Amy I'm going to have you
announce each person as you
bring them in thank you.
The.
We had one
Thank you Mr.
that if the feds or or the
federal tax situation where
again to change that this would
potentially compromise or need
needed need to be fixed on the
state level because we've made
that voluntary and because again
there would still be the
election by the filer about how
they wanted to make those
financial decisions for
themselves but it there wouldn't
be and and negative consequences
of having that remain on the
books but if Mister o'neill
might like to add I can't find
my email quickly enough to.
In my and again yes Mr.
Thank you madam chair
the.
Representative Dennison was
directed this is a voluntary
thing so if it becomes this is
Janet this advantageous to the
entity or its partners thank you
to stop doing.
so that's one fail safe zoning
system the other thing to keep
in mind is there are proposals
in Congress to extend the
limitation although increasing
it to higher amounts but to
extend the limitation to I think
twenty thirty or something so.
Until it settles down in
Congress we don't really need to
do anything.
All rights thank you very much
those are all my questions what
is the will of the committee.
Madam chair would do pass.
Thank you Representative the.
We have a due pass on house bill
one zero two from Representative
Martinez and the second from I
believe it was Representative
Hernandez.
Yes ma'am.
All right if you would call the
roll.
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative angles yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative James Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank.
Representative Dow.
Yes please.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Yes thank Representative sorry.
Madam chair for they are a.
Yes.
Madam chair we have the I was
table okay sorry chairman I did
not realize your back.
Yes.
Chairman vice chair we have a.
Cast your vote.
Unanimous do pass on house bill
one zero two congratulations and
thank you committee for some
great work this afternoon we did
some good bills and some good
work for New Mexico.
I'm chairman I make one quick
comment absolutely one to name I
was able to touch base with
Terrazas before we got to this
meeting and I know he's
currently presenting another
committee but he said this bill
is the best thing since sliced
bread so I also want to publicly
acknowledging appreciate the
chair for his support thank you
so much what's this this unit
Carmen is best built and sliced
bread madam chair can you put
that in the committee report
please as well yes Sir and we'll
make sure it's quoted in some
paper tomorrow.
All right.
Thank you representative Cadena
and thank you again committee
for some great work we will meet
again Monday at one thirty.
