Representatives back to
appropriations
but before we do that we will
take the role.
Representative and you know
present
representative dunkin here
representative of hernandez
representative lending here
representative little here
representative lunchtrum
representative martinez your
representative basin here
representative matthews
madam vice chair here madam
chair and i'm sure you have a
court thank you I also wanted to
announce that house bill seventy
one will be rolled until
wednesday
already with that representative
such as this
presentation thank you matter
committee I just want to
introduce my expert here it's
size are remarried he's the
sanity concessor i'm introducing
hospital more forty four.
Pretty much over this the goal
is
for this is for a residential
non residential propriety should
be treated with similar similar
fairness inequity madam chair if
you don't mind that i'd like to
have a mister talk a little bit
more about.
Yesterday good.
Work in the office for roughly
twenty three years and in
bellowing property according to
state statue we have to be at
current incorrect values
currently as it is we do receive
residential sells information
which allows us to do our job
fairly well right to be able to
mass a praise all parcels
throughout the state
and currently as it stands we do
not receive non residential
sales information which creates
on an equity between residential
and non reason to where you have
the residential properties
carrying a higher burning
because due to the fact that we
don't receive non residential
sales information which is one
of the major
approaches to to appraisal.
And this current memorial is
created so we can come to the
table with community members
commercial
and nondashresidential realtors
i'm owners to come to the table
to see if we can come to an
agreement so we could receive
the that sells information and
it would benefit the public and
would also benefit those members
who sell and lease property
because at this moment they have
fillings our thoughts then you
know they don't know what to
expect as far as increases in
taxes right or we're trying to
come up with a an agreement
through this memorial
to find middle gr.
Anything else representative
that's a matter of chairman i'll
stand for questions thank you is
there anybody here in
favor of this memorial.
Like to stand up and say who you
are in.
The county
support the
friends bringing both non
residential.
Everywhere more
valuation
thank you anybody else in favor
we have anybody on zoom
anybody in opposition of the
memorial.
Okay let's go to the committee
committee any that's.
Representative matthews.
The.
And chairman.
Actually just kind of
a
simple thing I guess maybe
i've been working with a group
of
property tax.
The constant increase in
property taxes because of
inflation.
We your I realize it's your
I realize that your
focus is on residential versus
non versus commercial property
if if I understand it correctly
is that right
crack representative matthews.
Well madam chair apologies madam
chair representative matthews
that is correct we are looking
at the discrepancies
discrepancies between
residential and non residential
currently there is legislation
that
that allows the assessor to
increase residential valuation
only three percent per year
there's not if the probably
doesn't have any type of changes
or changes in use
or changes in ownership at ma'am
chair
representative i'm just
wondering if
you're
proposal would be strong enough
to look at the impact on the
inflation or so on property
taxes or is that too far beyond.
What you're looking at so madame
chair representative matthews
there is a factor of inflation
within the market value which
you do take in effect in
receiving cells information that
information.
Well managed here yes there
there is I mean there's a
percentage of things go up and
so forth I understand that but
it
when the rates of inflation are
much higher than those three
percent or whatever it kind of
use the market place quite
crankly and the
and the people who are
paying the tax or likely to have
to pay the tax so i'm i'm just
asking that whether
you be interested in looking at
that in your
memorial or is it that's way
beyond which you're interested
in that's fine you can tell me
that madam chair representative
matthews that that is not within
the scope that we look within
this moment at this moment but
in the future we can take a look
at anything you like me to look
at okay manager thank you.
Thank you representative
representative dunkin
thank you manager thank you
representative for bringing this
for is new mac for this.
New mac
represent madam chair
representative dunkin mixer
social conference yes therefore
this okay I didn't see that
anywhere in the in the material
maybe I just overlooked it so
how often how often can the
assessor's revaluate properties
madam chair representative
dunkin
counties are either on a one
year schedule or two years
schedule sanity county is
currently in when you're
schedule were able to review
values every year as far as
their market value thank you
manager fixed that so an and as
you mentioned is a three year
old three percent as all you can
go up on that correct madam
chair represent dunkin that
would be for residential
property
there has been some talk then
maybe through this memorial week
we get we can discuss something
somewhere for non res okay thank
you madame chairman and and that
was to my point
you know what's been talked
about I know in the past
regardless of what happens you
guys just put it to the
treasure's affiliate and say in
order to those guys doing it
because they're the ones that
collect it so when anybody gets
yelled at displayment on them.
Madam chair
that's what I said well III
guess my perspective is always
we do take care of the we we do
we are responsible of the
valuation and yes when it's time
to pay the bill or those who
send the tax bills we do divert
direct
thanks for that thank you madame
chair
you know I I think I think
you're on the right track here
in and as an old real estate
agent
you know I I didn't sure my too
often
I believe that's my right as an
individual so I walk a very fine
line in in the in that but I
also understand
county governments and city
governments as well so I think
they're probably yes needs to
something to happen in this and
and so this is a good way of
going about it and and perhaps
getting something done thank you
madame sure that's all madam
chair represent dunkin we have
spoken to carnham and members
from carnoil and currently there
split.
And and being little some time
to time they don't know what
expect right from valuation of
non residential property it's
not very easy to receive non
residential information so when
we do we're going back to three
four years and it may be a
substantial increase of twenty
percent percent because they did
take us that amount of time to
receive that cells data or that
information thank you madame
chair on that and and
I can attest that because when
you have folks that have had
property in their families for
thirty years and then it sells
we were the benefactors of those
comments because you know they
thought that we get it in
reality its market market drove
it there and and also
consequently it was taxed there
as well so thank you matter
thank you representative
represent if I may get that if I
may would like to some clarity
on what carnon is madame chair
representative little
cardhome is the realtors group
for commercial real estate.
Apologize.
Representatives ratio
think about you think you
representative and with their
I said a quick question there
other states that do release
this information and i'm just
curious he had more information
on how that works or how that
impacts okay counties so madam
chair met him by share we are I
believe there's a handful of
other states that are similar to
us where we do not receive all
sales information I am quite
yellows when I had to I will
which was international
as assessing officers group and
their people for their from
colorado who say we get all
information and all data and it
makes our job much more
equitable and easier as an
appraisal right when you have
all the data available to you
and for a group for a state that
allows for all taxpayers to pay
their equals here.
Thank you manager thank you
expert representative i'm I
really appreciate that
perspective for what it's
unlikely it reminded me of a
conversation I had had with some
union professors at their
economic presentation day and
they were talking that a big
issue they face and they're
trying to run the numbers and
get the statistics that
understand how this policy are
that me effect is that we don't
have this exact
so thank you that's very helpful
to understand our role in there
did you would add yet madam
chair madam by share i'm going
to go ahead and
kind of talk somewhat like a
speak somewhat like a gentleman
that works in our office right
he's our mass appraiser so
essentially throughout sanity
county he's responsible of
valuing all parcels within
sanity county and will incentive
in it always been with this case
is that you know we're asked by
by legislators to be a current
incorrect think of that like we
have to have the right numbers
going out as far as valuation
for non residential however
we're going to pull back and say
hey we're gonna undercut you and
say you can have the date you
need to do it now go out there
go speak to the members who sell
property and try to get the
sales information from them
right at that point I need to be
able to go out to the public and
to hate my names I say I know
the information and no income
though then comproach I know how
to value complex properties
please share information with me
which is much do which is really
difficult for all counties
throughout the state of new
mexico.
A representative little
thank you madame chair afternoon
at representative and expert
I
was curious and looking at some
of this history behind it can
you tell me
I have a couple questions madam
chair
first is why are those not at
the non err d nine residential.
Properties not included
madam chair ribs in of little
currently due to state statute
non residential property owners
do not have to report their
sales data or sells information
to the assessors office thank
you and when was that rule
established.
Okay so i'm gonna go back in my
career
madam chair represented a little
I apologize I would have to say
it was when the three percent
limitation evaluation statue was
introduced by.
I believe it was.
A cash fifteen years ago when
when they did make this attute
for residential property only
increasing three percent per
year.
It think you think you madam
chair and so
and it would
i'm reading I just want the
reading this information and
the bill itself.
Will be the end result if this
bill is enacted am I correct in
what and hearing is that this
would bring all properties to be
considered
to be considered when the
valuation is taking place and
forgive me them using incorrect
terminology this is not my area
of expertise at all but is that
it is to establish
a could be by having all
contribute their data set
correct madam chair represent a
little it it is a memorial so
for some for most this is to
bring us together as a group to
discuss what is best for the
community in in hopes that we do
receive all day done all sales
information and hopes to make
all properties equitable in
property taxation.
Thank you madame chairman sorry
it was in the bill section it
just thought the tab that said
bill thank you very much those
were my questions thank you
anybody else on the treaty
was the pleasure of the
committee.
I.
Any opposition to the pass
thank you madame chair committee
or so I wanted to acknowledge my
assessor from very backing while
this
thank you manager thank you
thank you
we now have HB two ninety.
Madam chair we do have an
amendment we'd like to discuss
okay do it can we pass out the
the amendment for discussion
thank you.
For clarification this is the
point three so it should be a
two two seven nine eight six dot
three.
Point three thank you
and.
Thank you children i'm so with
this amendment does it just
clarifies in the bill that
number one are that one in the
lines with the statute best so
that's where we remove the word
facility because in the current
statute thank you and the
current statue that would almost
be self referentially a bit
confusing so we remove that but
what it also does is it
clarifies that it ensures that
the providers are not getting a
loan forgiveness which raised
them concerns about anti
donation but instead that they
are remaining in a contract with
the department and paying off
their loan through the services
that they provide so those are
the clarifications that the
amendment provides.
So face do we have any questions
on the amendment representative
long strong.
Thank you madame chair thanks
for representative so that's
exactly what I was going to ask
when I looked at the original
bill
so the way the loan is paid off
is through the services that
they're providing as a post to a
regular cash payment as yes
matter yes representative that's
correct so my question madame
cherry is is that an annual
amount of value or is it in
agriculture over a five year
period madam chair
representative i'm going to go
and hand that over to my expert
how they'd see this my expertise
america to russell she is the
executive direct second objector
of the new mexico finance
authority and she can explain
how that would be applied in
their work
thank you madame chair thank you
for the question typically in
the programs in which we offer
contract for services it's done
annually this bill those pretty
specific about what has to
happen there's quantifiable
metrics that have to be met over
five year period so I anticipate
minimal interest payments or
something over a five year
period and then at the end um as
they've met their contractor
services have that i'll be
applied to.
Madame chair III do have a
little concern about that that
there's not an annual required
report so to speak
you want to say anything manager
I think I must spoke so there
would be annual requirements
that they would meet that we'd
continue to monitor but we make
the app we'd apply their
contract for services at the end
of five years which is what
needs to happen pursuant to this
so there needs to be a five year
exercise of
the need to deliver these things
for five years so we would
monitor them throughout but
rather than make annual
apply annually.
Some madame chair when you're
looking at the contract and your
providing an annual report
what happens
if it looks like the
loney I guess is not going to
meet what's required at the end
of the day you're three year for
what happens.
Madam chair my expectation again
with we'd have to develop some
of this and rule but my
expectation is that there may be
a period of make up so that you
know at the end of five years if
they've missed a period for six
months that we might extend.
That there's a very specific
requirement here that for five
years they do a certain thing
and if there is a.
During that five year period
where they're not in compliance
with that I expectation would be
that they would.
So madam chair when we're
talking about a revolving loan
fund where's the cash come from
that goes back into the fund if
the value of services what's
being used to pay the original
loan.
Currently in our other contract
for services programs it's not a
hundred percent of that is not.
Only a portion of the c.
Here.
So there would not be really a
revolut.
The title is revolving loan at
least I saw it somewhere in the
bill or was a little revolving
loan fund which implies that
there's money coming back in to
the fund madam chair that is the
n.
Does it make sense now madam
chair that is for me when I
think of revolving loan it's
money going out money coming
back in so others can can apply
for those loans.
I just think it's something to
think about madam chair because
when you
think i'm pretty close to some
the revolving loan funds in the
state and
they're set these contracts are
generally set for so much in
payment annually goes in
that's countered on by the
lender because then there's
applications ready to use that
money but now we're not actually
using money as the payment we're
using services.
So I don't know how it revolves
as my question
thank you madame sure thank you
representative I mean that's a
fair consideration I think that
is who was maintaining that
name so that was just a part
that wasn't amended
the affect would not material
she materially change the with
it with the substance of the
amendment or of this dollars on
if that's something in this
something I know that we've
talked about as a committee that
that would literally be a one
word change on here
that would be something that I
would be open to for the purpose
of this discussion because that
is that is that the purpose of
how this changes the bill
doesn't change the context of us
and and madame chair wanted to
ask market it is this a
product one product under the
child care facility revolving
loan fund are there other
product.
Madam chair there is not another
product under this particular
program this would be the only
if you will program ah offered
but clients child care providers
could also qualify for funding
through our economic development
programs as well so there are
other programs that they want
while.
There is another option
available.
So chair with the loan document
also allow for cash payment as
opposed to these measurements
for increased participation by
with kids
madam sure I would anticipate
that they would that there would
that would also be a club.
Have a monetary repayment in the
event that they failed to
continually
not meet the term set out more
but
well what I was thinking madam
chair in the loan document if
the person asking for the loan
house the option of either just
a regular payment structure
because I assume they're low
interest versus trying to
demonstrate fifty percent
increase of additional services
when you can't provide service
you can't find service providers
I would be concerned about that.
If it were me and gallop or we
don't have any service providers
or not very many it'd be a lot
easier just to have a regular
look you know traditional loan
structure low interest loan and
instead of saying i'm going to
provide fifty percent more in
services or to fifty percent
more kids I would rather just
make the payment and if you have
that in the structure it becomes
revolving so that that's my
question manager representative
i'm I think that's a fair
question in because on
the section where we discuss the
service for claunt for contract
repayment is dependent on the
top of h three lines one through
seven
um should that not be met then
it would remain a monetary low
interest repayment structure
that already exists and that so
the rest of it is provided in
the bill except that earlier
madam chair market is said if
you didn't make it up you could
continue to try to meet this
goal so I guess i'm just trying
to get my arms around it is it
services provided that pays that
debt or
and if you don't make that then
you can pay it with cash or have
how do you see it market manager
again anticipate that this would
be hammered out in rules but I
would anticipate that if there
was a one time um temporary.
These conditions that there
would be a provision for.
As we do with our other
contract.
So if they.
I think it's very very good that
they took the information out
about facility because I don't
know what that means I don't
know how facility gets alone
so i'm happy to see that
that's all I had on the
amendment I don't have a couple
other questions on the bill
thank you.
No i'm really
okay.
I think venture I think i'll
hold off and ask about contract
services when we when we get to
the bill thank you
as far as the amendment what's
the pleasure of the committee.
Representative did you have.
Thank you madame chair think you
represent it we appreciate you
bring out that the the new ones
is there because the remains a
revolving aspect that can remain
we're going to keep the word
revolving in there for that
purpose now I appreciate the
clarification
okay so
any opposition to the amount
okay.
So.
Limit is adopted thank you madam
chair think representatives so I
know we dug a little bit into
the bill for that but just to
help clarify this a little bit
so this is market russell she is
the executive director of the
animal faith in mexico finance
authority that runs a number of
pride projects and then we also
have with us today
barbara lunati drove water owner
of a gold star academy and so
runs one of the facilities that
could possibly utilize this fund
and so what this is is it
reimbursed the child care
evolving fund fund that exists
and it replenishes the fun with
about one point seven million
dollars to begin with them to
move forward it clarifies how
those loans be made in light of
how a lot of our changes have
happened in the child care
industry but most importantly
again it it does go into that
bottom of page two in the topic
page three arm and while the
loans are low interest this
would allow folks for it to
enter first services for
contract repayment process and
should a
told her provider demonstrate
that fifty percent of their
students are their kids are
receiving some sort of child
care assistance or i'm twenty
five and that they've increased
their enrollment by twenty five
percent and other new ones is in
there then they would be able to
instead of repaying through
monetary fund be able to repay
through services provided so
that that's the crux of this
bill just to be clear again this
was a this was a fun that we're
just talking as I can go it was
established back in two thousand
three with a nominal amount and
that had run out a long time ago
and back in twenty twenty one we
are discussing actually just
closing out this program
altogether because it wasn't
really serving how good with the
deep investments that we've made
as a state into child care what
we're also seeing is that we
don't have the facilities
available for individuals to
build larger programs and we
know a number of our large
employers are chambers i'm a lot
of our programs in it and
general are looking to expand
their child care offerings but
they don't have the capital to
invest in the infrastructure
that you need to build the
safety piece of that you have to
add to the facilities even just
finding location.
And so this is one piece of that
solution we talk about that and
housing a lot but this is one
piece that will allow them to
build out their program develop
the the talent the the town will
they need for teachers and to
become providers in that sense
and so again with
my my consideration I think
fifty percent of their folks
need to be on some search hold
care assistance
and also twenty five percent
increase that's a significant
ship so that's the bill as it
stands that's why it means it
would be helpful to the child
current infrastructure you know
to be clear also one thing I do
I mentioned is that I look at
this as a sanity representative
and is a mall in santa fe we
have room for child care in for
seven percent of kids and santa
fe that's it we do have a number
of at home and small facilities
that are kind of off the rate
are a little bit or just in the
moment dad groups that we have
appear but this would allow them
to really go to flush out what
they're able to do and and in
transform their programs i'm
happy to end up want to see my
experts would like to add
additional context
with that we send her questions
thank you so on the amended bill
do we have any
one here in favorite bill.
Representative.
Thanks.
Kind of a quiet day on the zoom
isn't it yeah
so
at one point mode my life I was
a deputy and one of my jobs was
to
provide advise to the attorney
general about the answer
donation clause and when I see a
bill that talks about loan for
given us
it just smarts memories of my
younger dates and I can you all
talk a little bit about why
or if this would be a violation
why not or if it would be and
least in certain circumstances
of highlight.
Think you madam chair think you
represented for the question i'm
just gonna grab my mandately
quickly to look at it on so that
is why the amendment was
important to this because it
would not be raised a flag for
you I think for a lot of other
folks as well and it just really
clarifies the intent that it's
not forgiven but that they are
entering into a contract for
service after that point and
this is not a unique mechanism
in other mexico finance
authority so i'm gonna hand it
over to my expert to kind of
give some more i'm colored to
other programs that have a
similar a provision as well
thank you madame chair
representative so two of our
programs the behavior health
capital fund in the primary care
capital fund both have a
contract for service provision
i'm in those laws and this is
very similar to what some of the
capital outlet to nonprofits the
way in which those get satisfied
as well so there are
quantifiable metrics that are
provided for both in the light.
Contract and if they meet those
quanifiable services than they
are able to satisfy a portion of
their debt with those services
so again we've been doing this
with the primary care funds and
sits inception back in nineteen
ninety five.
So those are both ways in which.
Thank you
thank you
madame chair for that answer
the
contractors with a long made to
a provider facility or employer
and i'm assuming by employer you
mean an employer who provides
child care on side of nearby the
workplace with it might
understand it correctly
think you madam sure think
representative yes and my
nursing up yes actually you got
Presentative market
who would own
the improved facilities that are
constructed with this money
madam chair the the
borrower they're borrowing the
money they would own the
facilities and we would have a
lean against those facilities
through that fund until the
dedicidence fight in chair
presenters
there is I I reading the method
here for
compliance and I have some
questions about those but before
I get to those
is there any requirement that
the
that the provider the facility
or the employer in fact
continue to be a child care
facility for any particular
period of time and we went with
Shut the door in the next year
said a problem is that
with the still
do they do they have any
obligation to maintain this for
any length of time
madam chair again not as the
statute currently provides but
my anticipation is that that
would be provided for in the
rule and that that would be a
part of it I don't necessarily
believe that all the.
By the.
Maybe there'd be a limit.
That's what we see.
Isn't a specific
requirement here but we would
anticipate that there would be
someth.
Madam chair and members of the
committee representative
matthews thank you for the
question in the bill it is there
is not funding available for a
complete build top to bottom
brand new building this does
limit it to health and safety
requirements and expansion so it
is assuming that somebody has
skin in the game that they could
have already purchased the
building and then then they need
money for alone for all of the
renovations and all of the
specialty items it's kind of
going off of the ten million
dollars that secretary against
you from ccd utilized during
with some of her covered money
to help expand challenger
centers and so we're following
that same model and so it would
not be for a brand new build so
there is skin in the game so if
I did want to utilize this it
would be for portions of let's
say I needed money with the h
back or the sprinkler system
though specialty items that are
expensive that I may not have
their things that if I do have a
building I have room for
expansion but the far marshall
comes in because it is child
care because of those strict
regulations it's to help with
those funding so it's it's I
think it's kind of put your mind
it is is I don't think there's
going to be five million dollars
for somebody to go take it put a
brand new building and then
after five years there is no
funding for that in this bill
it's strictly for those health
and safety requirements and to
threaten thank you madam chair
thank you represent him to
further that point the specs
that are necessary for improving
how child care facility are very
specific to that industry and
specific to that population that
it's being served as I mention
this fund has been around since
two thousand three and even
though the loans that were
secured in the past at low
interest rates at none of them
really fell out of line
with the the terms and another
member I switched into an
entirely new field or or
something like that they they
were consistent with alone and
remained there for that duration
is.
Mountain presenters I I don't
really see any specific language
in here that sort of
**** is limits on that you're
describing and i'm curious about
what if the employer
he had a sweep officers in a
public office building kind of
facility and decides they want
to change
the process or change the
facility and offer some child
care facilities
it again I i'm
i'm just a a little concerned
about what is going to be sure
that that
is going to blast for a
substantial period of time to
justify the investment of public
money in it and is there
is there a language in here that
i'm missing which is certainly
possible but is there a language
i'm missing or something that
sort of says
or that even contemplates that
there will be some
ongoing use of his facility as
the child care center.
Think you madam sure thank you
representative for the question
again that the structure of what
people are expect to do in order
to enter into a a service for
contract agreement means that
they have a number of students
that are already involved in in
the program and that of the
increased significantly in that
twenty five percent increase she
was a significant increase of
the number of students that are
there in addition that you know
to turn an office space into a
place where you can have
children be provided for a child
care setting on is not of a
flipping decision it's not an
easy transformation of a space
so because that already exists
in what is required of childcare
facilities for them to turn on
the lights and be a called car
facility and then turned off the
lights in no longer to do it is
going to take more than that i'm
happy to turn it over to the
secretary for additional context
matter would also say that part
of our underwriting for this
will look into their ability to
operate this programs into the
long run
child care it is only worth the
investment as you mention of
that if the facilities continue
to stay open and continue to
provide for children into the
future beyond the five year
period that's mentioned in the
loss of that will be part of our
underwriting is to ensure that
what they've got is the
sustainable operation that they
have the staffing to follow
through that they've got rights
on a long term basis to the
facility that they want
improvement to that's all going
to be part of our underwriting
we will be looking at those
elements
madame chair
so the five years.
Should be given parents there
within five years of
disbursement of along the the
provider desert one two three on
page
okay and so.
Within five years they do that
do they have to be doing that
for the entire five years
because it doesn't say that
as I really.
I apologize for madame chair
representative i'm page two
line.
I believe the answer is yes to
your question that would that
they have to
do yes yes it would be five.
And then looking over on page
three talking about the
recipients of child care
assistance programs
are governor recently I believe
last year may be.
Our governor expanded the child
care assistance program
dramatically if i'm remembering
correctly because I think it was
last year the year before
thank you better think you
represent that was after the
severance fund adjustment was
made and we created that the fun
from the the the new funds that
were coming so yes I believe
it's a the fund is that
the distribute the distribution
is about one hundred fifty
million a year if I remember.
I didn't understand what you
said but that's okay madame
chair
so my question my memory is that
this was a very expensive
expansion of the joker existence
program and the individuals with
incomes of well over a hundred
thousand dollars would be
eligible for the child care
systems in my remembering more
or less correctly thinking madam
chair think representative and
so the the way the assistance
works as it is a graduated
scheduled scale and so it
decreases over over the amount
that you earn for individuals
earning up to a hundred and
twenty thousand dollars I
believe in a joint household of
for a family of four thank you
very much it's armed for family
four folks and earning a
combined income of a hundred
twenty thousand dollars on they
would be able to receive some
but not that cap and yes
madam chair if I could that gets
to how the families are able to
afford child care that doesn't
get to the number of chuck your
providers able to accept
children and that's what this
bill particularly gets to is to
increase the amount of slots
available for some of those
families that's what we lack is
the actual provider base to meet
the family needs
man chair i'm i'm aware that we
have huge weighting list on
child care and that those
exploded once the governor made
it much more affordable for many
many people including those in a
hundred and twenty five hundred
and twenty thousand dollars
and and I appreciate that we
don't have enough facilities and
I
would like this certainly to
have more facilities for child
care but
i'm as I look at this i'm
i'm wondering if
that this is not a program I am
just at low income people by any
means my right to child the
child care assistance program
may then come one hundred twenty
thousand dollars pretty good.
For family for in this in this.
Thank you madame sure think you
representative so
this program is for the
providers to expand the child
care assistance program is
intended to increase the number
of children that are attending
child care and it is on a
graduated and that separate
program from this is on a pro
and a graduated skill so that
those with less means are able
to afford a child card a greater
rate.
Presenters I just i'm not seeing
that those wind you're drawing
in the draft of the bill i've
just seeing that we're going to
grow the facilities and you
could have
at least fifty percent of the
children in the program
with coming from families of a
hundred and twenty with an
income of a hundred and twenty
thousand dollars more and I
bother me a little bit.
Manager business that madam
chair
I guess it's just a statement
but but tell me if I am reading
that incorrectly because it's
sure looks like it would allow
that that's my question
thank you madam chair think you
representative I mean again the
the childcare assistance program
the is available for families
before with up two hundred
twenty thousand dollars that
they earn and this is
consideration of that that all
those families are are about at
least fifty percent
I think i'll stop there
and
pass it on to someone else thank
you for your questions and
your answers i'm sorry you're
answers enough
I ask the questions
whatever reports here thank you
thank you representative dunkin
but before we go on will
everybody please put your phones
on silence thank you
representative dunkin thank you
manager.
Representative can you tell us
what the interest rates would be
on these loans
what you anticipate.
Madam chair on our existing
program again we haven't had
money in this program for many
many many years it's three.
And that's the same interest
rate that we charge currently on
her behavior health capital fund
in our primary care capital
fund.
So i'm gonna ask you one of the
questions that i'm in a you're
down to the meter but i'd i'd
like to know because I I haven't
got the answer yet on page three
under section three are under
section two paragraph three
line eight satisfies other
qualifications can you tell me
what other qualifications could
mean.
Madam chair currently we look at
the again therefore behave our
health and primary care so
they're a little different but
there are instances in which
we're looking at the level of
care there they're providing the
number of in those instances the
number of
uh.
Contacts their making with new
clients as opposed to follow up
clients of their there are
different things involved there
so I wouldn't have specific
answer other than to say
maintaining certainly quality
care would be a big point that I
think that would be in
anticipated to be included in
there
and i.
I think there are other examples
I don't know but we don't have
them outlined here and in law
thinking madam chair thank you
representative also an all hence
my their expert in a second but
in terms of the
you
in terms of the department and
and what their expectations are
again being in line with a lot
of their uhm uh qualifications
on and I think that's a big
element of this as well I mean
this year there's more bills
that are ensuring that our fi
backgrounds are up to date for
our childcare facility so I mean
I imagine and anticipate that
some of those will be more
clearly outlined by the
department and by animal faith I
don't know if you wanted to add.
Thank you madame chairman
representative dunkin and I
think we left the language this
way with the intention that the
department could have the
ability to look at you know
mexico is unique so what we
might have available in santa fe
isn't the same as carl's bad or
joe new mexico so we wanted to
leave it a bit up to the
secretary and through an m f a
at coming up with scenarios of
high quality and it and
nationally a credited centers
because when you get to national
accreditation you lose child to
teach her racial spots so that
could impact the twenty five
percent capacity for an example
a basic license under could have
a ratio of six information to
one trial but a nationally a
credit it is for invents to one
teacher so it it's going to
lower that so I think we're
leaving accreditation and high
quality as a standard that could
be seen as meeting a requirement
thank you madame chairman
high quality is in every city in
the in the nation and that's
what parents want for their
children so
other qualifications doesn't
give me a warm and fuzzy but
high quality does give me a warm
and fuzzy creditations do give
me a warm and fuzzy that's clear
other qualifications is as murky
to me as it gets so let me go on
i'm gonna give you a scenario
and you tell me if i'm reading
this right or if i'm so far off
in the weeks I just I just don't
understand childcare so i've got
a facility I want and I right
now I have five kids I want to
increase that so many add on
when I come borrow some money
from you know i'm going to
borrow hundred thousand dollars
and add on so I can get fire.
Those five kids in order for
this loan to be forgiven
fifty percent of those
the kids that I provide for now
have to be in and
child care assistance program of
some sort correct.
So far better my ten have got to
be in the program let's just say
that madame's representative yes
okay thank you manager
medicare rips in it so of those
five
is the state writing a cheque or
his family write me a check for
those five or is that money
going straight to your
department the animal fa to pay
this loan back.
Madam chair it's not coming to
the finance authority it's going
to the provider.
Representative
yes so for the contract the
childcare facility would receive
those funds to operate to keep
the program going to hopefully
get to national accreditation
and hopefully if we meet the
aspect within five years then
that those monies that we
received helped to compensate
for the loan for given if not
then we would take those moneys
that were obviously made
available to us for travel care
assistance and then we repay the
long if we didn't meet the r.
Think madam chair thank you so
i've got ten kids now I am
getting paid for all ten kids
and I borrowed the money and and
five years if I have kept those
by kids in that program that
loan will be forgiven
madam chair so there will be
annual requirements for you to
meet conditions of from under a
contract for services you would
be satisfying a portion of that
the all or a portion of that
loan with those contract for
services and so you're not it's
not forgiven as much as it is
being repaid through these
services that you're providing
madame chair thank you but
okay less good letter along the
same lines this year say I go
over here and I don't know about
this program I don't I go into
citizens bank and I borrow a
hundred thousand from citizens
bank and I go ahead and open up
that I get ten kids i'm paying
my loan off at citizens bank
just like clockwork
my fail here's that we're
picking winners and losers again
and were deciding who the
winners are going to be because
i'm going to allow with this one
point seven five i'm going to
see at the end of five years i'm
i'm contracting for the same
kids i'm getting paid for those
kids and yet I mean one person's
gonna have their long forgiven
and the other person is not
going to have their own forgive
and they're getting the same
amount of money for the child
care that they're providing and
the same levels of child care
that providing so tell me what
the difference is thank you
manager think you representative
I mean again this is an
incentive program to encourage
folks that may not be able to
get a loan from a citizens bank
for example to be able to expand
because what we're facing right
now is a serious lack of capital
for these these these these
providers to exist on the issue
with having a service based
company like a child care
facility is that you don't have
a total capital up front to even
start these programs are really
to expand them either you were
depending on it individuals
being paid paying you back for
the services that you provide
and so so for that reason.
You don't have that team on a
cap even even though the assets
that you going to to to a bank
to do it there just isn't enough
around right now so this is we
are trying to incentivise an
industry to grow in new mexico
and that's why this we would
want to do within this manner
thank madame chairman
representative if I have a
contract with the state I can
walk into my bank and see this
as a contract to have this is a
number of kids I have can I get
this amount of money so I can
borrow an in raise what i'm able
to provide to ten is that
possible think you benefit think
you're represented a hands of my
expert to give an example of how
that that works yeah thank you
madam chair and thank you
representative dunkin to give
you an example I just built
another facility I could not get
a bank on I was denied i've been
in business for twenty four
years I have three centers the
bank would not lone to me
because childcare is an industry
that is so up and down I can
tell you that I have ten
enrollments the bank told me you
can't guarantee they'll be there
tomorrow barbara I don't know
what's going to happen covered
can hit and you could lose all
of your all of your kids I
couldn't get alone my husband I
had to take out his four or one
k we barred against our life
insurance policies
that that's why this lone is
this this funding is so vital
for programs to expand because
private businesses do not have
the capacity to go to banks
banks do not loan to chalk her
centers
picked medicare I can tell you
banks don't loan to a lot of
folks when I started on my
family and I started a propane
company well spargo we walked in
they laughed at us three years
later they came back and asked
us if we'd like their business
which you said no we don't i'm
glad you have skin in the game
on your business.
I just don't understand where
we're headed with this.
If my calling here comes back
next year with the bill and and
he owns a western a clothing
store and he has a contract with
the
the state provide
stilton boots.
One of the whatever they call
the pancel online on fire.
Anything like that
I might get a vote on his as
well and that's my concern here
thank you madame chair thinking
representative I you know again
when we're looking at
basic capitalism their senses to
that we're trying to do is
incentivise behavior and we do
know in just to talk about the
behavior we're getting out of
day cares children go better
prepared they have the better
they're more ready for regular
school when they've been in
daycare on the their more
socialized to those there's
behaviors that they were
expected to the more familiar
with the of that i'm sure my
experts can give you more
information about how this
improves our long term workforce
by ensuring children are
socialized in earlier age and
how that not to mention it
increases the number of people
that can come into the work
force what we are asking with
through this is that we are
incentivising the growth of
those facilities because we see
that as an asset to driving more
individuals to our state to be
part of our workforce so that
that is why we would do that for
childcare facilities which are
an often times considered a soft
infrastructure in peace right
they can go anywhere they are
built into the ground but
they're not necessary part of
infrastructure to help our work
for scroll
thanks madame chair so is that a
no one western holding starter
and I love that name though.
Thank you madam characters
that's all the questions I have
right now thank you thank you
representative representative
line.
Thank you chair I had a couple
of other questions i'd like to
ask i'm looking at the bill on
page two on a line twenty where
says the department shall
provide in a contract that alone
made to a provider so when we're
talking about the department is
the fay madam chair marketer who
is it madam sure that's the
early education childhood and
care department okay so they
would they would actually
provide in a contract that alone
be made to a provider madam sure
that's the section that does get
amended and so what what we were
what the finance authority had
concerned about was that ececd
was going to have the authority
to forgive alone that the
finance authority makes what the
count what the amendment does
provide that the three am
entities the borrower the
department and animate they
would enter into a contract for
services to help satisfy the
requirements under the loan okay
so amount of madam chair market
and sponsor how are public
providers dealt with here and
what I mean is a child care
services madame chair are
provided in some public schools
and i've always you know argued
the fact that I think those
groups are heavily sub.
I mean when you're in a building
this provided by a school
district or I don't know a
county or whatever so my
question is is our public
providers given the same option
manager of this current law the
providers are for profited not
for profit chuck your providers
where does it say that madam
chair.
That's.
I'm mad i'm sure that might be
actually in our rules I
apologize it might be back in
our rules and not in the statute
so you're madam sure you I think
representative is correct that
it is not explicitly provide for
it here new rules will have to
be promotated obviously if this
gets adopted.
I have some concerns about.
It has to be super clear in
statute who this
we've always had that can major
consideration in budget hearings
in the past regarding public
providers versus private
providers and what those t.
And that's where the loan
information when you're looking
at setting up alone and I
noticed this for capital also
for operating expenses I think
was operating expenses are going
to be a lot different depending
on who actually is running this
was facility
i'm just curious madam chair and
and presenters what is the
average cost annually disturbed
a child was just general
programming
thank you madame chair think you
representative let me go back
for a second so if you're asking
what it generally costs per
month in but find the same
thousand to thirteen hundred
dollars approximately depending
on the program so we could
safely save out of chair
representative about twelve
thousand dollars a year for
child depending and i'm just
talking just regular programming
I I don't even know what the
different programs are that are
offered just yeah I ask the
provider is that about right
that's on average if you take
madam chair
representative if you are a five
star nationally a credited
center the cost of an infent in
the state of new mexico is two
thousand dollars a month and for
a preschooler it is twelve
hundred dollars a month
just about twelve hundred is the
low end.
Madame chair
me I i'm sorry I don't know your
name
and madame chair representative
it's barbara okay barbara the
question that I have what what
incompasses at twelve hundred
dollars what what are our kids
actually
madam chair and representatives
of the overall cost for the
program is when you're looking
at the private facility as it
takes into account the rent the
utilities the staffing all of
the insurances all of the food
because most of us are on food
programs it takes into account
the maintenance for the
buildings that sixty to seventy
percent of the cost is staffing
ok so madam chair so we're
saying that about thirty percent
of the cost per child is the
actual program the educational
program that they're going
through madame churn
representative that's correct
okay
so when I when i'm looking at
this six hundred people four
hundred bucks
it goes into that
and i'm i'm just doing some
quick math of chair
representative
at a loan of three percent so
you take out a hundred thousand
dollars it's about three three
thousand dollars cost for the
loan
and I don't know then within a
five year period
how quickly
if you're only going to have
four hundred dollars annually
for child you're gonna be able
to pay that off i'm trying to
just do some quick mouth here
and my understanding is as you
pay that off by providing more
services to fifty percent of the
kids they get additional
services so how much how is that
cost figured matter chair
so madam chair and
representative
we are lucky in the city of new
mexico that this body has funded
childcare assistance and.
That that the governor has
increased the subsidy rates and
that most children in the state
of new mexico do qualify for
telecom assistance so we are
receiving more of the monies to
give you an example a private
family that comes to my center
for an infant is seven hundred
and sixty dollars a month a
child care assistance in front
is two thousand so it there is a
big disparity of the amount of
money received to a center so
most child car centers lead our
parents to do you have you heard
of the childcare assistance can
you apply for a trial care
assistance granted every area's
different and some families we
have many families that one is a
police officer and wasn't one is
a nurse so they obviously don't
qualify we still have some
families that don't qualify but
those of us in the centers are
very proactive in getting the
families to apply so we can
receive those higher subsidies
because like you said even one
child at two thousand versus
seven hundred and twenty makes a
big difference
a profit margin and healthcare
centers is is very very slim
that is my point madam chair yes
so if the profit marginis is
slim and we're saying that the
way we're going to pay this loan
off is fifty percent of the kids
that we bring down we're gonna
add additional services to I
don't know how that happens
because I don't know where the
extra money is coming from to
pay for those additional
services that's the part does
not registering for me.
Madam chair and representative
and incorrect me if i'm wrong
however though the way that
we're utilizing this or that we
want it to flow is that we we
don't have to necessarily every
month make a repayment on the
loan we're taking the money's in
for that child car assistance so
that after the five years we can
meet that those requirements and
then we don't have to pay the
funding back because we have
received the monies and we do
have that thirty percent from
that those high quality
subsidies to pay the other bills
as they're as as there do that
answer i'm sorry madame chair
what i'm looking at page three
and maybe this was changed in
the amendment online three it
says that the
will provide program expanded or
created by the they're looking
at expounded program so my
question is is when you're just
getting by with the amount that
you're receiving now how do you
expand programs I guess would be
the easier way to say this think
you better think he
representative I think what
we're getting at is that would
be the loan itself is to expand
those programs and then once
those once the the staff is
hired once the providers are
expanding like the facilities
and and the people there then
they would be able to ongoingly
pay back through there the
tuition that they have to charge
okay so the other question I had
bound him chairs at when i'm
looking at the appropriation
piece
why isn't this just coming
directly instead of coming out
of general fund why isn't it
coming out of cash balances for
the early childhood fund.
Madam chair representative I
believe and I could be wrong
with this I do want to double
check this but I believe because
of the way in which we provide a
rules around the early child
education and care fund the ecd
funds that is particularly for
providing those services and not
necessarily for building up that
infrastructure and I I would
love to get back on that because
this is an issue that we've come
up with two before and
consistently I run into that
that we cannot build
infrastructure out of those
funds that come from easy cd but
I am happy to follow with you on
that but matter i'm sure i'm
talking more about the
programming part
where you're adding additional
programming not necessarily
facility upgrader that kind of
thing i'm thinking more about
the programming part
it just seems to me with the
kind of money that's in that fun
today
and because you're going to be
developing rules for program
expountion if they're going to
have to agree with I mean we
can't just full amount of the
air there their partner in this
they're actually paying for
those it makes sense to me about
i'm sure that the money where
this appropriation should come
out of cash balances under the
largest button in the stating
the mexico
that's just me talking out loud
but i'm i'm just a little
concerned about that
and I did the final question I
had mountain chair was when we
talk about satisfying other
qualifications I assume those
are qualifications that come up
through the rule making process
is that that correct
manager that's correct okay so
that I mean that and there's
public carryings on that and
what have you and I know you all
do good job
setting up rules but how does
that tie into the actual if this
bill was signed into law and
your role making process what is
the start date for this.
The.
Madam chair there is not a
there's not a number.
So is it ninety days after the
end of the session or after she
signed it okay when how and one
with the rule making process
start manager the rules into
this program.
It would deal a little bit.
Right.
So amount of chair it would be
the new mexico finance authority
that then keeps the long file
for every every person that
takes one of these loans would
you be the one to my two manage
those files madam sure that's
correct we currently are doing
that.
Electing the d.
We have a.
I guess mountain chair i'm not
exactly sure that what the role
the finance authorities I mean
if they're technically they
could do this without the
finance authority they wouldn't
want necessarily want to set up
a new department to do that or
anything but it's their bunny
it's their program they know
what they're looking for in
terms of how we measure success
at the end of the day it's not
going to be the finance
authority that measures how that
this this long program measures
success it's going to be the
early childhood experts to do
that you're going to look at
numbers you're gonna look at do
we need to restructure this
lounge does this make sense or
they're making my payments I
think this would be fairly
complicated to run as my
observation madame chair
but I also think that early
childhood out of the pan for it
they ought to be capitalizing
this thank you.
The.
Eh thank you representative
anybody else from the committee
representative mason
that he met him to have
represented
me i'll have one question and
reading through this thing I
don't what is the provision I
give her the loan she doesn't
make the expectations she
definitely pay the long what
what what happens
madam shirt there is this is a
loan at the end of the day so
the finance authority has the
ability there will be collatera.
And I understand that that you
may have that but
you have the abilities do you
have the wheel thinking better
think a representative of animal
fame but it's not there is no
rule in here that says that
that's what so I think it's
worth it to go over the purpose
of what I say fills in the spot
that they do because they aren't
necessarily a governmental
entity right because I write
they have private and public
funds that fund what they exist
and so unlike many other
programs that we see through the
through our government or
through the federal government
their repayment
numbers are significantly higher
they've been able to they
succeeded with pp loans when
many other states would be to
weren't able to manage that that
you want so well so the
incentive for animal fa two claw
back essentially from that is to
maintain those that a high level
excellencies that we continue to
work with them without being
said something like ecd doesn't
have a loan making department
that may exist in it that is why
they would have to work with
something like an american make
those loans possible now at this
particular moment in the state's
history we have an excess of
funds in the general fund with
an excessive funds in any ccd
and at this and we're looking at
a one point seven five million
dollar amount that's being
appropriate when we're looking
at this in the long run my
anticipation is that we'll need
to see that grow now with the we
should be a suggestion be that
we turn that into eccd funds
later in the future that is the
possibility that I
that I would have no problem
doing to be quite frank but
again this is a beginning cost
process to reinvigorate a fund
that had kind of gone still
after a while so the incentive
though going back to your
regional question is that they
want to intend maintain there
they're a strong institution and
are in our wanting to work with
them and we all do you know
maybe we want we don't want
anybody to fail you know with
the but in every industry there
is
those that the bits
through missed management
through this over there there's
a thousands of reasons why
anybody can fail it at anything.
My only other concern I guess is
that I have no problem with a
loan
ever
a fairly low interest alone you
know it's just I have problems
that that was
a representative that considered
some people will get loans and
these will be considerably
cheaper on the establishment in
the one that goes that puts all
the
abuses therefore work day in all
of that to secure a lot will
they put up
real collateral the body and
they lose everything if they go
I just don't know if these will
have that savings in him or
their losses they really.
But the thank you
distant trips the question if
those losses would rubby real
miss madame chairman is mister
representative you know I I do
want to point out that childcare
facilities become part of the
family I i'll be I mean and it's
it's I know it we talk a lot of
the data here we do all those
pieces but I will be honest you
know the they care for these
infense and they care for the
families and so you know they're
skinning the game is that these
attachments that they developed
over you know your plus
relationships they develop
really becomes their skin of the
game to remain in there but I
mean I you know you think that's
what it makes the same unique
industry arm is that because it
is so dependent on those
relationships that are thank you
representative
thank you and I guess what I
would add if you could go there
page three lines eight through
ten.
This.
And maybe talk about how at that
point you can provision for a
long repayment I think that
might clarify a little bit
better I think you're presented
because that does remind me of
one thing that representative
the gentleman reminded me of was
that on this is the art of
legislation right this we have
to we have to give the goat that
the given take on what's working
and what isn't working for
legislation right so allowing a
lot of this process to be at the
hands of the rules that could
put into here allows ms to
adjust it necessary I was
checking with my my my expert
earlier if other contracts for
service programs are written in
a similar manner giving this
kind of lenience ability to to
work and she said immediately
yes and the reason why is that
alone in many ways is a living
document we want to make sure
that if people are failing to
be acting good faith with it
with mfa that mfa is able to
work to ensure that they can
claw back this one so that is
why we want to keep it in that
same sense that is why the
original statue gives that that
that capacity and that's what
will continue to work with them
to finish those pieces did you
want her and one thing I will
ever do it
is that you know unlike many
other agencies animal fa
authorities and him if they has
a specific interim legislate
legislative committee that where
they have to report back on how
well this fund is doing where
those dollars are going and they
are very specific in those
reports on a bit have to show
you my faulter so again what if
then when this is a concern this
is something that they're
actually reporting back.
Manager I would just say that
the finance authorities are
mission based lender so we are a
len.
Mission so our goal is to help
keep the identified project
living as long as possible if
that point comes we will
foreclose we have done so with
the beh.
That was not acting a good faith
received got the money back
relent it to another facility
that sent serving that purpose
so we have both we both we're
both hats but we are
predominantly a lender.
You know I
guess my problem is is I like
stuff I got the bank and get a
loan document it's got it all
spelled out
you know and these don't have
everything spelled out so always
have a little with the other
baby and all of these your calls
me a little a little problem in
these thought that we distressed
the album like i've said before
I don't know three years now you
will be set
or who it might be you know it
art in arguing you know these
days I I believe
that I don't mean it is right
you know it's i'm sure they'll
get the money they they think is
is good but you know it's that's
reason I like it
I like everything.
Written down in I side you
signed up
thank you
so and and I guess to that point
in that section I think that
there can be as the
representatives at spelled out
it could be spelled out in that
section so I would just so that
back at you
and for now we have one more
representative little
thank you madam chair i'd like
to live a do pass.
As a mind.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin.
No.
Representative hernandez.
Representative lend day.
Representative little yes
representative lunchtrum.
The.
Representative martinez.
The.
Yes
representative mason now
representative matthews
now but I want to explain my
book.
Representative i'm sorry madame
vice yes manager yes and your
final tally is seven votes yes
three votes now
you have a do pass
representative matthews to
explain her bill yes and I
really didn't want to vote
against this but I did because
it wouldn't make any difference
tell by the rocal and my concern
and I just want to share this I
want child care facilities like
my friend barbara runs I want
them to get the money I don't
want his money to be used by
intel or sandy elabs or los
animals labs because they can
afford to do this themselves and
our chair child peer needs are
so strong so critical that
that we need to be very
strategic in getting the money
to the communities and to the
the child care centers and so
forth that serve arm new
mexicans who aren't necessarily
employed and making very good
money in it businesses.
Thank you ready next week have.
The.
HB one eighty one representative
thompson.
Please begin
thank you madame chair hospital
one eighty one amends the
mexico's life and health
insurance guarantee association
act.
Based on a current version of a
model act developed by the
national association of
insurance commissioners forty
one states have already adopted
adopted these changes be one
eighty one at additional
consumer protection by expending
guarantee association membership
to include hmo's and provide
teverage to their subscribers
and providers valuable coverage
that will protect them from loss
if they're hm will be comes in
south installment make that
batty batty is the administrator
for the new mexico life
insurance guarantee so the
issue.
And i'm gonna turn it over to
him madame thank you and when
you when you do speak again if
you'll pull the mike a little
closer to you work as I know
you're not feeling well but we
have we're having a little hard
care you thank you mister
mister.
The.
I hear association with form by
an act of the legislature back
in nineteen seventy five.
Uhm sense that point in time are
association has paid out
approximately thirty eight
million dollars on behalf of new
mexico residents who happened
own policies and insurance
companies that became insolvent
the act that was passed back in
nineteen seventy five
was based on an a model law
developed by the national
association of.
And since that time there have
been a number of amendments to
that
national florida model act.
In
in fact we've updated our laws
probably several times but the
most recent
amendment to our act was in two
thousand and fourteen.
Uhm since that time there are
bensome substantial changes
made by the natural association
of insurance commissioners in
their model law and uh house
bill one eighty one attempts to
bring our model act up to that
standard are to bring us up to
date with other states that are
passed the additional
legislation
with that I think I would
be here to assist the committee
and build.
You still stand for questions
already is anybody here in favor
of this b.
Next.
Thank you next.
Anybody else you
know manager already anybody in
opposition to the bill
ready it's got to the committee.
Representative lines from
thank you madame chair thank you
representative list thompson can
you tell me and two simple
sentences what this bill does.
Madame cheer and representative
essentially it adds in hmos so
that in case those companies go
back about insalvant that the
patience that clocked their
customers will be protected okay
so it's something like fdic
insurance that banks have if you
if something goes insolvent and
then the your coverage is out
with the right is actually I
think that that example was used
in the first time
thank you very much
thank you representative.
Representative dunkin
think minimiture
so let me ask you this and
representative so do all of them
pay into it and so eighty most
keep that fun solvent disincase
something like that acr.
Madame chair
unlike the fdic the guarantee
association does not
assess its members before
there's an insolvency so we
don't really go out and try to
collect money and.
What we do is when company has
been determined to become
insolvent
by a court uh at that point in
time association becomes
responsible for the policies
and at that time will assess
how much money if any that we
need uh to take care of those
liabilities and will assess the
industry at that time.
That time instead of refunding
like the f d i.
Thank you madam chair that's
your own question at thank you
representative mason.
The.
Thank you madam chair
represented that man was
answered I just want mine was on
the atmosphere's deliver under
player
but the so this doesn't
so that that was all that by my
question already been thank you
anybody else from the committee
was so pleasure the committee
had do.
The.
The.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin yes
representative hernandez
representative lender
representative little yes
representative lunch.
Representative martinez
representative mason yes
representative matthew.
Man investor yes madam chair yes
madam chair final tell his
eleven votes yes zero votes now
represent if you ever do pass
thank you madame chairman
membership just passed the most
exciting bill of the session.
Okay how speel two forty nine is
next we're going to give it a
couple of minutes to see where
the sponsor is.
I hadn't seen a schedule yet
so many regular time one thirty
on wednesday.
Okay what what's on that
calendar.
I haven't seen it.
What.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee
i'm here to present house bill
to forty nine.
Which proposes to
adjust the tax level for social
security income
with basically indexing it for
inflation so
not too long ago that i'm sure
members of the legislature
exempted
some social security income from
state taxation
and
at the time we did not put in
any kind of a clause that would
adjust for inflation and we know
that
inflation has been an issue and
that especially people who
aren't fixed incomes are feeling
the effective inflation I think
that i'm out of turn inflation
is abating a little bit but the
prices have remained high and
her I was just in albertsons
yesterday and
yes prices ever made high
so some bags of apples for two
dollars in ninety nine cents on
almost bought a whole case of
them because I thought that's
the best buy i'm going to get so
it it's a factor and I i'm just
in just a little bit but
I think we owe it to people to
we acknowledge inflation in the
other areas and this would be a
way to compensate for that and I
believe that matter chair the
social security
colour this year I think was
three point two percent and so
that's one example of where we
we adjust for for the way that
the the the trandin prices
so i'm basically i'm just here
to say it made chair members I
think this is the right thing to
do there are computers that will
do the work for us for the text
and revenue department
and
I just think it's it's it's it's
time we do something we know
from the the bill we passed a
couple years ago that
this social security break
essentially income break has
been very helpful especially to
middle income people.
And for example a single person
are filing its what we did last
time was about four hundred
fifty three dollars to their
benefit and this again would
kind of as as inflation rises we
just not have to come back and
fix that every year so.
That's the basis of the bill
matter of chair and members the
revenue impact is estimated
twenty twenty six at a million
dollars I know there's a tax
package I believe that last
number I heard for that is two
hundred.
And then in outer years it might
uh twenty twenty seven it would
go to fourteen one twenty four
million and then a twenty twenty
eight one point seven and this
would be an affect on the
general find but it is I think.
Pretty pretty small to the state
as a whole but it would be a big
help I think to the people who
are and social security so
without militaries temper
questions thank you do we have
anybody here in favor of this
bill mister bullison.
Thank you anybody else in favor
of this bill.
Anybody on zoom.
Larry santeg.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is carlos on tag
within the mexico business
coalition
we are in strong support of
house bill two forty nine you
know we think that this was
really just an oversight when
the legislature took this issue
up to begin with it should have
been inducted at that time to
cover inflation we're in a
period of high inflation right
now and it's really eating into
the people's income all the way
around and I think this is a
really good fix something that
we could have done originally
but i'm glad that the sponsor
brought it and I hope that you
will support it thank you
okay thank you anybody in
opposition.
Okay let's go to the committee.
Representative serrato.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative bringing it I
forgot to ask but I do remember
my question as two things one I
want to think you can always
working on this issue I know
this has been something you
could you've been dedicated to
for a long time this is more of
a technical building question
but I curious do you have a
version it's going to the senate
should that tax package already
be you know completed on should
our tax omnibus bill in the
house be completed already
medicare and represent serator
thank you for the question and I
I did not have a mirror bill
working its way to the senate
i'm just hoping we can.
Thank you manager the groups and
more than hopefully we can thank
you
thank you representative
matthews thank you madame chair
and I just wanna
congratulate the
representative for
giving me a good response to the
consistent who just wrote me
about how can we increase the
how can we increase the
the amount of social security
that's not taxed by the state
and I had written a response he
said well to you we gave you
know we did it just a couple
years ago is really good and
and I said I don't think there's
going to be a bill to change
that this year
so now then you come forward
with the bill and I can say
with my urgent representative
and my simple representative has
done exactly what you want
so thank you very much thank you
anybody else.
They're.
Every thank you madame chair and
I know that there is reference
made to the tax back.
The dimension was made there
timeline is what would be
appropriate I think at this
point just.
Committee so so perhaps.
Perhaps you should as I deal
with somebody in the senate they
can work really fast before they
get out there six.
The.
Thank you representative little
yes ma'am i'd like to move a
department
as filled to sixty six okay we
have emotion and a second.
The.
Patches.
Representative and in order
yes representative dunkin
manager i'm of that age so
should I have to dequality like
twice
can I vote you can vote yes
in a few others
representative hernandez
representative lending
representative little yes
representative lunchtime
representative martinez yes
representative mason yes
representative matthews
as long as I don't have to
disclose my age yes
matter vice chair yes madam
chair yes madame chair final
tell his eleven votes yes zero
votes no representative I do
have a department thank you and
matter I must say i've never
seen a pink gave it before
that's a great work
already world that concludes our
business for today we do have as
we discussed several bills or
wednesday if we can start
hopefully at one thirty or
fifteen minutes after the four
