take roll and then we got to go
to a little bit of housekeeping
and then we'll start with you,
representative.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez here.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Oh.
Right.
Madam Vice Chair.
was also here.
Oh.
I'm here too.
Madam Chair
Uh, I'm here.
Thank you and we can only uh say
if you're here personally, not
your neighbor. I was here.
All right.
All righty, um, so I've got a
statement to read before we
start, um, and so I'm gonna do
that now, members of the
committee, it came to my
attention that there was a
technical error on the draft
committee report for HGEIC HB
93, that was the result of the
committee adopting two
amendments to the same page and
line numbers of the HGEIC subs.
for HB 93.
We have a combined amendment
before the committee that was
prepared by LCS to eliminate the
conflict and reflects the
amendments discussed and adopted
by the committee. I would accept
a motion to replace the
amendments in the committee
report, uh, with the ones that
are before the committee as
shown on.
2312 14.4. This way, the
committee report and amendments
are fixed before the, before the
substitute is on the floor. Um,
this was prepared by legislative
council.
When, uh, it was a, it was a
drafting error that should have
been caught in a.
I guess proofing, and it was
not. So, um, we won't have to,
we just need to make sure that
the right.
Um, amendment is what is
reflective.
So I will accept a motion if
there is one.
That's all we got to do on that,
so thank you.
All righty.
Let's start with uh HB 95
representative Herndon.
Thank you. Thank you, Ms. uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so we have House
Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 95. That's 0.230711.3 and
we have an amendment, Madam
Secretary, I mean, um, Madam
Chair.
And has the amendment been
passed out?
Yeah
Me
Oh, it's coming. OK.
So before we go on to your bill,
I just want to make sure, let's
just vote on the motion just to
make sure because.
Legislative council was supposed
to be down here and they're not.
Yeah
So
Yeah.
So come back and vote on it
again. So if Patrick, go ahead
and call the roll on that so we
can have the vote.
The
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason.
Yes. Representative Matthews.
Uh, may I ask a question?
So I have an amendment.
To HB 95, which I think is what
we're voting on, but
I also have an amendment to HB
93, is that?
Even on the representative, it's
HB 93.
That the that the error was made
on.
Oh, and it was made in the
previous committee and so it was
a drafting error because they,
they when they lettered it, they
forgot a letter.
Um,
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, OK, with that,
I'll vote yes.
Representative Murphy.
Uh, Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Repres uh madam vice chair.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, final
tally 9 votes, yes, 0 votes no.
that, um, it's just out of.
That.
To
Right,
well, they, they're on time out.
OK, so you've got a sub and then
you've got an amendment to the
sub, is that correct? That is
correct, Madam Chair, and the
amendment number is 0.231380.1.
Thank you.
And Madam Chair, um,
Would you please move the.
Amendment
To.
Discussion.
Any objections?
Go ahead. Madam Chair, members
of the committee, the sub
actually provides just
clarification, which was
inadvertently left out of the
substitute and so uh the the.
There is um items just uh
provide more clarity to items
that were already in the
substitute. There were no
substantive changes, just
clarifications.
OK. Um,
Does anybody want more
clarification as to the
amendment or can we move to a
You wanna
move to the end of it. OK.
We have a second?
Any opposition?
All right.
Please explain the bill. Yes.
So, Madam Chair.
The purpose of the bill is to
help ensure that women and men
who face the possibility of
fertility damaging illnesses or
medical treatment, have the
opportunity to have children and
to have a family if that's
something that they would like
to do.
So madam uh, Madam Chair, uh, HB
95 substitute as amended enacts
new sessions, sections rather of
the healthcare purchasing Act
and the New Mexico Insurance
Code to require fertility,
preservation services for
enrollees whose disease are
medically necessary disease
treatment is determined by the
enrollee's health care provider
may lead to inf infertility.
Uh, infertility, sorry about
that. So these new sections, uh,
if once they approved would
become effective on January 1,
2026, but most importantly, we
want to give people the
opportunity to have a family if
that's something that they want
and then they're not prevented
from doing so because of an
illness that may cause
infertility later on in their
lives and uh Madam Chair, I do
have a, an expert here with me.
is a renowned doctor in the area
of uh health care in fertility
preservation. Her name is Doctor
Sandra Pan, and she has a
statement.
And I just wanted for
clarification, Sandra Pin.
OK,
welcome.
Madam.
My name is Doctor Sandra Pan.
I'm a retired family physician.
train.
Is that better? Can you hear me?
Is the light green on, on your
microphone.
Thank you. My apologies.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
My name is Doctor Sandra Penn.
I'm a retired family physician.
Trained at John A. Burne's
School of Medicine in Honolulu.
And completing my residency here
at Burnleyo County Medical
Center.
I practiced in both Hawaii.
And in New Mexico.
We purchased insurance for that
insurance and assurance. We're
not experts when it comes to
difficult medical occurrences.
And often a diagnosis is
traumatic.
We expect our
Riders and our insurance company
to know how to protect us.
If a treatment might have
detrimental side effects we
expect that those who care for
us will have the foresight to
protect us against them.
If it is possible to go blind,
and there is a way to prevent
that. We should expect that we
will be protected.
Future fertility.
Is an expectation.
Preventing harm to gonadal
tissue is possible should always
be part of treatment.
At a time of treatment which
should not be asked whether or
not we want such prevention.
It should be an expectation as
much as it is our expectation
that we survive.
In a country that does not have
national health insurance.
Each of us has to.
Get our insurance and we hope
that it will protect us.
and we insist on making sure
that it does. Thank you.
And Madame Chair and members of
the committee, this is such an
important topic, we also have
two experts that are on Zoom who
could not fly in and be with us
today. I would like to introduce
them and have them just briefly
introduce themselves in their
brief statements, Katrina
Kimball, who's from the Lithomia
Society and also Joyce Roenicke.
Yeah, but
Uh
Hello, can you hear me? OK,
thank you, chair, members of the
committee. My name is Christina
Kimball, and I'm with the
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society on
behalf of blood cancer patients
and their families. We support
House Bill 95. When first
diagnosed with cancer, a
patient's primary concern is
their upcoming treatment and
long-term survival. They may not
be thinking about whether they
can or want to have children in
the future or how their
treatment could impact their
chances of having a child.
Treatments like chemotherapy and
radiation are very harsh on the
body and it can cause
infertility in both males and
females.
Treatment must begin quickly,
often in just a few days, which
leaves patients with a difficult
and expensive decision. There is
no time to appeal to insurers.
for coverage after denial.
Without coverage fertility
preservation costs can add up
very quickly, very challenging
for patients to afford these out
of pocket costs, especially on
top of their other cancer
treatments.
Please support young cancer
patients and their chance to
have a family,
but yes, on 95. Thank you.
Hello?
Uh, hi, good afternoon. Thank
you, Chair Gallegos and
committee members for allowing
me to speak to you today on
behalf of House Bill 95. My name
is Joyce Reinke, and I'm the
executive director of a national
nonprofit organization, the
Alliance for Fertility
Preservation, and our mission is
to provide information and
resources about and access to
fertility preservation services
for those facing a risk of
medically induced infertility.
I'm here today, in my
professional capacity, but I
want you to also know that I'm a
cancer survivor who had to go
through fertility preservation
in order to have my daughters.
Through my work over the past 15
or so years. I have met hundreds
of cancer patients, survivors,
and family members and have
heard about their fears, not
only in facing cancer, but also
about losing their chance to one
day have children.
Um, increasingly our, our
organization is hearing from
young adult patients who face
good prospects of survival, um,
and from pediatric oncologists
who see people with cancer,
sickle cell, and some other
hematologic diseases, uh, who've
been left out of this kind of
coverage. The cost of these
services can run anywhere from
about $1000 for sperm banking
and about 12 to $15,000 for a
round of egg freezing.
Without insurance coverage,
these expenses are prohibitive
for most patients.
But while the costs are
significant when born by the
individual and paid out of the
pocket. They are really
minuscule when spread across an
entire population of insurers.
They are also unconscionably
small and weighed against the
value of what is at stake for
these young patients facing uh a
chance at future parenthood.
I would ask you to consider
this. Every year based on cancer
registry data about 930 New
Mexicans under the age of 45
will be diagnosed with cancer.
About 2/3 of those patients will
face treatments like
chemotherapy, radiation therapy,
and stem cell transplants that
will present a direct risk um to
threatening their fertility.
Those that do face treatments
and not all will choose
fertility preservation.
Some may already have children,
some may not want children and
some just can't really undergo
additional procedures in the
midst of their cancer diagnosis.
But in taking all of these
factors into account, in the
end, we would expect about 120
men and 85 women per year would
utilize these services in the
state of New Mexico. Based on
these assumptions, our best
estimate is that the cost total
to the state of covering these
patients would be a
approximately $600,000. And that
is based on retail costs of
these services, not ensure
negotiated or Medicaid
reimbursement rates, which
generally, of course, are much
lower. For this cost, you can
protect these young patients
hope for their future, and ease
their burden during medically
challenging, scary time. We
would respectfully ask that you
pass this measure, and I'm here
to take any questions that you
may have. Thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we stand for
questions.
Thank you. OK, do we have
anybody in the room, um, that is
an opposition of this
legislation.
But this spell.
Do we have anybody on Zoom?
No, man.
OK, do we have anybody here in
favor?
Hey, if you'd like to speak.
Uh, will form a line in the
middle. We'll have our attendant
hold the microphone and you'll
have one minute.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the community or of the
committee. My name is Amaka
Tupman and I am a student at the
University of New Mexico and um
I stand in support of House Bill
95. I've seen firsthand the
emotional financial burden that
individuals face when they have
to make the heartbreaking
decision to prioritize their
health over their future
fertility. For many like those
undergoing cancer treatments,
the possibility of infertility
can feel like a a second
lossertility preservation is a
lifeline offering a hope of.
for a future that may not have
thought possible. It's not about
just giving access to medical
care. It's about giving people
the ability to plan for their
futures. I urge you all to
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Haley Zoin. I'm the
staff attorney from the
Southwest Women's Law Center,
and I'm currently a pregnant
lady, um, no one should have to
choose between life saving
medical treatment and their
future ability to have children.
So I please urge you to vote yes
on HB 95 today. Thank you. Thank
you.
Anybody else?
OK, let's go to the committee.
So on one.
Danica Tyronis.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Donna, and I'm the first
justice manager with New Mexico
as a reproductive justice
organization, we do our work in
the whole spectrum of what
reproductive care is. This
includes assistance for those
seeking to start a family.
Medical necessity should be
assisted and insurance coverage
would remove the barrier to
families or families to be
started. We in the strong
support of 95 or did you pass?
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, let's go on to
the committee leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you for bringing this bill
forward. Um, I have a few
questions. Does Medicaid pay for
this now?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, they do not.
OK, thank you for that answer.
And do you have any idea what it
would cost?
Um
If
We implemented if we pass this
bill, what would it cost the
state of
In Mexico.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we've been trying to
get an exact cost that we did
notice that there were some um
figures that were mentioned in
the FIR they were grossly too
high, uh, considering the fact,
uh, as we heard the testimony
today of 120 men, maybe 85 women
in a year, and the, the maximum
cost that would be available
there would be about 600,000 if
they were freezing eggs for our
sperm in an entire year.
So what we were looking at was
what would be the cost of an
increase for insurance, but not
everybody would be paying the
same amount. This would be uh an
insurance that you would be
selecting for purposes of your
coverage, if indeed you found
yourself in that instance, so we
don't have an exact number,
Madam Chair Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, a lot of
us disagree with the FIR
sometimes, but it's what we have
to go on. So, uh, Madam Chair,
representative.
What is the average cost to
freeze eggs. It doesn't matter
if it's Medicaid.
Self pay whatever I know those
costs may differ, but what is
the average cost.
Madame Chair, members of the
committee representative
Armstrong, we've determined it's
about $1200.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
$1200 a year, but does that
include the procedure, does that
include everything?
Madame Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Armstrong to our best estimate,
the answer is yes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
So
There is no additional money,
Madam Chair representative in
the Medicaid budget.
For this and no money in the
healthcare authority.
To implement this.
If this does pass.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee represented Armstrong.
I disagree with that statement.
I do believe that there are
enough funds with respect to the
projected people who might be uh
presenting to utilize this
service and looking at budgets
in the past and looking at
reversions and looking at monies
that were left over, uh, there
is enough funding to take care
of this.
Madam Chair representative.
It would be an unfunded mandate.
If we pass this bill on to the
healthcare authority because
it's not specifically in their
budget right now, even though
you're saying.
They would probably have the
money to do it.
Madame Chair, representative,
uh, members of the committee,
Representative Armstrong, we
don't consider it an unfunded
mandate looking at the history
of the uh healthcare authority
even though they've only been in
existence for a year, there was
still enough funding that would
we believe would significantly
cover.
This, uh, procedure and this
process.
The legislation were passed. In
the meantime, we will continue
to ask for Medicaid, uh, if we
have to ask for an additional uh
coverage. We will ask for that,
but we do believe that based
upon the information that we
have.
The number of people who are
likely to use it, looking at
budgets in the past, madam, uh,
Chair Representative Armstrong,
we are in good shape.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, we'll agree to
disagree on that one. how is,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
how is medically necessary to
find and who gets to decide if
fertility preservation is
needed.
Madame Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Armstrong, I'm gonna ask my uh
my experts. We have a renowned
doctor right here who can
absolutely answer that question.
But whenever you have
Treatment
And treatment has the potential
for doing harm as well as good.
The oncologist or the treating
physician.
We know
that there is some risk.
And they will be.
Estimating that there is a risk
that needs to be addressed.
Before treatment can be
accomplished.
So Madam Chair, uh,
representative and expert.
So is there a definition in the
bill itself or uh it just says
that the medical provider will
make that decision.
I believe the medical provider
has to make that decision at the
time that treatment is offered.
to
That
Sorry, can I, this is Joyce
Rainy. Um, I just, can I jump in
just with regard to hold on just
a minute, please. Oh sorry.
OK.
Were you done answering?
Doctor
Were you done answering?
Forgive me, madam chair, yes, I
am. OK, now we can go to the the
other expert witness.
On film.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, uh,
this is Joyce Reinicky from the
Alliance for Fertility
Preservation. I just wanted to
give some context to fertility
preservation, um, as part and
parcel of cancer care, um, the
American Society of Clinical
Oncology, which is, uh, you
know, the leading professional
organization that sets
guidelines and standards for
cancer care, has recognized
fertility preservation in the
face of potentially sterilizing
treatment.
As part of the standard of care,
and they issued guidelines on
fertility preservation, um,
first in 2006. So this um has
continuously been recognized as
something that patients, um, you
know, need to have if they are
facing that potential, uh,
sterilization or um infertility,
but insurance coverage has not
kept up with those standards
that have really been in place
now.
almost 2 years. So I don't know
if that's, if that's helpful to
this discussion, um, but just to
give you background on that 18
states now and the District of
Columbia have passed coverage um
for these services so that
patients have the protection,
um, and have this treated as any
other side effect of the
treatment.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative.
I believe that's all my
questions. Um, thank you.
Thank you, uh, Representative de
la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
There's a strong possibility
that
Medicare and Medicaid.
Federal funding
Maybe significantly reduced?
Have you considered that option
in relation to this bill, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee representative de la
Cruz at the time that we began
promulgating this piece of
legislation.
The, uh, various and sundry
executive orders that have been
issued had not been issued.
So that we had not considered
that as like being an issue, but
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee and Representative de
la Cruz.
I, we do not know exactly what
will happen, and looking at the
number of people who may or may
not utilize this uh process.
Still a great way for us to
proceed. It is not something
that we should stop.
On conjecture of what may happen
because we don't know.
Madam Che, are you?
I think it's, it's a
consideration. Certainly we
don't know.
Um, but like all things that we
do financially, we look into the
future and see a potential and
so I would just encourage that
we temper whatever we do with
the prospect of federal funding
being significantly reduced
around Medicare and Medicaid.
That's all I have.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Just a few questions, uh.
I heard
Adam representative stated that
how many states have this?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Mason,
18 states and the District of
Columbia.
states.
Thank you, representative uh.
Adam chair, I'm just, I was a
little confused because I uh.
Analysis said only mentioned two
states.
New York and Illinois.
Ta,
members of the committee, uh,
Representative Mason, remember I
stated that sometimes FIRs are
incorrect. That is another
example.
Well, could be represented uh.
Uh, Madam Tay, uh.
Madam Chair represented in the
18 states, what degree of
service do they?
Do they mirror this bill or
chair members of the committee
representative Mason. I'm gonna
ask my expert to help me with
this answer, so Miss Renicky.
Any of my experts online, can
you assist me with this answer?
Sure. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative, um,
Each of the 18 states that have
passed um this coverage into law
in the past few years, um, they
differ in terms of who they
reach, um, and what is provided
in each bill. We have tables on
that and I can get that, uh, to,
you know, we can send that over
to the committee, but um there
are several states that include
Medicaid, some that do not. um,
so different, different groups
of insurers are reached through
each of the different state
laws.
Thank you. uh
And thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh
Uh, I don't know that it's
necessary at this.
Time to have those figures
exactly, but uh.
Madam representative, would you
say?
that this state law is the
I don't know quite how to put
it.
The Cadillac version of this.
Coverage or is it the?
Volkswagen version.
Away in the higher end or we
middle or we low as far as
coverage that we're offering our
state.
President, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh,
Representative Mason, I'll ask
my experts if they would like to
comment on that. I will comment
on it.
Uh, letting you know that this
is the most reasonable.
A form of coverage that I think
that could be allowed.
When you're looking particularly
at a healthcare issue when
someone wants to make sure in
the future that they can have a
family.
That's good enough.
Adam chair,
uh.
A couple of more here
Uh
We talked about the cost of the
Medicare what is the estimated
people with private insurance,
are we gonna mandate that all
the private insurances.
Over these uh
Types of services also. What
will it cost to individuals to
be on their private.
Insurance.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee and this uh
Representative Mason, there were
many insurance companies that
had the opportunity to review
this legislation before it was
presented. There are some
insurance companies that don't
provide the type of care that
would be provided and they would
not be mandated to do so, like
Aflac, for example, they don't
cover this type of insurance, I
mean, that's not what they cover
in terms of the uh the coverage
that they do provide and I've
been talking to
there, lobbyists.
Those types of insurance.
Um, providers would not be
covered or expected to provide
any coverage under this process.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair, uh.
So
We're we're gonna mandate
coverage but not mandate anybody
to.
give the
Have
Uh, how's everybody gonna buy
coverage if, if.
Oh
Obs to the
Or some of the health care
providers will not provide the
coverage.
So, um, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, representative,
um.
Mason, I, I hope I didn't
mistake, uh.
We will
That we are asking to amend the
Health Protection Act. I want to
make sure I'm pronouncing the.
The section correctly, so that
means that insurance companies
would be required to provide it,
but there are certain insurance
companies that don't provide
this type of insurance coverage.
Anyway, so we're not gonna now
ask them and mandate them to do
so.
So under our healthcare
Protection Act.
We would be looking at those
types of insurance companies
that provide healthcare in terms
of um.
Of
Family and reproductive care
services to continue to provide
them or to expand them to
include these types of services.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
so.
I'm a little confused.
So the Aflac.
For example.
Will they no longer be able to
sell.
Health insurance, to this age
group of people in the state of
New Mexico if they don't provide
the services required by the
statute.
Uh, no, madam Chair, members of
the committee representative
Mason and unfortunately.
I don't see him in the room, uh,
to explain exactly what kind of
insurance they provide so that
it would not be, uh, it would
not necessarily be a
A, a way in which we are
differentiating from insurance
companies that actually provide
the types of insurance that are
covered under this type of uh uh
process and protocol and so they
specifically talked about what
they did provide and what they
don't provide. And if you have
it there in front of you, um.
That would be fine, but I, I
agreed with him that I thought
they were absolutely. I don't
know that I'm.
Well sure on that, but we'll
move on anyway but uh.
They, uh
Well
Employees and employers be
required?
Oh
Provide this, have this type of
insurance.
Or will they be an opt in opt
out. I don't want it then I
don't buy it. He wants it, he
buys it.
That will work.
A mandated insurance.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Mason, it would be in addition
to your insurance policy that
you would be adding on to it
like maybe you decide.
You don't need this insurance,
uh, provision added to your
insurance policy. So it would be
an option that you would not be
including on the, on your
policy.
Nobody will be required.
to have this, is that true? Adam
Chair.
So, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee represented Mason,
so that's not exact correct
statement. The insurance
companies have to provide it,
but whether or not you get the
coverage is gonna be something
that you would be opting in to
take, right.
But that Adam Chair
representative, so.
That's, I, I think I get it
right if.
If I
No matter what their age, if
they don't buy the coverage,
they don't get the.
But they're not, they're not
required.
The
I know that the insurance
companies required to offer and
I'm not required to take it.
Right, you're not required, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Mason, you're not required to
pay for this, uh, provision in
your insurance if you're not
going to utilize.
So
If I may
Speak in terms of a male and
female, uh, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Representative
Mason, if you were to decide
that you did not need to freeze
your sperm because you were not
interested in making sure that
you can have children later on
after you are healthy and your
body was well enough, uh, to.
Um,
Nor would your body be well
enough to produce, uh, healthy
sperm that you are now going to
freeze them early so that they
would be available later on in
life when you are able to not
take care of children and then
utilize your healthy sperm when
they're available, that's
something that you would have to
take uh advantage of when you
are selecting your insurance
policy, but those insurance
companies here would be required
to offer that coverage.
I think that's as long as I am
not required.
Purchase it if I don't want it.
Uh
One
That'd be my last one, maybe.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative.
In New Mexico, do we have?
The
equipment and facilities.
Offer these services statewide.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, represented Mason,
yes.
I think that's all. Thank you
for representing Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Do we have any other questions
from the committee?
Um, I've got a couple of
questions, um, representative.
So I'm looking at um
At our house analysis.
And so I'm going to read a
couple of statements to you and
and I'd like you to respond. So
one of the under substantive
issues, the office of the
superintendent of insurance
reports that fertility services
are not included in New Mexico's
benchmark coverages under the
Affordable Care Act, meaning
that the state would have to
bear the full cost of these new
benefits in individual and small
group insurance markets. This
will also impact premiums in the
large.
group
Market.
Um, do you have a
Some thoughts on that.
Madame Chair, members of the
committee, I'm gonna ask my
expert Joyce, uh Renke to speak
to that. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, and
Representative, um, yes, we
noted that the um New Mexico
Essential Health benefits plan
does actually contain an unusual
line item and does have some
coverage for infertility-related
services, um, which, as I just
said, is not always standard,
um, and so the, the, um, that
provision could be interpreted,
um, to include
this coverage, um, which would
then allow um the state to avoid
those defra costs. They haven't,
uh, that's been an argument
that's been put forward in
several other states that had at
least some provision for
infertility services, um, within
their EHBs.
Thank you. OK, the, the second,
um, issue under substantive
issues is the New Mexico public
schools insurance states given
the high cost per procedure and
expected utilization, uh, the
introduction of fertility
preservation coverage represents
a significant increase in
healthcare expenditures. The
long-term financial impact will
continue to grow annually due to
increased medical costs and
storage fees.
you comment on this as well,
please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Miss Frey, would
you like to comment on that?
Sure. Um, Madam chair
representative, um, I believe if
you're speaking about the state
employee costs we have, we have
looked at this in many, many
states and we've looked at it
here, um, and when you amortize
those costs across the
population of insured. What we
would project would be um uh per
member per month increase of uh
pennies, 0.06 cents. And again.
can supply that information to
the committee if needed, but
across the country where we've
seen fiscal analysis of these
types of bills, um, generally
the um per member per month
amount um because of the small
number of, of patients who need
these services, um, remains
generally under 10 cents per
member per month.
Thank you. Um, I guess based on
both of the substantive issues,
um, I would question if they're,
you, you did say, I think when
when the leader asked if there
was if you had gone and gotten
anything, um, earmarked in House
Bill 2.
Um, I think your answer was no.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I mean, Madam
Chair, the answer is no, we
still think that there is not
gonna be a significant financial
burden.
On implementing this piece of
legislation.
OK.
So I think for the the purpose
of this bill is to ensure and
I'm reading this right out of
the book here is to ensure women
and men who face the possibility
of fertility damaging illness or
medical treatment have the
opportunity to have children.
I'm 100% behind that.
I just don't see that.
That's the, I, I'm concerned.
That there's not
There hasn't been more
discussion, I mean, with the
office of the superintendent cuz
they would be the ones
implementing this. I'm also
concerned with our budget
process because there's gonna be
an impact to the budget. So I
just want to put that out to you
as those are pretty significant
concerns for me, so, uh, with
that, um, I'll ask for the
desire of the of the committee.
Madam Chair, we would do pass as
amended.
Substant motion to table.
I have a motion to table and
that supersedes all other
motions, uh, Patrick take to
take the role. Representative
Armstrong.
Yes to table. Representative de
la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes
Representative Lente, yes, the
table.
Representative Mason, yes,
Representative Matthews.
No, no to table.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Note table
Representative Serato, not a
table.
Madam Vice Chair.
I'm sorry, uh, uh,
Representative De la Cruz.
Yes to table, I want to explain
my vote.
Madam Vice Chair.
Not to table.
Madam Chair, yes to table.
Madam Chair, final tally for the
table motion is 6 votes yes, 4
votes no.
Unfortunately, your will has
been tabled, um, representative
to explain his vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to make it clear that I
actually support this bill, but
I'm very concerned about the
budget, particularly with the
unknown of what's gonna happen
at the federal level, and I also
agree with the chair to the
budget as well. Well, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Go to HB 410.
Representative, are you ready?
Uh, yes, Madam Chair. Uh, we
also have a committee substitute
that we had sent to the
secretary.
We could discuss the committee
substitute.
So, um,
I think they're being passed out
now.
Um, I know that there's 2 bills
that we'll be bringing up and so
I'd like to for you to.
To present your bill, um.
I was hoping there would be one.
Uh
United Bill
Um, and I guess you can discuss
that at some point as well, but,
um, with that, if you go ahead
and give us the.
The number and we can begin with
your bill. Thank you. Uh, the
202 number is 230941.3 Ms. OK,
please proceed wait uh for
discussion, do you let's move
to.
move to
Thank you. Move to move this up
for discussion.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, so, uh, House
Bill 410, um.
Well, let me start more broadly,
and I'll get to some of the
questions that the chair was
asking. So I just want to be
clear right now in New Mexico,
if a bad actor were to abuse
your data or to use it for a
purpose that you had not
intended or not agreed to or
didn't know, there really isn't
much that the AG or you could do
to protect your data or go back
and fix it. So it really leaves
All New Mexicans vulnerable to
the fact that we can't protect
our data. And so this is why
this topic, uh, and both the
sponsor, I am the sponsor the 7
had talked at length about how
important it is we get um
protections in place as soon as
possible, um, on these issues.
So, uh, the committee substitute
goes a bit more in depth into
some of the topics that we have.
Uh, pages 1 through 13 are a lot
of definitions. And one
definition I want to point out
to the committee in particular
is on page 12 and the
definition.
of sensitive data, that'll come
up again, but effectively it
means that it protects your
health data, your citizenship,
sexual orientation, um, your
social security number, your
financial accounts, etc. and you
can look through that a little
bit closer.
When you continue on, if you go
to section 3, which starts on
page 14. It tells who's exempted
from this, which is essentially
is
a political um uh public bodies
and also others that are already
covered by HIPAA data that's
already covered by HIPAA and
other statutes as well, and it
limits the data, um, to be used
for what it's intended to be
used for and what people know
that it's going to be used for.
Uh, section 3 continues on and
then section 4 starts on page
19, and that's where we get into
some of these consumer rights
and their protections.
Essentially, uh, any consumer
can uh revoke or opt out of
their data being used and they
can essentially make it an easy
process that it's as easy for
signing up as it is to revoke
your data. Uh, one of the
examples I gave to someone the
other day was, you know, like an
unsubscribe button, it should be
that easy to opt out of your
data if needed.
Section 5 begins on page 23, and
that um authorized that offers
authorization to other
individuals to do this on your
behalf. Section 6 is when it
gets really interesting and I do
want to point out that some of
this was inspired by, um, HB
3307. And what this is is it
limits, um, it limits what it's
to, it's what it's needed for.
It also means that you're up,
you have to opt in for use of
your sensitive data. So if you
give a company, um, your sexual
preferences because the website
that's useful for that.
They have, you have to opt into
giving that data, they just
cannot, uh, it's not an opt out
option that one.
Similarly, it's an opt-in for
all children, so like 307, this
is an opt in for sensitive data
for all consumers in New Mexico
and an opt-in for uh children
under the age of 13, which is in
line with federal COPA, um, CoA
uh regulations as well.
And then it also limits how they
can use the specific geolocating
information as well.
Section 7 talks about online
services, products and features.
Um, that is an opt-in for
services online services,
products and features online,
um, for under 18 for anything,
and you can't message kids
unless you already know them.
Uh, so that begins on page 29.
Section 8 is on page 32, and
this is kind of one of the
exciting things that we worked
at the AG on. Um, it's these
data protection assessments,
which require, well, just kind
of sets up the form of it. What
these would do is it would
require companies to explain how
the data is being protected and
to send that over to the AG's
office as well. Section 9 lays
out the relationship between a
controller and a processor. So
when you think of um a
controller, think of somebody
who owns the business, who's
running the business, who's
running that online source and
the process
is the one that's moving all
that data around, right? And it
sets up that relationship and
that contract that has to exist,
because what processors might be
moving the data, they should not
necessarily be reviewing and
looking at all the data.
And that begins on page 35.
Section 10 is the details of how
the assassin would, would work,
and that's page 38.
Section 11 is how you process
de-identified data. And so
effectively, there's 3 types of,
well, there's 4 types of data,
there's sensitive data that's
very specific. There's personal
data, but then you also have
de-identified data, which is you
just throw it in with everybody
else, and they cannot tie it
back to you is the goal, and
this clarifies what that should
look like when that data may be
sold later to ensure that it
remains de-identified, um,
section 12 is, uh, starts on
page 42, and it's the
limitations essentially.
it has to comply with laws and
other standards that we expect
freedom of speech, things like
that.
And then, uh, section 13 and I'm
sure we'll talk a bit more about
this one is a Mexi the mechanism
for removing data for users as
well.
Section 14 is uh is uh the
protections against what might
be misuse or sold to be misused
later uh with uh with the
federal government. So should
this data, you know, be used to
harm someone in New Mexico, um,
the, the AG can take action.
Section 15 is uh civil
investigation that the AG can
move forward with Section 16 is
the civil penalties that they
can take and section 17 is the
severability which says that if
one section of
It's very short and easy Bill,
uh, you know, is found to be not
uphold in court, um, that the
rest of it should still uphold.
So again, the basis of what 410
says is that we believe that we
need data protections that
complete, I would say 3 things.
One, that it protects our
vulnerable vulnerable
populations, but also the
consumers at large that your
data that when, when you, you
know, when it's being used, it's
being used for the purpose that
you expect it to be used for.
2, it gives teeth to the age, as
we know right now, there is no
national data protection in
place for adults and for, for
many children, anyone over 13
really. There's nothing that
really protects us. So 22 other
states have begun passing these
bills. This bill is based on
best practices after numerous
conversations with the AGs in
multiple states about what
works, what's been holding up in
court, and the direction that
these policies are moving in and
what we want to continue to do.
And, and lastly that it's
enforceable, that the language
in here will hold up in court
and that there won't be a
question if it's, you know,
follows First Amendment or
things like that.
I, I think it, it remains one of
the strongest while staying in
line with the intent of, of what
we're trying to do here, which
is making sure that our
populations are protected. I do
want to thank the sponsors of HB
307, because we didn't have
often language in here
originally for for for kids.
That would have been opt-out
language. And this falls more in
line with those strong
protections we're seeing that,
that I believe we held up in
here, but again, children data
would have to be opt in,
sensitive data would have to be
opted in for the specific.
excuses laid out.
We are still working with other,
um, with some of the, the
business community and various
folks on a section 13 to make
sure it works as intended. Um,
we want to make sure that it,
the language fits in with the
bill and, and works correctly.
So again, we feel confident in
this, this version of the bill,
um, those are some of the
differences and I can talk a
little bit more about that as we
continue. Um, I have with me my
expert Julie Meade with um the
AG's office as well, who I will
be referring to is consumer
protector in Chief, uh, because
that's how we see it in the
bill. But, you know, hopefully.
We, we have a productive
conversation and with that we
stand for questions.
Thank you.
Uh, do we have, um, anybody in
here opposed to the bill.
OK? If we could start a line.
Uh, there'll be a one minute.
Time limit.
You hold it? OK, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Marshall Martinez, the executive
director of Equality New Mexico.
And we stand in opposition of
House Bill 410, including the
committee substitute. This
committee sub offers weak
enforcement mechanisms for
protecting privacy rights. It
relies on the capacity and
resources of the Attorney
General's office, leaving many
privacy violations unaddressed.
Without a right, private right
of action, individuals have no
direct means to defend their
rights against companies that
misuse their data. Queer and
trans people
have been left begging
governments to defend or protect
us for decades and even
currently are begging for that
protection by this attorney
General with no response or
action.
Please do not put us in this
position when it comes to the
very real harm from the misuse
of data against us. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Lena
Weber, policy director with the
ALLU New Mexico. We also
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill, including the
committee sub. Um, because of
the amount of data that would
still be subject to opt out
mechanism. Um, we know that
that's really just too
burdensome for for consumers in
New Mexico's, New Mexicans often
consent often just works as a
simple pop-up for opt out, um,
we appreciate the example of the
subscribe button, but what often
happens is that you have to go.
to every single company website,
app, data broker, sit down and
find their opt-out mechanism,
communicate with them, and hope
they comply. And if they don't
convince the EG to take on your
case and for busy New Mexicans,
we know that most of us just
don't have the time to do that.
We have to be really clear-eyed
about the seriousness of the
threats to New Mexico and New
Mexicans' personal information
being used against us in this
moment when we are quite
literally surrounded by hostile
out of state governments,
anti-abortion, anti-LGBTQ, and
anti-immigration vigilantes and
militia groups who are already.
purchasing our data from data
brokers and tech billionaires
who will always prioritize their
profit over our safety. For
those of us less at risk.
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Alison Riley, public
policy director at the Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. We
understand data privacy is very
important, and other states have
implemented aspects of data
privacy successfully, but given
the language in this bill, we
cannot support it at this time.
The additional requirements
translate directly into
increased costs that divert
valuable resources away from
innovation and growth.
Ultimately, the unintended
consequences of the bill will
force small businesses to scale
back or relocate. We would like
to work with a sponsor on a
small business amendment.
The definition of a small
business in this case is a
business that processes or
controls the personal data of at
least 100,000 consumers per year
or 25,000 consumers per year and
to raise revenue from the sale
of that personal data.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Ray Ray.
I'm with Bold Futures,
marginalized groups including
LGBTQ folks, people of color,
those seeking reproductive
healthcare and those with
different documentation statuses
are especially vulnerable online
and in need of additional
privacy protections.
Unfortunately, HB 410 does not
provide the strong privacy
protection we need and risks
creating an illusion of safety.
Not only does this bill exempt
some of the biggest actors from
regulation. It also allows for
widespread sales.
and purchase of sensitive data.
This exposes marginalized groups
to tracking and surveillance by
data brokers and hostile
entities, risking our safety and
privacy at a time when so many
of our communities are being
targeted for violence and
discrimination. Additionally,
the bill's vague definition of
heightened harm could lead to
the removal of vital resources
and information for minors on
topics like gender affirming
care, abortion and contraception
by companies fearing legal
action from a partisan attorney
general. We urge the committee
to vote no.
Hello.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Arturo Castillo
and I'm the director of equity
and culture at Conservation
Voters in Mexico or CVNM
depending on how you're feeling.
Um, how Bill for 10 appears to
be modeled off of legislation
passed in other states that
unfortunately hasn't succeeded
in changing business as usual.
New Mexico deserves something
different because we have seen
how disinformation and
misinformation takes hold in our
local communities, creating
polarization and division.
Additionally, this
misinformation and
disinformation campaigns are
currently attacking our
democracy. Conservation.
sees the need for meaningful
data protection and security
because our movement for climate
justice depends on accurate
scientific information. However,
this bill does not achieve that.
Thank you.
Thank you. And Patrick, uh,
let's go to Zoom.
Isaiah Torres. Thank you.
Um, my name is Isaiah Torres.
I'm the statewide policy manager
at the Center for Civic Policy.
Uh, we are here to oppose the
committee's substitute for House
Bill 410 because it exempts many
of the large entities that
collect and sell vast amount of
personal data. These exemptions
weaken the bill's intended
protections and overlook the
reality that these entities are
often the primary data
collectors. New Mexicans deserve
stronger, more comprehensive
privacy policies that protect
them from powerful interests,
not legislation with gaps enough
to accommodate for multitina.
corporations. Thank you for your
time and thank you for the work
you do for the state of Mexico.
Matt Schwartz.
And then chair members of the
committee, thank you for
allowing me to testify today.
Thank you for your attention to
the issue of data privacy. My
name is Matt Schwartz, and I'm a
policy analyst with Consumer
Reports based in Washington DC I
previously testified in support
of HB 307, and today I'm
testifying in respectful
opposition to HB 410. I've
submitted the letter, uh, to the
committee that shares our
concerns in further detail, but
in general, we believe that HB
410 currently replicates too
many of the loopholes.
Present in other industry
sponsored state laws to be
workable for consumers.
Well, we appreciate that the
submitted committee substitute
includes recognition of
universal opt out mechanisms and
authorized agents. There's still
a number of issues with this
approach.
HB 410 still doesn't include
meaningful data minimization
provisions, strong enforcement
mechanisms and includes many
industry-wide and other
exemptions that could undermine
the core purpose of the bill.
Again, more detailed thoughts
are in our written comments, but
thanks for the time and happy to
answer any questions you may
have.
Andrew Kingman.
Hi, good afternoon. My name is
Andrew Kingman, uh, I represent
the state privacy and Security
Coalition. We're a multi-sector
group. Uh, I also have a
background as a privacy
compliance attorney. We work on
these types of bills nationally.
Our only major issue with HP 410
is with the new section 13. It
is redundant with other parts of
the bill with regards to
attempting to cover sensitive
data, um, and it does this in a
way that doesn't really fit with
the rest of the bill. HP 410
critically.
establishes a strong consumer
control of opt-in consent for
any collection and processing of
sensitive data broadly defined
and include data regarding
biometric data, precise
geolocation, children's data,
data regarding racial identity
or sexual orientation, but
section 13 itself makes no
distinction between controllers
and processors as the rest of
the bill does. There are
duplicative rights already in HB
410 regarding deletion and
access, but it has different
timelines to respect.
on. So would love to work with a
sponsor on um on moving this
bill forward, uh, but without
section 13. Thank you. Happy to
answer any questions.
Renzo Soto.
Renzo Soto.
Hello, can you hear me? Yes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members, I thank you
for the opportunity to testify
today. My name is Renzo Soto
here in office for 10
representing technet, uh, I, I
do want to start by mentioning
that we are very grateful to the
sponsor for being willing to
listen to our concerns as well
as the proposed solutions that
we have with um some of what was
introduced by the committed
substitutes. I also want to
mention that was prepared to
support.
the inclusion of
some technical fixes that we had
submitted most of which were
just fixing errors, uh, just
like
Mr. King we do believe that the
underlying framework under
hospital can provide strong
consumer protection while
allowing businesses to
meaningfully comply and provide
the data protections that are
needed to consumers as well as
businesses. However, with the
committee substitute, which I
will know we are still reviewing
there are some provisions of the
notable confusion.
Such as 13 that has already been
raised as well as additions
borrowing from laws from other
states are currently enjoying.
Um, so we do want to work with
the sponsor concerns as well as
providing framework that
encourages compliance and
establish
and if you are taking from
passenger?
Uh, do we have anybody here in
favor of the bill?
Ready, if you guys could line
up, we get the attendant to hold
the mic. You have one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington speaking onhalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce that supports this
bill. I think all of us would
agree that helped out as among
the most personal and private
information that we've got.
Strong data privacy protections,
help consumers and boost their
confidence that they are dealing
with the responsible business
establishing uniform rules for
data collection and processing
will help businesses streamline
compliance and avoid legal
uncertainties also data security
measures can prevent cost
data breaches and lawsuits, so
having the same data standards
weeds out the bad actors and
limits gaining competitive
advantage through irresponsible
data practices.
Afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce. We echo a lot of what
Mr. Bollington relayed. We do
think that this bill strikes a
very good balance relative to
Promoting strong uh consumer
data protections, but also
protections that have been
vetted and implemented in other
states and that businesses have
been able to actually abide by
without major disruption to
their models. Um, we think it's
important to create some
uniformity on the state level as
opposed to having a massive
patchwork of different data
privacy laws in every state.
That makes it really hard for
local businesses that are small
to compete on a national level,
and it also makes it hard for
national businesses to operate
here, because we've got, we're
subjecting them to unique uh
regulatory.
models that, that might be very
uh strict here and and require
um specific um provisions that
they comply with, then they
don't have to comply with any
anywhere else. We do echo the
same concern as was mentioned
online with section 13. We think
it's novel, we, we have some
some pretty significant concerns
with it, but the sponsor and the
attorney General's office have
been great in terms of working
with us. We hope that can
continue so we can resolve our
issues with that section. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Art Hall on behalf of
Fidelity Investments.
Fidelity Investments is
officially neutral on the
committee sub at this point, but
we thought it was very important
to point out.
How much better it was than
House Bill 307, it's far more
workable.
I'll spill 4:10 is similar to
what we're complying with in
other states, which is very
helpful for a multi-state
corporation and we very much
appreciate both the sponsor and
the AG's office working so
collaboratively with us on a
number of amendments to improve
the committee's sub. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyist for the
consumer data uh industry
association and we too are still
um reviewing the sub and we
appreciate the fair credit
Reporting Act and Graham Leelily
Act exemptions um in this bill.
We support a well crafted
privacy bill and
continue to work with the
sponsor.
I've had several conversations
with representative Cerrado and
appreciate her willingness to
work with us, uh, to figure out
outstanding issues like ands and
oars.
Thank you. Do we have anybody on
Zoom?
No, madam. All righty,
let's go to the committee.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for bringing this bill
forward.
I, um, I have a couple of
questions for you.
Um, does this bill proposed data
privacy provisions that exist in
other states, or does this
create a unique framework.
That would only exist in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Leader, um.
I would say 90% of this is in
line with what we're seeing in
other states, I'll even point to
some of the small business
protections that we're seeing in
here as well that it would apply
to businesses that have
interactions with uh customer
interactions of 35,000 or more,
um, that we're seeing on the
rise in Maryland and Connecticut
and other states as well. Um, so
I would say 90% of it. And, and
truly when we went back to add
some of these protections, we
made sure they were in line with
those as well. The opt-in for
kids was also from Connecticut
ensuring that I would say the
pieces that are um that that
that are, that are newer, um,
would be the section 13 that
we're still trying to prices and
next I'm gonna have Mr. Kingman
sit with me because I think he
explained the the nuances fairly
well about making sure we're
making a a controller, which is
to my mind the business and the
processor who processes the data
very clear in that. So that is
the part that we are, we're
still working with on them and
then uh 4 section 14, which is
something that was noted to the
AG's office by other um.
Attorney generals as well as
something that they wanted to
add in there as well. So, um, I
would that that's the full
answer, Madam Chair, Madam
Leader. Ah thank you, you
answered my second question on
that because everyone keeps
talking about Section 13 and
they're concerns about 13. My,
my biggest concern is that we're
Possibly passing something out
of a committee that's not quite
ready yet, and so that that's,
as you know, that's a concern
for me. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, how?
How do you know small businesses
and startups.
How do you know how they're
going to be impacted by this.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Leader. So, um,
again, I'm gonna go ahead and
turn over to.
We define the 35,000.
So I'm, I just want to point it
out to you in there.
Yeah, so if you look on the
bottom of page 14, it specifies,
so page 14 starts with the
exemptions, who is not under
this bill. And it it makes it
specific that who processes
personal data of at least 35,000
consumers, excluding personal
data. This is important because
I, I, I think of like V Hill
Hill's jerky because I just like
them. Like I think of a small
New Mexico company that doesn't
necessarily know how to put
together a data assessment, who
may not have done that for other
states, they are excluded from
being required to put
sat together, which is part of
in this bill, but that's why
we're ensuring that the larger
businesses have to, uh, work
with that and that our consumers
have protections.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative for your answers.
My last question is um
concerning uh page 54, Section
F.
This isn't really typical
language that you see in a bill
and.
Uh, to me, it seems like it's
unenforceable and a separation
of powers, and, and it seems
like you're trying to define
what an injunction is for the
judiciary branch.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, leader, I'm
gonna hand it over to my expert
to kind of go more in depth
where that language came from.
Madam Chair, Madam Leader, this
is actually language that we
reviewed and the importance of
this language was because of
section 13 and 14 to make sure
that if there were challenges,
um, we had a strong severability
clause so that it wouldn't
impact the other provisions of
of this bill and we believe this
this particular type of
severability clause has been
included and has withstood any
challenges.
So Madame Chair Representative,
so this language is in other
states.
Chair, Madam Leader, I believe
so. I could not name the states,
uh, off the top of my head I'm
happy to pull that information
for you following um this bill
as well. Thank you.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
You know, I've, I've been
contacted by several entities,
some in favor, some opposed.
Uh, I'll say it's better than
307.
Um, and so, um, it's, it's an
unchartered territory and, and I
commend you for trying to make
the the heavy lift.
Um, and, and for consumer
protection, uh, I'm fine with
that. I just want to get it
right.
The first time. I don't want to
create.
Unintended
Consequences as we do so often
here in our wisdom, and so I, I
really, uh, I'm torn on this
bill, um.
But I'll listen to the rest of
the committee, um, debate and
make up my decision later. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I didn't
think you'd be I get to this end
of the table so quickly.
Um
First of all, uh, Madam Chair
and presenters and thank and
thank you for, I mean, obviously
there's a lot of hard work has
gone into this bill.
Um
And I think the same is true
with 307, and it's a tough
topic.
Uh, to try to figure out how to
come to grips with. Um.
And, and I've had some
conversations with some of the
lobbyists. I've had
conversations with the Attorney
General's office, um,
And
I haven't had a chance to review
the sub.
So
That's sort of the background in
which I'm coming to this.
Uh, I am cur I, is it possible
to get a list of the states that
have adopted this.
And
I'm curious about.
How long has any state
And this in place and what is
their experience been?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Matthews,
and I, I do want to, this, this
is why I walk through each
section, cause I know that it's
a hefty bill, and I know you do,
especially do your due diligence
and we, we can do that. So I
appreciate that and and we'll do
our best. So there are 22
different states that have
variations. Uh, California has
had some of the longest ones.
They are some of the most strict
ones. This one is based off of
one of the oldest, I would
argue, which is Connecticut in
2019.
California's um model was pushed
forward by their ballot
initiatives. So there was a,
there was a a push immediately
to to get that moving as quickly
as possible and they, and they,
they're working on it still and
I I've actually talked to um
people I know that are data
privacy lawyers in California
and and privacy lawyers in in
other places so that's kind of
what what the overall sense is
there. But then you have
Connecticut that came forward in
2019 with a bill that's pretty
similar to this, and this is why
we continue to work with them on
this. Following them, you
had Virginia also start to do
this as well. We know Maryland
has a similar bill to this as
well. Those are the ones that I
can name off the top, in
Colorado and as well.
And Oregon
So these are all, those are the
ones off the top of my head that
are that are in our head, I
should say, Madam Chair and rep,
um, those are the ones that are
similar to what we're looking at
here. I will say, as mentioned,
Section 13 is, is a bit unique,
but what I'll say about that and
and two leaders point as well is
that what we're trying to clean
up here and I hope what you
heard from the opposition is to
make sure that opposition
regarding section 13 is that it
is in line with the intent of
the rest of the language, and
that is the key that we keep
controller and processor.
as it is in the rest of the
bill, as we're seeing in other
places, um, keeping it clear,
um, you know, how to utilize
that, not that you're mining for
more and making that very clear.
And so that is why that's still
ongoing, but the entire intent
of that section is to keep that
and so that I want to mention
that as part of the
conversation. But those are the
other states you can look to
that have been putting into
place data protections.
Uh, thank you, and, uh, madam
chair, Representative.
Um, of those states.
Uh, do they all preclude a
private right of action.
Madam Chair, in my conversations
with data privacy, uh, lawyers
that I know they said that
California has the one private
right of action. It is
specifically for data breaches,
um, and I, I don't want to talk
about other bills as much, but
part of the reason.
What was difficult for them when
I read them, the pride of right
action of 307 was that it was
for all um violations, and that
would be very difficult for a
business to do business here.
And when I say that it's
businesses across New Mexico
utilize tools like Microsoft,
uh, uh, Amazon Tools, Google
Tools, I mean, you name the tool
and we use it if we change how
if if we're doing something very
novel, it will make it difficult
for those to continue to operate
in New Mexico because we're such
a small subset of users.
And so I, I just put that out
there. The private, there is no
private right of action because
as I mentioned earlier, we see
as many states do our AG as
being our consumer protector in
chief, and they have the ability
to use the, the, the commerce
clause and other tools in their
chest to take action on behalf
of um our consumers in our state
and, and our vulnerable
communities.
Madam Chair, representative, I,
I, I appreciate the concern, a
couple questions about that.
First of all,
It's, it sort of seems to me
that
Um, small business or medium
sized businesses or so forth,
and I don't know if the
insurance industry is responded.
To provide protection.
Or
Inappropriate lawsuits or
whatever caused by a data breach
that was not necessarily
inappropriate lawsuits, but that
are caused by a violation of a
law like this. Is there any
protection like that.
Or um business.
Or it or
Any other institution.
Madam Chair, um, representative,
I, I think I understand your
question, but if I get it wrong,
just let me know. Um, we do have
make it very clear that if an
individual consumer who's a
resident in New Mexico feels as
though their data was abused,
they have to go and talk and
they, they go to that business
that that um controller
themselves and that controller
has 45 days to respond. If for
whatever reason the request
isn't correct, if that isn't how
it works, whatever was missing,
they can respond and deny that.
The consumer then has a, and
when they deny it, they
Also have to give the consumer
the contact information to the
AG and an explanation for what
went on. Those are protections
for businesses to take in case
they feel like they're unfairly
being targeted. Um, and I
believe there's another section
towards the end as well that
talks about how that is, so I'll
pull that up as as you continue
onward, uh, Julie, if you wanted
to respond as well, Madam Chair
Representative, additionally,
the data assessments were
designed so that the Attorney
General is receiving reports and
can.
monitor how many times a
consumer has been their request
has been rejected or how many of
these actions are happening so
that the Attorney General then
can.
take enforcement actions.
Madam Chair, just to end on that
as well, if you look at section
16, the civil enforcement Acts,
uh, uh part on page 51, it lays
out that if there are any
violations, um, that the
Attorney General shall provide a
controller or processors a 30
days written notice identifying
the specific provisions that
were violated and and we give
them that chance to respond.
A.
Madam Cha presenters, I'm not
sure that totally answered my
question. I
If, if, if I'm in business and
I'm concerned that uh somebody's
gonna sue me because I released
information I shouldn't have.
Just kind of what we're talking
about, right? OK. Um, then, I
mean.
It, it seems like instead of
preventing or or prohibiting a
private cause of action.
Uh, by, uh, somebody who feels
that they've been um damaged by.
Whatever happened
That the easiest way for the
business to have protection is
to buy some insurance coverage
from somebody who's providing
some kind of coverage for that,
and I'm just kind of wondering
why the market has a,
I, I don't know that the market
has responded to this issue in
that way, but I'm just curious
if you, if you know whether the
market has responded and
provided.
You know, some legal protection.
For the business community or
not, not for intentional
violations, but were
unintentional violations. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank yous
representative. I've not seen
that product on the market, but
I will again point to pages 51
and 52 that do explain that, um,
and especially 52 at the top,
that if the controller or
processor cures the notice
violations and provides the AG
with an express written
statement that alleged
violations have been cured. No
further violations shall occur,
no further, no.
should be initiated against the
controller or the processor. So
while that market need hasn't
been answered, I believe how the
bill is set gives opportunity
for correction, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
thank you for that and I, I, I
wanna look at that.
Closely, but it does appear to
help solve that problem, um.
I'm curious, but I, I would tell
you that not having a private
cause of action in this bill is
of concern to me.
Um, but again, I haven't read
the whole thing, so.
Um
The age of 13.
What is the reason?
To
Uh, I had to
what his reason for adopting the
age of 13 as the key age for in
this area.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, that is in
line with federal laws, the, the
copapa law we say it wrong,
COPPA, the Childline protection
law that exists at the federal
level, um, that is referenced in
section 6.
We go in additional step that
again is in line with a number
of other states that protects
people under the age of 18, and
where you have to opt in for
online services, products or
features if you're under the age
of 18 for, for that use. So for
us it's 13 and 1813 because that
falls in line with federal um
laws and then or guidelines I
should say and then 18 because
we believe that those children
should also be protected.
OK. Um,
Thank you
Ma'amer representative.
Um
So
If we were to adopt this bill.
And
Um
I'm on my computer.
And signing up for some product
or service or something.
Um, and providing personal
information in the process of
doing that. What?
What is my screen going and
we've adopted this bill.
What is my screen going to be
showing me about what my
protections are, if anything.
And
I'm, I'm, I'm trying to envision
what the notice is that popping
up.
Uh, notices pop up all the time,
and I quite frankly don't
understand half of them.
Um
health
Friendly is this process.
How meaningful is it going to be
to people between the ages of 13
and 113.
And you talk about that some.
Madam Chair Representative, I
really appreciate that question
because it requires us to look
at the real world experience of
how our users are going to
interact.
And so, um,
For the for many websites, you
won't see a significant shift
because a lot of uh companies
are already in line with these
rules and regulations because or
laws, because there are laws in
other states. What this does is
it gives the AG the power to
protect our citizens when that
is abused, when, when you think
that your data has been abused
and sold.
Um, what I will say is that the
biggest difference is that when
it comes to your sensitive data,
and, and again, going back to
page 12.
Uh
This is what is considered
sensitive data, if I may, Madam
Chair, um, data revealing racial
or ethnic origin, religious
beliefs, mental or physical
health condition or diagnosis,
sex life, sexual orientation, or
citizenship or immigration
status.
Consumer health data, the
processing of genetic or
biometric data for the purposes
of uniquely identifying an
individual, an individual's
social security, driver's
license, state ID or passport,
an individual's account login,
financial account, debit card or
credit card number in
combination with any other
required security or access
code.
Personal data collected from a
known child.
Data concerning individual
status is a victim of a crime
and precise geolocation.
When it comes to any of that
information. If you want to play
Pokemon Go, they have to
specifically ask you, can we use
your, your location.
to play Pokemon Go. And the only
time we're gonna use that is
when you're playing Pokemongo
and you have to say, yes, you
can use it for playing Pokemon.
if and that's gonna be the same
and it has to be for the
intended purpose of what your
data is supposed to be used for.
And this is also interesting,
which what I appreciate about
what's being passed across the
country. If that data ends up
being sold.
That same purpose is the only
purpose that data can continue
to be used for.
So that's why it's really
important that if you can
identify that data back to a
person,
An individual, that data is
still protected as it continues
on.
Now, when it comes to children,
any kind of opt-in has to be
done for under 13 by a parent or
any child. And when it comes to
under 18, if they're using, if,
if it's an online product or
feature that has to be done,
they have to opt into anything
they give.
Any trends they have in that
sense, Madam Chair and
representative.
Oh, and I'll let Julia add on
that as well.
Madame Cher representative
specifically around what you
will see. So if you look at page
26, could you move a little
closer to the microphone
move the market.
I can't move it.
Oh they're glued.
I did not know that.
Madam Chair representative, is
that better?
I just wanted to, uh, add some
information about what you said,
what, what will we see and on
page 26 under responsibilities
of the controller, there is a
requirement for uh easily
accessible.
Uh, privacy notices that will
very clearly explain the options
for opting in, what needs to be
opted out, um, and so we think
we have an extensive sort of
requirement for businesses to
make it clear, um, easily
accessible privacy notice
explaining all of this.
Um
Thank you. um.
Thank you, both of you for the,
for the answer and Madam Chair,
um.
I get notices that pop up on the
screen now that say can we use
your location?
And I don't really have any
vague idea. I really don't
understand what they're using my
my location for unless I'm
ordering a pizza with home
delivery.
Um
And that's what I mean, I mean,
the stuff shows up, but it, but
I don't.
I don't have the background to
figure out.
Whether I should tell them, yes,
you can use my location or no
you can't because I don't know
what they're doing with it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and I'll be
honest for a lot of those, I
often will click no, right,
because I don't really know. I
think that's the same that
you're gonna want for not you,
but that I'm looking for uh uh
for our vulnerable populations,
um, you know, we don't want
their their location to be
tracked constantly if they want
to opt out of that option, and
that's why we want to
consistently make that the case
is that people who want to opt
out because they are concerned
can do that pretty easily.
That's the goal.
here, but that when it comes to
your sensitive data, you have to
actively opt in and say, sure,
I'll, I'll let you, uh, I'll,
I'll, I'll tell you, you know,
my age or my, my sexual
preference or whatever, you
know, that's sensitive data that
I think or like that I, you
know, I gestational diabetes or
something, right? I am opting to
tell them that and they can have
that data, but it has, but it,
and they should be telling you.
We're looking at medicines you
might be interested or, you
know, nutritional supplements
that you might be interested or
something like that on on an
Amazon or something, you know,
if I give them that information,
it should be used for that
purpose, right, for, or maybe
it's um uh uh finding the right
product that I'm looking for
something, Madam Chan
representative.
Uh, ma'am share presenters, one
other thing that happens is
they'll ask you for some
information.
And if you opt out.
Then whatever it is you were
trying to.
Access whatever information that
was from them.
Um, they cut you off. It will
that still be allow allowable
under the substitute, Madam
Chair and representative.
I, I want to say that's why
we're very specific about you
have to opt into, um, sensitive
data, data involving a child and
and because of that.
We, what I was warned again and
again by data privacy advocates
in other states by data privacy
lawyers in other states, was
that you have to think of the
consumer experience and what
they're going to go through. And
if every time they go to a
website and they have a barrage
of do you want opt in to give
this information, you want to
get opt in for that, what else
do you want to opt in for? Um,
it, it is overwhelming. The only
place where you have that much
opt in to my understanding is
overseas in Europe because it's
just a different population, the
processes privacy in a different
way.
There's no other state that does
it that expansively. So yes, if
you opt out, you may not uh have
access to certain services still
under this bill, but because it
is an opt out, you'll have
services until you opt out,
Madam Chair and representative.
OK. I'm sorry, I think Julie has
something to add.
Madam Chair Representative,
there's also a fairly easy
mechanism that we wanted to make
sure we required if you opt out,
uh, or opt in depending on what
the information is, there's an
easily just as easily to opt in
or opt out, there's a mechanism
to revoke that opt-in or opt
out.
That's uh, Madam Chair, uh.
Uh, representative, um, that's
good to know because you go down
the path and
You know, it never ends.
Uh
Um, just a couple more
questions, um.
The
And I have great respect for the
Attorney General's office. Um, I
used to, uh, work for an
attorney general, several of
them, um, and I'm curious
though, what particular
expertise or resources as does
our attorney general's office
have to to do things that would
be required of the office under
this act.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think decades of consumer
protection, uh, experience for
the Attorney General's office is
where it comes from also.
We have been currently
responsible for um uh enforcing
and overseeing the data breach
of um act in New Mexico and
monitoring data breaches, um,
and so I would think that of all
the state agencies and uh
regulatory entities in New
Mexico, the Attorney General's
office is the most well suited
to monitor and enforce enforce
this act.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, I, I
agree the Attorney General's
office would be the logical
place. I'm just wondering if
If uh
Uh, I know when I was at the
attorney General's office, we
didn't we we weren't doing it,
we did consumer protection all
the time, but it didn't, wasn't
this kind of thing because this
kind of thing didn't really
exist at that point, and I'm, my
question really was,
Um, what kind of commitment does
the Attorney General's office
have and what kind of resources
do they have financially and
others.
This is very
techno technology specific kinds
of things.
Um
And somewhat different than a
lot of times with the consumer
protection division does.
Um, and I'm wondering if there's
a special budget for this or
there are plans to hire.
Uh, have a division that would
do this, what, what would be the
enforcement plan.
Madame Chair Representative, not
including myself, that's why
we've hired a lot of young
lawyers who are living and
existing and working within this
tech world, um, and I don't know
if, uh, through, I think
technology and today's
environment and how we're
existing and protecting
consumers in today's technology
environment is of key importance
to this attorney general. Um, I
can't speak to specific, uh,
resources, but we do have a.
a lot of young, uh, very astute
lawyers in technology. Certainly
not myself included. OK.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, and
madam chair, I just, I think I
have just one more question. I'm
looking at the fur.
And I realized it was written in
terms of the other bill, but.
Uh, maybe you can help me with
this. It's on page.
Let, let me find it here.
OK.
Page 3 of the FIR.
In the neck, the last full
paragraph, it reads HB 410.
Does not mandate.
The re-identification of
de-identified or pseudonyios I
don't understand how you say the
word, data or the maintenance of
identifiable data for
associating consumer requests.
Do you know what that sentence
means?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
just give me a minute. I thought
I had my FR with me, but I'm
just gonna.
What page is that, Madam Chair
representative John Page, Madam
Chair, it's on page 3 of the FIR
and it's in the
Mm
is it's in the paragraph that
begins the bill outlines
requirements.
Give me one moment I'll we'll
respond, sorry. And then on the.
4 sentence.
Near the end, it starts HB
410,410 does not mandate.
And then it
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
not quite sure what they're
getting at, but we have adjusted
um from the original bill in the
committee substitute the
definition and how we're
handling de-identified data. So
I'm not sure this applies
anymore, but I'm not really sure
what this actually is getting
at.
OK.
I, uh, madam chair, um,
presenters I had this.
I
I just couldn't figure out what
that sentence meant.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative Parajon.
Madam Chair. Thank you so much
for presenting for bringing this
or chero in Serato actually, um,
and AG's office, I have a few
questions and um I've
categorized them to make them as
easy as possible, uh, the first
relate to the opt out and I
wanna like understand a little
bit about what that looks like,
and I, I think that'll help us
to visualize.
Um, I have some questions on the
exemptions piece and also on um
identity. So, uh, to start with
the opt out piece, you, you were
sort of describing a little bit
of what that looks like in
Europe, where there's a whole
checklist of different um pieces
that you can opt out of and I've
I've been on some European uh
websites with, um, like like,
like buying flights and I see
that they do have a lot of
different checklists, much more
than what we see here in the
United States where it's just
like one.
Yes or no, um, so could you
detail like what it would look
like to opt out with in this
bill, and like what would be the
specific steps that someone
would need to to take to ensure
their data isn't being shared.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, so, um, I'm
gonna go to
The section where we line it
out.
If you go to page 22 on the
bottom of the page on line 19.
You have a section 6.
And it specifies that a control,
oh sorry, uh, yeah, a
controller. Yeah, well I'm gonna
go a little bit behind that.
So it says, it says a little bit
earlier.
Just want to get the right, OK,
so, uh, section C says except as
otherwise provided a controller
shall comply with the request by
consumer to exercise the
consumer's rights subsequent to
the opt out, uh, if you will, of
this section as follows.
And it has all these different
ones and it says that the, the
controller will provide an
effective mechanism for a
consumer to revoke the
consumer's consent under this
section, it is at least as easy
as the mechanism by which the
consumer provided the consumer's
consent.
So what that says is that if you
go onto a website and you just
said, yep, cool, except cookies,
let's go. It should be that
easy. Like I said, an
unsubscribe button to to revoke
that permission and step
backwards.
Got it, Madam Chair and
representative. So with the,
with that cookies but in detail,
like what you are opting in to
share.
Ma'am representative.
Or opting out, not to share.
So Madame Chair and
Representative, what this bill
overall does is it ensures that
the intent for what you're
utilizing, what you're inputting
your data for, right? I used for
that purpose. So if you're
inputting data about uh yourself
cause you're you're.
Signing up to join um a a group
of a website, right? That data
will only be used for that
purpose. It cannot be used to
identify you for something else,
um, if it's used against you in
a different, in the federal
case, it cannot be used in that
same case. But the, but it
should be used for the purpose
in which you're giving it over
to.
Would you say, um, Madam Chair
and representative that this,
this process would be easy for
like an average citizen to
navigate, or maybe not an
average citizen, but an elderly.
Madam Cherry represented, I, I
appreciate that question because
I think that's really we're
looking at a diverse, uh, user
base, um, who is in New Mexico
and who will be using this, uh,
this service. So I think that
the goal of what this is is to
ensure that everybody can use
it. If everything turned into an
opt-in, that would very quickly
turn confusing for individuals
about how their data was being
used. And I, I will be the first
to admit that when European
sites have asked me to opt in, I
click through that button so
fast cause I wanna get to the
experience that I want.
Experience um and and so we're
trying to make this easy so that
people are protecting the data
they want to protect.
OK
Um, so,
Representative, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative, would you
say that it, it places a lot of
burden on consumers to be able
to manage the privacy settings,
um.
Or do you feel that it?
You know that this the way that
it's been implemented in other
states it hasn't actually been
as burdensome for consumers
Madam Chair represented, the
objective here is to make it as
easy for consumers as possible,
and that is why we have not only
that section that we read
earlier on page 22, but other
sections that make it clear that
if you're going to opt out, if
you're gonna go through this
process, either it should be as
easy as it was to get into, uh,
putting in the data or be that
um you were provided with a link
to how to go about it, that you
were given that opportunity.
So that's already here in the
bill. We're making it as giving
them as many avenues as
possible, madam representative,
and Madam Chair and
Representative, I like how
you've added an additional
definition here for dark.
Dark maneuvering, I think is
what you call it, Madam chair
and and representative, uh, dark
pattern. So is that is dark
patterning, is that like?
Creating a more difficult like
if a website does try to make it
more difficult to opt out, for
instance, Madam Chap
representative, yeah, Madam
Chair Representative, thank you.
So Dark patterns is it this is a
federal this is not. There is a
federal definition of dark
patterns in lines with what we
have here, we back up our with
the federal definition. What
that is is when they use
deceptive tools to make you give
away more information than you
intend to. Um, that's not good
business, that's not good
practices. If you think you're
giving your information to
Domino's to get your pizza
delivered, you know, you should
not.
have accidentally signed up for
5 other things along there that
are now being delivered to your
house, Madam Chair and
Representative. Madam Chair and
Representative, I definitely
relate to this, um, because I am
the victim of a data breach. Uh,
I was a victim of the Wells
Fargo data breach, and I must
say that I live with the
robocalls every week because of
this data breach that gave out
my phone number. Um, so I, I had
a question actually because
something was brought up here
about the private right of
action, and you said that in
California that there is a
provision in there.
And they're data bill that
allows there to be a private
right of action if data like
that is breached, so would a
bill like this allow for me to
sue for that kind of thing,
Madam Chair representative.
Madam Chair representative, so
we have a data breach, um,
statute that exists, um, and if
next year you and I want to work
on strengthening that. I'm very
interested in that opportunity,
Madam Chair Representative, I
will be honest unless Julie
disagrees. I don't see that how
in within this particular bill,
the data breach aspect,
primarily
also because this ends up being
a 55 page bill. So I think
though that would be absolutely
worthwhile having a further
conversation about how to deal
with data breaches.
Madam Chair Representative New
Mexico currently does have a
data breach, uh, act, um, it
does not include a private right
of action as it currently
stands.
Thank you Madam Chair and
Representative. I was hoping I
could make a few dollars, but
that doesn't seem like it maybe
next year. Madam Chair and um
representative so I'm gonna move
next into the few questions I
have on exemptions, um, and I
was looking at page 5, where
it's talking about um the
covered platforms.
And how the covered platforms,
uh, include revenues in excess
of 10 million or has at least 50
million users. So, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative who
would you exactly foresee with
this apply to?
Madam Chair Representative, that
definition is actually specific
for section 13.
So that does not apply to the
rest of uh the act or the bill,
I should say, Madam Chair and
Representative, part of that was
focusing in on businesses that
may, and correct me if I'm wrong
on this, but it's focusing on
businesses that may end up
selling data to the federal
government or otherwise that
might be utilized um and that
people are concerned in that
sense. So again, but overall the
protections are for those that
have more than 35,000 customers
to protect, to allow small
businesses to continue to.
operate.
Got it. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative, do you see
that there could be any kind of
loopholes that would be
exploited that would harm
consumer privacy in this, um, we
heard that in the public
testimony, but I wanted to ask
if you could respond to that.
Yeah, Madam Chair, thank you for
that question. In particular, I
don't see it. The exemptions you
see here are because they're
pretty much covered in other
statutes that exist. Um, HIPAA
is one of the exemptions, for
example, if your data is covered
by HIPAA, um, you, that is
exempted because that's already
covered by.
Um, there's a few of those,
right, um, uh, we have other
bills we have in 2023 we passed
bills that ensured that
political subdivisions in the
state were not selling sensitive
data to other states that could
be used against our citizens.
They are another one that's
exempted. So we really are just
trying to focus in on the
businesses that might be abusing
data, um, overall that I'm
madam, I don't know if I read
this right, but does it mean
that if a organization has, for
instance, HIPAA part of HIPA or.
Some of their services that they
offer are HIPAA related that
then the rest of the company is
exempted venture and Madam Cha
representative, it's really
funny you brought this up
because I was on the phone with
Julie for like 10 minutes
yesterday, ensuring that was not
the case, um, and part of the
reason it's, it, it's clear in
here and I'll let her add to it
is that we have a section that
talks about, um, uh companies
that are covered by HIPAA, but
then also data that's covered by
HIPA. So if the data is not
covered by HIPAA, it, and it
falls into the rest of these
categories, it would be covered
by 410. However, if
Yeah, that that's what I'll say,
so we do have those two
sections, I don't know if you
wanted to add, we just also say
when you're thinking about
exemptions. Oh, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair representative, um, the
exemption is for health
organizations directly pursuant
to HIPPA.
And so it's a, a pretty narrow
exemption for health
organizations under HIPAA.
Madam Chair and Representative,
so what percent of the business
has to be health related for to
qualify as a health
organization. I'm chair
representative. I don't think
it's distinguished by a
percentage. I think there's a
clear definition of, of what
these exempt health
organizations are because they
are specifically covered by
protections under HIPAA.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
just wondering because I, I, I
know like Amazon, for instance,
um, is, has some hipA, um,
eligible services like being
able to order different
medicines, so would a company
like Amazon be exempt just
because part of their services
representative, no, they would
not be exempt. They would have
to be an actual health
organization as defined and
covered by HIPAA, which Amazon
is not. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative that, um, I, I, I
see that one.
Um, so I, I would imagine that
then that exemption also applies
to um all the other
organizations, for instance,
like Meta and X who um, they
have, you know, they have
abilities where you can transfer
money, um, but they are not.
They're not that is that kind of
financial data would not be
accepted, is that correct, Madam
Chair?
And Chair Representative, that
is correct.
Thank you.
Um
And, and so kind of relatedly,
and this is the last question
for that section, but on page
51.
Um, the.
There's some, there's a mention
here or there, there's a
provision that um section 16.
B and line 19, and it, it talks
about.
Um
Like
I mean, I speak in like uh
eviction law prevention and and
such so this to me is a right to
cure, so if they, um, an
organization, for instance, is
found to be breaching data that
the AG would send them a letter
and then they would have the
right to fix it, um, within, I
think it said within 30 days.
Um, and then if, if they do cure
it, then the AG can't.
Prosecute that case, is that, is
that an accurate interpretation
of that, Madam Chair and and
representative.
And I'm chairing representative.
I don't know if it precludes,
but it definitely requires the
Attorney General to give
businesses an opportunity to
cure the violation before
proceeding to an action.
Um, depending on what happened,
whether the cure was full,
whether they then had a
subsequent violation, but yes,
that's the general intent.
So, uh, Madamarian
representative, if, if there was
a company that had multiple um
breaches, for instance, or
multiple alleged violations
would, would that be different
than a company who had one
alleged violation, for instance.
I'm sure representative, I'm not
sure what you mean by would that
be different in what way? I
guess, Madam Chairian
representative, I, I'm thinking
there might be companies who
continue to violate that right
to cure provision and the AG
continues to send them letters
and then they fix it for one
person, but then it's just this
endless
cycle of um sending like demand
letters, demand letters, demand
letters, and they stop and fix
it, but um, you know, if, if a
company has multiple violations
like that, and yeah, they're
curing them every single time,
but they're still doing it, are
those kind of organizations
gonna be in more trouble than
the ones who cure it immediately
and only have one breach, Madam
Madam Chair representative, and
I'm not gonna use the word hope.
I will say yes they will be in
more trouble. OK, great. Thank
you, Madam Chairian
representative. OK, my last
category is.
is identity authentication.
And, um, just really briefly
here, I.
I, I just wasn't sure like how
identity, um, authentication
would work and maybe it's in a
different part of the up, and I
just didn't see it, um, but
what, what would that look like,
Madam Chair and represent?
Madam Chair Representative, I'm,
I'm trying to figure out in what
context are you thinking, Madam
Chairpresentative? Um, I think
this is in the context of um,
When the, the, uh, when the
person asks the.
The, the website, for instance,
to delete part of their data,
the website has to verify that
that person is the person that
they're saying they are who
wants their data deleted.
So, um, there's a process here
that says you have to have like
identity verification.
Authentic authentication, and
I'm wondering what that looks
like, and I can look for the
age, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm pulling it up too. I think
it's in section 4, but give us a
moment.
Yeah, I think you're right on
Madame Chair and represented on
page 1910, it, it does mention
um the controller shall comply
with an authenticated consumer
request, um, but there.
another bird that I can
Madam Chair Representative, are
you coming back to that question
then
I oh yeah, I can't come back to
sorry I don't. So I see the line
Madam Chair represented, but
what are you um asking about
just that process, madam chair,
what what what is the process to
authenticate your identity.
Madam Chair representative, I
imagine it's gonna be a variant
based on the website, so I
imagine websites where you have
already you have a profile,
right? that may be that process
in and of itself that you've
already uploaded that
information. I would anticipate,
um, you know, for another
website that maybe sells things,
maybe it's, uh, you know,
connecting to your order or
something along those lines. The
objective here is not to, uh,
mine for additional data, you
know, not to try to find that
newness, um, but also to give um
the consumer the ability to uh
take action if they need to,
Madam Chairs representative. OK,
Madam Chair and representative,
I think what, what I was
imagining with identity
authentication is what I
recently had to go through to
authenticate that I was a
student, to get my student beans
discounts.
Online and that took a very long
time. It involved submitting
photos of myself, so I was just
wondering like what that
identity authentication process
might look like if you did want
to, for instance, like submit a
claim to remove your data, um,
but it sounds like it'll kind of
be left up to the businesses to
decide what that process looks
like, Madam Char representative.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
yes, with a caveat that those
data protection assessments,
that's part of that process,
Madam Chair and Representative,
and so that is also would be.
expected in the AG's office as
well.
Man.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um.
My last question here is related
to the definition section and um
kind of as part of that I
identity authentication section,
but um on page 12.
I, I really, um.
Like that you've just find a lot
of the different sensitive data
pieces.
Um, I saw in number in in line
11, you've identified or line 9
you have racial or ethnic
origin, you have the
citizenship, the immigration
status, the sex life, sexual
orientation.
Um, one thing that I, I think
was most worrisome for me is
like the part of gender forming
care and of our trans community.
Is
The definition for consumer
health data.
It, it does that cover?
Um, does that cover?
Those protections, Madam Chair
Representative, if you look on
page 4 and uh section K, that is
the consumer health data, um,
and that specifies online 18,
that it is uh includes but is
not limited to gender-affirming
health data and reproductive or
sexual health data.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
um, and thank you so much
Representative for answering
those questions.
Thank you. Is there anybody else
on the committee?
Before we take that motion, I I
I'd like to.
to
Let you all know what I want.
Um
So
In listening to the testimony
today, I think that there's
still some area to be worked on.
Um
I am
I am disappointed that
Representative Herndon is not in
the room because I thought we
were gonna.
Have some more discussion on
that, so I I would like to get
her in in the room, um, I also
think that.
What we need to do.
What I wanna do when I talk to
you on the floor earlier, I
thought that we that you all
were close to.
Some type of compromise is, is
that still um,
Possibility. Madam Chair
Representative, um, Madam Chair,
sorry, uh, you mean with uh
Representative Herndon? Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair. So there
are some, there are things that
are just very different about
the two bills, um, and I don't
want to speak for the
representative's why I want her
in the room, but I, but what I
do want to point out is that,
um, we did, we did, I expressed
how the sensitive data opt in
and the child protections were
indeed inspired by, if not
influenced by 307. We wanted to
make sure they were in line with
other.
um, statutes that existed. um,
and we, I'll be honest, Madam
Chair, um, I think myself and
the AG have some concern with
the private right of action,
considering that AG is the
literal office for moving those
these these pieces forward, I
would argue that, um, in terms
of cleaning up section 13,
that's, that's a separate issue
from what her concerns were,
although that is, that is an
ongoing piece to make sure it's
in line, uh, with the rest of
the bill. So it does that answer
some of the questions so let me,
I, I want to be
fair to Representative Herndon,
um, I believe that she needs to
be in the room. Um, I, I hope
that she'll go back and at least
review the tape today so she can
see what your presentation was,
um, because we're voting on on.
I, I'd like just one bill to
make it out of here. And I, I'm
hoping that you all can somehow
figure out uh one bill, but if
not, uh, one's gonna be voted,
well, one.
Well, I want her in the room.
For one. I am looking at our
schedule, um, I think you need
to, to do some cleanup on this
bill as well. I think you heard
where some of the that needed to
happen on what section, um, and
I'm looking at being able to
reschedule for Monday.
So, that's what I would like.
OK, thank you. All right. Thank
you.
And with that, we're going to go
to the next bill.
HB 227.
Can I ask you a question? Would
it be possible to ask um
For a uh
For an updated FIR and um
analysis for this bill by
Next Monday
It it it it was difficult to try
to ask questions about a bill
that there wasn't any time to
actually review and it's an
important topic and it's a long
bill.
I, I am in agreement. I don't
know, um.
We, we will make the request.
How's that? I can't, I can't
promise we will have it, but I
will make the request. Thank
you.
I'm good to go, OK,
let's go. All right.
Um
Let's go to HB 227.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. This is a very
different bill.
It has nothing to do with
technology. It has to do with
babies. Um, so I have with my
expert today, uh, Kate Noble
with Growing Up New Mexico, um,
what this bill does is it
ensures that childcare
facilities can apply for LIDA
funds, um, as other businesses,
um, the LIDA Act, as many of you
know, was passed in 2003 to
encourage, um, uh, economic
growth and to invest in
infrastructure, um, and, uh, I
would argue with this bill we
are there's a piece of this that
acknowledges childcare as
infrastructure for increasing
the jobs in our state.
and for bringing businesses to
our state, um, the, the, uh,
these childcare facilities would
not necessarily have they they
would still be up and and
competing for these leader
dollars with everyone else that
competes for Lita dollars,
they'd have to, you know, uh,
provide the same applications,
but what this bill does, it, it
ensures that um these that that
they could then build out their
facilities, um, you know, in
2019 in Santa Fe, we only had
enough room for 6% of the
infants uh that that lived in
New Mexico, um.
That cuts into our workforce,
and we need to see that shift.
And so that's the reason for the
bill. I'm gonna hand it over to
uh Kate Noble.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, it's great
to be here and I really
appreciate the consideration of
childcare and childcare
infrastructure as economic
development.
Um, as Cha Cerrado mentioned, I
am the president and CEO of
Growing Up New Mexico. We are a
statewide early childhood
nonprofit. We have a school here
in Santa Fe, preschool with 9
classrooms. We serve more than
100 children, uh, and families,
um, that's in our direct
services. We also have a home
visiting program and some other
programs run out of that, uh,
school, which is in building
from 1948, um, it's, it's
falling apart, um, the
infrastructure needs are very
real there. We're looking at
4 to $5 million for that
facility alone. Um, I will also
say I spent my, uh, one of my
previous careers, about 10 years
in economic development,
primarily for the city of Santa
Fe. I still run in a lot of
economic development circles,
and as the conversation has
developed over the years. The
idea that childcare and early
childhood is critical
foundational economic
development is certainly gaining
steam. Um, we've seen it. I had
the great opportunity to work on
a.
program called Crisa, uh,
otherwise known as to grow in
Spanish that did a number of
grants for capacity building
through the early childhood
education and care department in
2024. We saw all over the state,
the need for investment in
childcare facilities, and we saw
quite a few communities unit,
um, Farmington's done it, Santa
Fe wants to do it, Riodosa wants
to do it, uh, looking for often
civic buildings owned by.
useful governments or local
school districts, even private
entities, uh, that they want to
make into childcare facilities,
but need funding in order to
retrofit these with little
toilets and um extra doors and
all of the things that make
childcare facilities safe. So
this would give local entities,
uh another option for what they
want to do as lead a local
economic development Act
intended, um, for local
leadership to go forward, get
Matching funds for economic
development projects from the
state so we see this not only as
important for our workforce and
the economic development
infrastructure that is needed
all over New Mexico, um, but
also as something that would
expand local options and allow
communities to make the choices
that they need as to how to
invest in economic development
infrastructure.
And with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you. All righty. Do we
have anybody here in favor of
this bill, on Zoom?
No.
Do we have anybody here in
opposition of this bill.
Anybody on Zoom?
No.
Go to the committee. Leader
Armstrong.
Oh, madam Chair, I'm tired of
going first, but I
Have my questions lined out and
so thank you Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
one of the things that I want to
bring to, to, and I think you
know it, and I think others know
it, but I just need to bring it
to everyone's attention. The
intent of Lita is to support
economic development projects.
And is based on the core
economic development concept of
growing the economic base to
create and foster economic
diversity and wealth in the
community, economic based
companies are those that export.
At least 50% of their product or
services to a client base
outside of the state. The fire
thereby infusing the economic
economy.
With new money rather than
recycling money, uh, that exists
within the economy. So why
Would we amend the LIA to for
just childcare and not every
other business in the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, Madam Leader for that. So I
just, I mean, again, I, I want
to focus on what the definition
of a leader is in the
Constitution itself. So, as you
know, for maybe some newer
numbers, they don't realize that
they don't, but it's an
anti-donation clause exemption
is what LEDA is and in that
exemption it says that um uh
that's exempted if it's creating
new job opportunities by
providing land, uh, buildings or
infrastructure for facilities to
support new or expanding
businesses. Since then and and
how I've, you know, some of the
conversations I've had.
EDD, they've expressed that it's
for economic based jobs to your
point that are importing new
jobs that are coming in. Still,
how the EDD website describes it
overall is as a tool to assist
in expanding or relocating
businesses that are qualified
entities, um, will stimulate
economic development and produce
public benefit. So the reason
why I bring in those two
language pieces is that
childcare in particular feels
that specific niche if we're
looking to grow the job
opportunities and to grow the
workforce in these areas.
Childcare in particular benefits
that because it
allows workers to go to work
while their children are being
watched, so this is why, unlike
and, and I talked to some other
folks about, oh, there, there
may be other bills that may
exist. This in particular is
looking at a direct influence on
the workers that'll be able to
participate, Madam Chair, the
leader, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for that. Um,
There's $10 million right now,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
uh, for low and no interest
loans to childcare providers in
the capital improvements.
Um, and it's to increase the
infant and toddler classroom
capacity, uh, ECDCE right now
is.
Going to be close to 11 billion.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Or, uh,
$11 billion. So why not, why are
we going after Lita money that
um is already a little bit
controversial sometimes, uh,
we're having trouble making sure
that it's fully funded. Why not
go after some money in the ECDCE
and have them promote it.
There's already a childcare
already receives tons of
subsidies.
Uh, and a lot of it out of the
ECDCE program. So I just don't
understand, um, Madam Chair, I
understand your definition of,
you know, people can go to work,
uh, but we're subsidizing that
already, um.
So I, I'm, I'm just not sure why
we're going after Lita. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
leader. I would, I mean, from my
perspective on this, and the
reason why we brought forward
this bill and the conversations
that we have and I'm happy to
hand it to you at any point, but
in particular, this doesn't
preclude any of that from still
existing. The problem is that we
still are running into cases
where infrastructure needs need
to be filled and for some uh
facilities, it might be best to
talk about childcare in terms of
another leader project that's
also coming in. It can tie the
infrastructure aspect to it.
More clearly, um, I'm, as you
know, and I think many of us
are, you know, big supporters of
what we're doing with early
childcare and education,
however, the building and the
infrastructure just isn't
happening as quickly. And so
giving them as many tools as
possible to build up that
infrastructure is, is critical,
Madam Chair. Did you wanna add
anything, Kate?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. Many
of you may not know this, but I
owned a child care center.
Before, um,
All I had my children.
So many, many years ago.
Part of the problem, Madam Chair
and Representative, is the
regulations.
I was like, I, I was on track to
be licensed for 10 amount of
children.
I
Lease the building. I upgraded
the building. I had those cute
little tiny toilets I had, uh,
you know, my ratios were better
than anyone else's.
But I'm mandated.
I was mandated how many children
I had to take that were on the
government subsidy.
I was mandated and then all of a
sudden the number changed after,
Madam Chair, I opened the
business.
So I was set up to fail.
And so possibly removing red
tape and, and mandates and all
of these things that we're doing
to childcare centers might be a
better way than subsidizing them
even more through the LED
program. I'm a huge childcare
advocate.
Um, we need more. I agree with
that. The other part of the
problem, Madam Chair and
Representative, is that
Right now
We're being pushed to universal
childcare.
That's the avenue that we're
being pushed to. That's not
private.
People that are
That have child care centers.
That's state-run facilities.
And so would the state be able
to apply for the LIDA funding?
Madame Chan representative, uh,
the way that we've laid it out
here is that I do not believe
that is the case.
Because the only shift that we
would make in that language is
on page 6 because as you know,
many um childcare facilities are
nonprofit organizations. They
would have to fit, um, that
they'd have to be a childcare
facility in that case, but there
is no place in here where we
would actually push it that the
state would, Madam Chair. This
is for, and you know, lead
better this is primarily for
private ventures. I do want to
clarify because this often comes
up when we talk about the bill.
This does not mean that
nonprofit organizations can
apply for LIDA funding if they
are not a childcare provider,
the rest of how.
fills out, they have to be a
profit making enterprise, a
business, um, or specifically a
childcare facility, Madam Chair,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much. Um, for, for
the bill, but I just, I really
think we need to keep it focused
on on what it was in my personal
opinion, what it was intended
for, um, and, and with $11
billion in the ECDCE, I don't
know why we wouldn't create a
fund.
Where childcare providers or
childcare entities, whatever
could go and apply for money,
low interest rate loans or
whatever else. I, I.
I understand and I appreciate
what you're trying to do, but I
really don't think this is the
avenue for that, um.
As stated before, why wouldn't
we open it up to?
Every business in New Mexico,
which is, it's not open to, so
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Anybody else on the committee?
Representative Matthews.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you presenters, um.
Yeah, I'm a, I'm a little torn
on this too, um.
A lot of childcare providers
that I talked to.
Um, talk about the real
challenges being
Um, salaries.
The
Uh, lack of health care.
Or
And the the
And then workforce issues which
are
And, and, and the childcare
providers I talked to like that
they're.
Business is uh and their
services have clear mandates as
to ratios and so forth and so
on, they think those are really
important from a quality
standpoint.
But to be sure that you have
workforce that can meet all the
certifications and all the
problems and so forth.
Uh, are substantial.
Um, and.
Since the state is now paying
for the childcare, as I
understand it under the
governor's program.
Um
I, I guess I'm kind of have the
same.
The reaction as a.
Representative Armstrong, which
is
It's not
I mean financial considerations
are important, but it's not.
Consideration to build the
building. It's, it's the ability
to generate.
Uh, sufficient income.
Um
In order to pay competitive
wages and and build up the
workforce and so so on. So I
just share that.
Um
Or an industry that I think is
very, very important to our
state and to economic
development.
Um
But I guess I'm a little curious
to why.
What, what hole in that picture
Lita is filling. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I, I don't
disagree with any of those, uh,
qualifications on, you know,
what's needed in our childcare
industry, uh, you know, we've
invested significant funds into
it and it still a still a
growing industry, um, I will say
compared to a lot of other
places across the country, we
have more childcare facilities,
but getting the infrastructure
is a big aspect of it, and I,
and I do point back to, you
know, Miss Noble's experience of
when a facility.
has an emergency, um, or, or not
even emergency, but their, their
facilities fail. That is a
fundamental piece that
undermines their ability to
operate. So from, you know,
again, this did not preclude any
of that. I, I'm on board and
there are other bills that do
that as well, um, you know,
should this one pass, it doesn't
knock any of those others off
from there. And I do think our
body in the past has fixed some
holes we've had in the tax
structure, um, with some of the
leadership of the folks here to
ensure that private providers um
are essentially charged the same
amount.
As public providers, there's a
bit of issue with the taxation
on that. We fixed that, I
believe it was last session. So
you know, it's again something
we're going to keep working on.
I'm happy to hand it over to
you, Kate, as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee,
representative, um,
This is an industry that I think
many of us agree has had an
underinvestment forever and, and
even potentially over
regulation. It's very difficult
because of the layers of, of
regulation.
Um, many of these things are
needs. If I had to rank them
given that New Mexico has made
so much great progress. We are
looking at at workforce and
facilities, um, as numbers 1 and
2 in, in terms of the needs.
Some of this is also because the
industry is very unique in that
it's a mixed delivery system,
uh, which Representative Serato
alluded to in that we have, um,
not always a level playing field
between public schools and
private entities that that
deliver, uh,
The care and education that we
need for our youngest children
and this would again sort of
increase the options,
particularly for the private
entities who often don't have
the access, um, that schools
have and, and for local
governments, local communities
to be able to make those
choices. We haven't done large
scale investment in our early
childhood facilities and, and
it's falling behind in in
organizations like mine. So
again, I mean, there is, there's
there's $10 million that's good
money. Our, our facility.
alone needs about $4 million. So
it's that $10 million will only
go so far in terms of the low
interest loans and our
businesses are not built to
create enough revenue for
capital investment, even with
the good rates and, and what
we've paid, so there's a sort of
a multitude of needs, um, and
ultimately facilities are one of
them, and again, the options uh
feel important for many in the
industry.
Thank you for that answer, Madam
Chair. That's one of my
questions.
Terra de la Cruz, oh, I'm sorry.
No, it is delicers.
Thank you. I, I support the bill
because
Li is a process. You want to
have a leader ran.
Uh, whether it's a local one or
a state one, there's a process.
You don't just say, well, I'm
gonna build the daycare and I
want Lea, so I'm gonna get it.
Doesn't work like that. It each
project is vetted its criteria
has to be met. There's a
compelling need as an example.
Years ago, I tried to amend the
law. It happened, it happened
anyway later, but I try to
affect law here. I wasn't a
state representative, so that
leader would qualify.
um
But he said,
Little grocery stores.
Retail, that's the resume work.
Because retail was not a
qualifying item for Lita.
And in Carrizozo, they had lost
their little grocery store, and
there was no way to really
entice somebody to come out
ultimately a Family Dollar
showed up, and that helped a
lot.
Uh, and today you can actually
have leader for commercial.
Retail establishments.
But nonetheless, it's a process
that's vetted by the local
government. I think it gives uh
local governments, especially in
a place where there might be a
need and nobody's breaking down
the door to build a daycare
there, an option to do that.
So I, I support the chair the
the bill I'm sure.
Everybody else on the committee?
So, um
I have a couple of statements,
um.
Thank you for the presentation
and thank you for bringing us
this bill. Um, I think it's
something that is is needed, you
know, we keep talking about the
early childhood trust fund and
how there's gonna be $9 billion
and everybody gets really
excited about that and it
becomes a big target. What I do
want to say is we're not, we
don't have access to $9 million
or a billion dollars. That's in
the, that's the corpus and
that's what we're pulling out
of. And so I think that's the
piece that we need to really be
real careful with, um,
What happens is we get $250
million to be able to run all
these programs, and my
understanding, and I, I'm pretty
sure I'm correct on this, but I
may be wrong, but um.
We, we had many, we had federal
dollars under COVID.
That allowed us to um do
building updates and to help
with buildings.
Under the state funding that now
we're using. That is not in that
budget.
And so that's where I think this
would really apply and so people
need to understand that when we
talk about $9 billion where that
is the best news we we have in
going. We don't have access
tonight.
$9 billion. So with that, um,
what's the desire of the
committee.
We would do pass.
I
Patrick to take the role.
Representative Armstrong? No,
for the reasons I stated
earlier.
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason, oh
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
And Madam Chair,
Madam, the Dust motion, 7 votes
yes, 3 votes no.
HB 325 leader Armstrong.
Right
25.
You, Madam Chair and committee,
um,
House Bill 325.
New Mexico taxes construction in
a very unique and and ultimately
very burdensome manner with um
among if not the highest sales
tax burden in our, in the
nation.
Uh, New Mexico GRT can amount to
nearly 30k on a $400,000 home.
In some high tax jurisdictions,
which is the single biggest
budget cost and line item of the
law.
After the law.
The biggest challenge to
overcoming New Mexico's
estimated 40,000 unit home
shortage.
Is the need for private
investment alongside public
investment for various levels.
Quite simply, government can't
solve the crisis alone and
market rate builders and
developers have the lion's share
in the role, um, share a role to
play and ultimately bolstering.
Our housing supply.
This bill mitigates New Mexico's
number one financial hurdle to
private capital investments for
the construction of more housing
units. What this bill does,
Madam Chair and committee, is it
serves to reduce the overall tax
burden on new residential
construction, which is a
hindrance of new projects,
feasibility and ultimately to
capital competitiveness with
neighboring states and markets.
The GRT burden, unnecessarily
raises the cost of new
construct.
siphoning away money from home
builders and home buyers who
could benefit.
From increased affordability and
more capital to reinvest in new
development and supply. And with
me is my expert. I'm gonna have
him introduce himself.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Mackenzie
Bishop. I founded and co-owned
Abrazo Homes in Albuquerque. We
also built in Santa Fe.
This thing is not working, um,
it is OK. Uh, we also built in
Santa Fe. um, we build all of
Homewise's houses here in Santa
Fe, um, as a native New Mexican,
uh, when I started my company, I
didn't really understand that
this was an issue, um, as I
became more involved nationally
um with competing builders and
other builders in other markets
and we compared cost and looked
at what that, um, you know, all
of the different cost items, um.
That go into our homes, it
became apparent that we, we are
unique in how we tax
construction, um, especially
residential construction here in
the state of New Mexico, um, and
it puts us at a disadvantage,
quite frankly, and so, um, look
forward to having this debate,
talking um at greater length
about um the issue, obviously
the, the fiscal impact of this
is significant, um, I, I also
gave you and prepared a, a
breakdown that kind of in
layman's terms, shows the
comparison of how uh
the state of New Mexico, taxes,
uh, residential construction,
um, on a, on a typical $400,000
home as compared to neighboring
states like Colorado and Texas,
um, and quite frankly, most
states in the union, so, um,
with that, I will defer to you
guys and stand for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
thank you, McKenzie for that.
Um, so with that, Madam Chair,
we will stand for questions.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
favor of this bill?
I like to come to the center of
the room. The attendant will
hold the mic and you have one
minute.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Randy Traynor
representing the New Mexico
homebuilders, the apartment
association of New Mexico, and
I'm also a board member of the
mortgage Finance Authority. Um,
we all know we have a very
severe shortage of housing and
we're talking about upwards of
probably 40,000 units short of
housing, um, and I can promise
you with all the appropriations
that this legislature gives for
homelessness or affordable
housing, it doesn't even
begin to move the needle on
solving this problem. So I would
like to implore you to start
thinking out of the box and
start thinking about what the
market sector can do because
that's what we do, we build
homes and we know how to build
them and things like this are
very a great hindrance to us and
so I've just ask you to please
allow this bill to go forward.
We need to continue this
discussion on housing. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz
registered lobbyist for NAO,
commercial real estate
developers in New Mexico, and we
stand in strong support of this
legislation, gross receipts tax
on construction is a huge
detriment to affordability in
New Mexico and makes our
construction costs higher than
other states, thus pushing
investment and jobs out of New
Mexico. House Bill 325 will help
lower the cost of construction,
thus making New Mexico a more
competitive environment for jobs
and for business. Thank you.
you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, uh Kent Cravens,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Association of Realtors,
um, realtors depend on rooftops.
To, uh, for their living,
obviously, but, but moreover, to
service their clients and their
clients' needs.
Uh, markets come and go. They,
they get, they speed up, they
slow down.
Uh, the, the reality is, is
economic development and um
Just our, our, our existence as
New Mexicans now depends on uh.
Removing barriers to the
creation of
Of these new homes, 40,000 as as
the sponsor has said, uh, as a
shortage, that's not going to
get better unless we take
affirmative and robust action,
and I would encourage you please
to um count us as, as in support
for this bill and we hope you
join us. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is John Thompson,
registered lobbyist for the
Central New Mexico HomeBuilders
Association. Mr. Traynor did a,
a, a good job at at elaborating
some of the reasons we support,
but one of the reasons I didn't
hear, I'd like to bring to
everybody's attention is when
we're considering this gross
receipts tax factor, and, and
I've heard numbers like 30,000
on a $400,000 home, excuse me if
that may be off, but I think it
translates the point that can
make the difference between
affordability and
non-affordability. Difference
between somebody being able to
buy a home and not being able to
qualify.
a Ford one. And so we're, we're
having conversations about
getting folks in homes and
homeownership. We need to truly
consider things like this that
that can really help take that
from a conversation to a
reality. Appreciate the time.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Do we have anybody on
Zoom?
Built in Mexico.com.
Greetings, um, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Miles Conway, I'm the
executive officer of the Santa
Fe Area in northern New Mexico
Builders Association
representing 350 contractors and
every aspect of the home sweet
home building industry in the
northern part of our state. Uh,
I apologize, I'm not there in
person. I am at the world's
largest international builder
show where um where counting
among those people here are the
140,000 members of our national.
Association of Home Builders,
and what is before you is all we
are talking about in the
internationalBuilder show today
is, is that what are the suite
of the options to the bills, the
legislation that can move, that
allows our state legislators to
engage and bring housing
affordability back uh back under
control and close the gap
between what it costs to build a
home, and what a working family
is, is capable of qualifying for
in terms of the mortgage.
Thank you for hearing this film
considering it. There are dozens
of bills before this legislature
session that bring in that did
it do something to address
housing construction costs, um,
our fear, of course, is that um
members of the left, members of
the right could negate each
other by defeating one another's
initiatives. This is a great
initiative, um, and we'll
hopefully be part of the suite
that makes it into law. Thank
you very much for your time.
OK, do we have anybody in
opposition to this bill?
Anybody on Zoom?
No. All righty, we'll go to
committee, uh, chair de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I can't
think of a more.
Appropriate inducement.
Getting more houses built in New
Mexico and to creating this I.
And so
Madam Chair, when you're ready,
I would like to move.
Thank you.
So it sounds like everybody's
ready to move. I just have one
question. Um, why are apartments
included in the bill?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, that is a good
question. Um, you know, our
thought and belief is that
I would love, personally, I
would love everybody to be a
homeowner because it has amazing
wealth generating benefits and
there's a million other
ancillary benefits of being a
homeowner, but the reality is we
need housing at all levels. Um,
rent right now has skyrocketed
in almost every market, um, and
that's because of a lack of
supply and ultimately that's due
to a lack of investment. Um, if
we can attract more capital,
build
units, even market rate units,
that's gonna just create an
environment that brings the
price down of rent and hopefully
solves the affordability crisis
at all levels. So that's why
both are included.
Thank you.
I guess that's the place where
I've got a little bit of the
rep, uh, representative Parajan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
thank you, Madam Leader for
bringing this bill. I share your
concern in the housing realm,
and I think for me the most
important thing I, I, I really
love that you have included so
many different kinds of housing,
especially that middle missing
housing that we don't have in
our state. And I think the, the,
you know, I think.
One of the analysis here says
that, you know, we don't really
see that this is a proven way to
increase the housing supply, but
I think it's also true that we
haven't really seen and, and
tell me if this is true or not,
Madam Chair and and Madam
Leader, um, we haven't really
seen um a state remove a GRT.
Many states don't have GRT
necessarily, um, Madam Chair and
and um Madam minority Leader.
I'm not aware of any states that
have necessarily removed GRT,
um, there's only a handful of
states that actually have it. I
think it's 7 or 8 states have
it. Most of them are targeted at
certain industries like alcohol
usually, um, or they're at a
much lower rate, you know, it's
a, I think in Vermont, it's like
a 0.25% or 0.5% on all goods.
It's not taxed the way we do on
a from a sales tax standpoint, I
understand why we have a gross
receipts tax, um, especially
with the labs and, and all of
the federal.
employment that we have here, it
makes a lot of sense given the
state's economy, um, but it just
unduly challenges our industry,
Madam Chair and Representative
and so I mean I'm looking at
this price tag of uh $10051
million is that right?
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
I looked at that FIR as well,
um, I had a hard time getting
the math to work, um, the US
Census Bureau data just came out
last year, um, 7500 total
residential units were permitted
in the state of New Mexico last
year, at least according to the
Census Bureau, I think their
data is pretty good. Um.
And if I just do the basic math
of what we're looking at from a
fiscal impact on an average
house, um, it's, I think that
number may be overstated by at
least an order of magnitude, um,
especially when you, when you
look at the whole harmless
provision as well, creating a
$300 million impact. I think the
impact is probably less than 100
million if I had to guess, um,
hopefully that would be offset
by property tax revenue
increases for the municipalities
and counties, um, and also
increased construction activity,
which is I think.
the goal of what we're trying to
do is we're just trying to build
more houses,
that that was the other question
that I was gonna ask about
property taxes, and I think, you
know, for the price tag that
this is, um, a couple weeks ago,
uh, LFC was considering the the
city of Albuquerque's proposal
to put in $100 million the city
of Albuquerque and Bernalo
County who have a joint um
housing agreement and, uh, you
know, for this price tag, I'd
love to see how
housing we make with this kind
of tax exemption, uh, I think it
would be a great addition to the
bill would to be to be able to
come back in um 5 years or, or,
you know, have some kind of
sunset, come back in 5 years,
evaluate the effect of the tax
to see if it, it's really doing
exactly what we want, uh, but
Madam Chairs representative, for
that reason, I'm really
supportive of this um initiative
to bring more housing to our
state and specifically um
housing, not transitional
housing, not, um, more.
faltering, but housing period,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Thank you. Uh, any other, uh,
committee.
OK.
Representative De la Cruz, thank
you, Madam Chair. I do pass.
Many seconds, Fernandez. Hey,
Pat you to take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Blente
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews. Yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado,
Madam Vice Chair Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, final tally on
the DuP Past motion, 10 votes
yes, 0 votes, no.
do pass. Thank you. And for our
last bill, we've got HB 368.
check you here. No, yes, maybe.
Better
Worse.
Madam Chair, yeah, now I can
hear myself.
All right.
Uh,
All right, Madam Chair and
committee, House Bill 368 is a
bill intended to clarify
language within the highway jobs
tax credit statute to increase
the predictability of the credit
for economic development
purposes. This credit is
arguably New Mexico's and
economic developments most
powerful incentive to recruit
new companies and spur
additional job growth.
Instead of reading.
The remaining paragraphs, um,
this is Everett Trujillo. Um, I
would like him to explain, uh,
or sorry, introduce himself and
he will be able to explain the
um small change a whole lot.
Faster than me reading the rest
of this.
my name is Everre Hill. I work
with uh Clifton Larson, Allen
CPA firm in Albuquerque, New
Mexico and filing this credit
for over 20 some years, um, have
been part of some changes in the
past um that were favorable for
the purposes but also for
taxation revenue department.
Uh, the recommendation that we
have here is to change or
clarify the threshold job
definition to basically be in
line with the high wage jobs
definition in the statute, um,
only difference is it's really a
base baseline threshold jobs.
It's the same thing as a high
wage job. The only issue we have
with it currently, it says
calendar year and most people
aren't hired within a calendar
year. So what we're changing it
is we're eliminating the
calendar year.
and same based on when the
position is failed, so if it's
failed for 44 weeks within a
year, just like the high wage.
It would qualify for that
baseline.
Madam Chair, essentially, um,
The way that it works now is if
you are hired in January or
February, you are eligible for
the, this threshold job portion
of the high wage jobs tax
credit. Uh, but if you are hired
after that, it's not on a
rolling year, it's on a, you
have to, it has to be 44.
Weeks within a calendar year
rather than a rolling year and
um they changed the high wage
jobs tax credit to be a rolling
year. So we are just trying to
make the threshold job. The same
definition so that it's a
rolling year rather than a.
Single calendar year because not
everybody gets hired in January
or February. So we're just
trying to make them match. So
with that, we stand for
questions. Thank you.
Hey, is anybody in favor of this
legislation, do it, you come to
the center and we can speak to
that.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza with
New Mexico, the idea of the
statewide economic development
Professional Association, uh
stand and strong support of the
legislation as we're saying,
we're just clarifying language
so that it's easier to implement
both for TRD as well as for
economic developers that are
applying for the credit. So
stand strong support. Thank you.
And I see that we've got one
more in the back who doesn't
want to make a statement, but if
she just stand up so we could
see that she is in support.
Thank you.
Alrighty.
Anybody on Zoom.
No, man. All righty, anybody in
opposition?
Anybody on Zoom?
Go to the committee.
Man, you guys got quiet. All
righty, move a do pass.
Is it time? Oh, Jimmy Jimmy, you
have a question.
Oh, OK. We have a motion for a
due pass in a second. Patrick to
take the role. So I get to go
last in this committee because
we move fast.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason. Yes.
Representative Matthews,
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Yes
Madam Chair, final tally, uh,
for the new pass motion, 9
votes, yes, 0 votes, no.
All right, we will see you all
