So with that patrick please take
the off
representative and you know
present representative dunkin
representative hernandez
representative lender
representative little
representative lunchtrum
representative martinez
representative mason here
representative matthews
madam vice chair here madam
chair madam chair you have a
corn very good okay so
so are the first on the agenda
is HB two ninety
i've asked
our rights chair to roll this to
monday for a couple reasons and
i'm gonna let her explain some
of that I think about i'm sure I
think you could be so we're
going to roll this into monday
this is a pretty simple there is
an amendment on here that came
through this morning and so we
feel it fixes in the concerns
that were raised by this
committee however in respect to
the idea that we want to pass
clean bills out I get that I I
will encourage the committee to
remember that we are now in the
second half of the legislature
and while we shouldn't get
missed the morning of which I
respect they were not gonna
they're not going to fit twenty
four hours because of the
rapidness in which we're moving
so we are going to roll the
summon to the limit is already
in the committee and the point
to
is will be the one that we will
be con.
Thank you and what I wanted to
say also to to that point is
yeah we are at the second half
of the committee up until now
we've had a twenty four hour
notice of amendments I don't
like getting a right before I
because they were not properly
prepared we do want clean bills
but I know that from here on out
when we get a we get him and
work everybody's just gonna have
to be flexible but that's why I
want to make sure that everybody
is aware and we're all playing
by the same rules
and we do want to pass clean
good bills out of here and and
so I appreciate the secretary of
being here and I apologize that
we're going to slow down but I
know that appropriations is
meeting every day so I I hope it
doesn't slowly down too much so
with that I i'm going to move on
to the next bill
so he too oh nine
representative had eta
and I we've asked that they
turned down the heat and here
because it's awfully warm so.
Okay
okay please begin thank you
madame chair members of the
committee great to be with you
this morning and i'm putting
house bill two or nine on the
table and this is the regional
district planning funds matching
I also want to introduce my
expert witness who sell it lou
settle who is on zoom call and
facility would introduce
yourself and just tell everybody
a little bit about your
background.
Good morning and this is
personally set in the southwest
no mexico council counselor
governments director I represent
catching granting dog online and
I am also under state
association and i've been now
with the cancellate government's
thirty seven years and very
proud to serve the this the
region in the state of mexico so
thank you good morning to
everyone.
And now ma'am chair if I can
just explain the spell it's
really this is really a
companion bill to house bill to
ten house bill to ten provided
and appropriation of well at
this point two point eight
million dollars in the house
it's at one million right now
has been
passed by the house
appropriations committee this is
a really important bill this is
a cogbie this was to provide
every cogon we have seven them
in this state.
Every cog four hundred thousand
to do grant writing and
technical assistant and for
those of you who don't know I I
used to be a grant writer a
fundraiser my whole life I have
been doing fan racing long
before they even have the word
development director so I have
raised a lot of money over the
years when I saw four years ago
or three years ago was a massive
amount of federal money that
would come into this state and I
said what we're going to need is
to help the cogs do grant
writing and technical assistant
spirit I live in a small rural
community because people know
how to do step but they don't
necessarily know how to write a
ground right they can ran a
sophisticated water system but
they don't know how to write a
grant so that bill didn't get
through the way I wanted to get
through and I could see it
coming and this was two years
ago so what we did is all of our
representatives in the region I
thought i'm all together I said
look let's put some junior money
into this and we all contributed
we put four hundred thousand
into that car to do grant
writing and technical assistance
and in a a year and a half later
that cog has brought thirty four
million into the north central
region we have another twenty
million in grounds that have
been written but we still don't
know the outcomes yet so that
small carg well so actually a
large part but that small amount
in money resulted a year and a
half later into thirty five
thirty five million dollars for
mostly local small rural
governments that's really where
it went so what is this grant is
we have a message from the
governor on this I mean this
bill has spilled two o nine it
we when we when we put this bill
together for the cogs for the
appropriation
we went back when we looked at
the statutes regarding cogns
they're called regional planning
distance.
Spot we column councils of
government when they went back
and looked at the at twenty year
old legislation they've they
found some floss in statutes
that weren't so what we're
really doing just we're just
eliminating the problems we had
in the current statue so they
were required to have a a
hundred percent match there's no
way they could match thirty four
million okay it's just old
language it was never used and
it was kind of buried in in and
statured and we pulled that out
and so that's basically what
this bill does eliminates old
statutes that no longer have any
meaning weren't used for years
we're kind of ignored and that's
what this is really about is
cleaning that up so that these
cars can go for it and hopefully
raise money for all of our all
of our cogs in the state and are
closed with that madam chair.
I certainly am okay thank you so
do we have anybody here in favor
of this bill okay would you like
to.
Yeah.
Thank you anybody else and
supported the bill
anyone on zoom.
Athena.
Yes in a crystal dullo and i'm
an energy and environmental
engineer and co founder of quite
a few companies and it is very
important that we start moving
our state towards better
use of grants and bringing the
other companies and invite
people to come in as well as
developed the people we have
thank you.
Thank you okay
anybody opposed to this b.
Okay then let's go to the
committee representative
matthews.
Thank you madame chair
thank you representative for
presenting this bill I too.
And it is a great way to bring
money into the state
and I support what you're doing
I just wanted to raise one
question I find I have found and
see if you agree and then maybe
something we can pursue at a
later time that to stay a new
mexico does not have a data bank
there is no single source of
information that you need to do
that compiles and keeps data
about the state and all the
other kinds of things and so
when you're trying to write a
grant it's often very difficult
because you can't find the
information you need to support
the grant and
I just wanted to ask you for
that was something maybe in the
future we should also be
thinking about encouraging an
order to increase our ability to
attract grant app grant money
and madame chair and
representative
I totally agree with you what
you know what the hardest part
of the grand when you're when
your brand new grant writer and
you come into a district or or
organization is is creating the
case statement that you know
once you have that you can kind
of use a perinigrate you have
and then and that's that's what
actually mostly these cogs have
that created for most of the
governments or or that's the
first thing you work on so once
they have that it's pretty easy
I you know federal answer hard
to write I actually think state
grounds are hard to write but it
really doesn't matter when you
when she had that case statement
then you can do it most of the
cars probably have that for
their districts
but you're right this is just
the beginning with step able to
do this work on a continued
basis it will make I think it'll
have a huge impact on our state
I really do I I think within a
year you're probably see two
hundred million easy and it
could be more than that thank
you.
Man i'm sure I would just add
that that the
government's right grants but
also private entities right
grants including nonprofit says
I will grants were no profits
and sometimes the
the availability of data was
particularly difficult in that
kind of context so thank you for
letting me raise.
Anybody else
on the committee
representative artinus
thank you madame chairman
representative that
have a couple of questions.
The.
Does it the governor you so the
you got a message from the
governor on this.
The.
Take care of her concerns there
wasn't this wasn't a similar
bill veto.
At.
I I made him chair and
representative I I actually have
to turn to my expert witness I
don't think it was veteran I
don't recall
it a bill like this being better
before but i'll have to turn to
preceller and let and ask her.
Yes good morning madam chair and
representative martinez still
there what's not what I would
send in a bill that was being
told but there has been a chance
in the past to submit a bill for
increasing our budget allocation
from the state what we call the
state granted aid so of
approximately so I can just give
you a little bit of history so
when I started working here in
nineteen eighty seven our state
ground in ade was that thirty
eight thousand thirty thousand
dollars a year now in twenty
twenty three or state granted
eight is ninety nine thousand so
we have had several attempts to
try to increase that dollar
amount to be able to continue to
do or work with in our regions
and great additional support so
what has happened is that i'm
that i've kind of growth through
the organization I am the
director but i'm also doing the
networking i'm also doing the
captain for when plans cable
currently reatherstations and
i'm a staff at three so we
haven't really had the ability
to increase our stop well other
cards may be doing very specific
things and some of the larger
areas like red region may be
doing transportation or not
central doing anything programs
so so there has not been any
other bill that has
that has been approved for
additional revenue.
Well thank you for seller thank
you and chair
the question I had is on page
three.
There is a provision in there
that says that they'll no longer
be required to obtain matching
funds
aren't the majority of federal
grants isn't part of that that
the entity come up with matching
funds how are you going to work
around that
madam chair and representative
we also have
legislation which is a matching
fan legislation that's being
brought up
and will go through went through
appropriations yesterday at
fifty million
and we haven't had that before
what we need is a match friend
that will before matching you
can get him from the state but
it kinda came after july first
it was they're difficult to get
we all work together in l local
community to try and get
matching funds i've i've called
in foundations on occasion to
see if we can't you know provide
that match it can be very
difficult so we hope to get that
match plan up in the senate to
actually a hundred million
dollars I think we have might
have a good chance what that
will do is it won't have any
deadlines on it so so it will
begin as soon as the legislation
is passed because you know you
don't know when a grants going
to come in and you don't know
how much the match is going to
be
so I would say that
if we had this matching fun of
hundred million dollars I think
for the year you know twenty
four that would bode as well
especially in our small real
communities when it's so high
there's no businesses to provide
a match
I went to know that this year
it was passed we had a matching
punisher for ten million dollars
most it out money was outside of
bernaly or I hate to tell the
burning lead people here that
but the the the reality is it
went to help local rural
projects all over the state.
And you know sometimes it was
fifty thousand sometimes it was
a hundred and thirty thousand
they were usually small amounts
but it funded an amazing amount
of projects so that legislation
is also up this year for about
minimum chair rivers
I agree that for a small
investment you can get a big
return but i'm
i'm asking why where we can't
affo.
Fact that they'll no longer be
required.
Man
representative because there is
no way like our local card in
north central that we raise
thirty four million dollars
could we get a match of thirty
five I mean would they be able
to go out and get a match of
thirty four million dollars now
they simply can't.
And that's what old legislation
called for when this was first
started you know when the cogs
were first started they said
okay we'll give you thirty seven
thousand you have to provide a
hundred percent match
yeah thirty seven thousand as
went that yeah it just won't
work.
Madam chair.
Yes.
And representing our the
just to clarify a couple of
things I think you're
specifically refree towards in
the cost in the regional plan
interesting statute so the way
we are established by executive
order in the nineteen seventies
it has said that we had for
every state dollar that were
received to do our council the
government's work we had to
match that dollar for dollar so
what we have done in the last
year's of of the our existence
is that we have been charging
the local governments
a membership fee in order to
meet that matching requirement
so when I take myself as the
example the most that I can get
from my local governments to
meet the dollar for dollar
market on the ninety nine
thousand and we get a year is
only about forty eight thousand
so what I don't want to do is
put an additional burden and the
local governments that are the
most smallest and most role of
populated competitors and like
that additional burden and so we
provide a great number of
resources to them and handle the
through this process so with
this bill would do is that for
any money that we receive on the
state to do our operational work
to provide the stickle
assistance to the local
governments we will not be
required to provide that match
and in the way the statute was
written it said none federal so
the the challenge for us is very
difficult to put that additional
burden on the other side they
want to send maybe federal then
we would be could look for other
opportunities but that's been
the challenge for us so what
it's what it means to me as a
council of governments is that
if that continues to be there
that means i'm going to be non
existing cause I don't have
enough monies to meet the
requirement of the dollar for
dollars for match when the
increase occurs so that is the
challenge that we're facing.
With the council of governments
and I hope that clarifies it I
think I know what representative
of our specifically talking
about when it comes to the
federal match dollars in that's
hospital when seventy seven is
that those dollars that are are
embedded in that bill will be
help us to help the communities
meet the local governments
imagine requirements in order to
receive binding from the federal
government I hope that helps
represent their partinus
thing madam chair.
The.
One last question.
How many
as far as the percentage was how
many of these grandson to go on
after do not.
A madam chair and representative
I just wouldn't have that answer
because we have seven debit
cards raising millions of
dollars I also in it introduce a
rebecca who is the governor's
infrastructure my infrastructure
guru
and has been part of this bill
making capacity to but I don't I
maybe I could go back and look
up the number but I I would not
know most foundation rants
private grants don't require a
match i'll tell you that or if
they do it's a very small match
maybe about five percent
just so they have some skin in
the game
but usually
usually pedal grounds err some
federal pans don't require
message it just depends
department transportation
grandchildren require a state
match
I think it's twenty eighty
but I really could now that's a
difficult question to answer
you modem to represent what
you're would your expert have an
idea when it comes to her call
i'm talking about president
to went i'm sorry would would
she have an idea.
Yes she might now sell it can
you take this absolutely so mad
and chair and represent the
martinis I would say that the
difference that I see from when
I first started my courier that
the opportunities in a hundred
percent grad where a much more
common back in the eighties and
nineties and even in the two
thousand but what you're seeing
now as we involve whether it's
stay dollars or federal dollars
what you're seeing is that these
federalistic agencies won't buy
in front of the local government
to start that then investment is
worth the investment rate so if
I was to activate what
percentage i'm gonna say
probably ninety five percent of
those federal and stay grants
not only do they require match
they require in some cases
require the long components and
so that's a lot of what i've
done in my courier and some of
those that were a hundred
percent crack back back in the
nineties for example where those
communities that were
economically disadvantaged as a
result of dealing with a
very specific emergency issue
such as the water and we swatter
that is no longer the case in
the standards and I hope that
helps enter the question
representative martin's manager
thank you madam chair
representative and sell a short
that rose back to my original
question why are we putting
language in the statute the
specifically says that they do
not.
They're no longer required to
have that matching to it it.
It doesn't make sense to me that
we're going to cottage this
language what same time.
You're going after a h.
Ninety five percent of the f.
I think you madame chair and
representative i'm going to turn
this over to rebecca who is
doing the infrastructure lead
for the governor
think you're good morning madam
chair members of the committee
represent him martinez and the
bill before you and the
provision there that would
eliminate a match requirement
applies only to that particular
part of our state code
which means it applies to one
grand program which is a state
only grant program created by
this body and years ago to
provide particular type of
ground that we call state grants
and aid which is really for our
**** they're the only ones
eligible for that grant program
and the elimination of the match
requirement in this bill would
only apply to that one grant
program which is a stake around
program as no impact on any of
the federal funding programs out
there so it's just a way for us
to.
Support our regional planning
districts are cogs by taking one
more burden off of their plates
to allow them to use the funding
that they get more effectively
and leverage additional dollars
through other types of grant
programs thank you manager than
you matter to her representative
so that that was the answer that
I was.
But then we're saying.
We're going to get this hundred
million dollars but nobody has
to use it so
it makes more sense to me
so I I appreciate.
Thank you representative
chairman lentim
thank you madame jones I would
move to passive
I mean I hope that for just a
minute chairman we do have one
more
person that has a question
though what will hold us
representative dunkin thank you
madam chair
just just to good questions i'm
a skin in the game type of guy
and I don't care how much skins
in the game i.
So we're gonna do this and we're
going to pass this does that
mean that we can get rid of car
and just go straight.
Or something else that we.
A madam chair representative
dancing thank you for that
question I think the reason cogs
are so important is because
their local you know what I
didn't want is a department
created in santa fe that would
do grant writing and technical
assistance for the whole state
that's or so what we have the
the genius of my cog director
when we gave her that four
hundred thousand that I was
talking about her genius was she
didn't hire one grant writer too
she contracted with time because
somebody knows had it some
people are experts at cdb g
ground some at people are good
at eday grants some people are
good at water grounds simply I
mean transportation that there's
a blot of you know there's
billions of dollars out there in
grants so what you want to do is
a symbol a local team
and I mean local you went grant
writers in the communities they
serve to work with these with
these local governments and by
that I include langram so
include a water mutual domestic
water system you know rural
counties real cities they don't
have very much money either so
what they need to do is really
work locally to figure out the
problems to have solved the
promise to write the ground to
get the the design work the
planning work
and in so when when you talk
about in in the game I think I
think that's why we when I have
local people in rural districts
writing local grounds I think
it's important think manager
going back to that question and
but I can by pass my talk now as
as as i'm a mayor of a small.
The town that I am from and I
don't I don't even have to use
the car.
We're going to strengthen cogs
with this I mean this is just
this is just the um
this is just the bill that helps
fun the cognitive hopefully two
point eight million dollars year
four hundred thousand dollars a
year so yet you should have
multiple multiple sources for
grant writing and if you want to
do it through your you know your
girlfriend that's great I mean
i've send it some of those
things to but you know should we
only be limited to one source of
getting help from the state to
do the work that needs to be
done and and yeah if you're if
you're a mayor of a small
community you need all the help
you can get so good that you
have a car and good that you
have a your junior money or your
grow money.
Please take the room.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin no
representative hernandez
representative lengthy yes
representative little yes
representative lunchtime
representative martinez
yes and i'd like to explain my
vote please
representative mason.
Yes.
Representative matthews
madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes man insured the due past
motion final tally's nine votes
yes one boat now already
represented you have a do pass
representative martinez to
explain as well thank you madame
chairman and representative of
the reader I voted i'm not fully
comfortable with a billion
avoided.
I think the bill deserves a
little bit.
The.
But I still have some questions
that I may.
Still not comfortable with that
provision.
I'm just not comfortable.
Thank you madame chair.
And thank you madame chairman if
they could just reply we'll try
and come in brief you on this so
that all your questions are
answered hopefully before it
gets to the floor and then and
then it is what it is and i'm
very comfortable with that but I
want to think the committee
thank you for your questions
thank you.
Three years we might all right
our next bill hb to seventy five
representative hernandez.
The.
Yeah.
Are you
awesome
good morning please begin
absolutely
before I get into the bill i.
I don't know if you're mike i'm
like scared to get too close to
four sorry madam chair before we
get started I would like my
expert witness to introduce
himself madam chair and rep
representatives i'm ever true
here
partner with axium cpa's and
albuquerque we have a medium
size firm that we represent a
lot of a taxpayers than
businesses that take advantage
of th.
Madame house to seventy five is
a bill intended to clean up the
statutory language within the
highwage jobs tax credit to
simplify the administration and
clarify definitions to increase
the predictability of the credit
for economic development
purposes
this bill address is sixteen
issues number one it removes the
time constraint on the
department's review because the
time limit has now been
addressed in the tax
administration act taking it
from one hundred and eighty days
to a hundred and twenty days
number two and defines resident
for purposes of an eligible
employee to a line with the
income tax acts and with holding
tax acts.
Number three it updates the
eligible employer definition to
follow and continue to grow with
the current j tip policy manual
number for it does extend this
credit by five years so right
now it will expire in twenty
twenty sixth and this will take
it to twenty thirty one
number five it conforms the new
job definition to the qualifying
period definition to indicate
that a one year gap of
employment of employment
procludes a job from qualifying
instead of the current three
year gap
and number six it clarifying
that jobs are eligible once
occupied for the required forty
four weeks away rolling year
instead of in a calendar year or
currently in order to to qualify
for this portion you have to
have
the job has to be filled before
the end of february if I got
that right and if it's done on
marks first then it doesn't
qualify till the following year
so.
With that madam chair I will
keep it very short and
i.
Thank you do we have anybody
here in
favor of the bill.
Start on the sale.
Always standards.
This is one of the states.
Thank you.
Mr bullington
thank you matter the committee
fighting is jd politics speaking
i'll be half of the greater
outcome chamber of commerce and
I think we can all agree that we
want more high paying jobs in
new mexico and that's why
hospital to seventy five which
extends us task credit up
through j.
This credit is a wind when or
business owners and employees it
provides an incentive for urban
and real businesses to create
phil highways jobs and the jobs
referred to an house bill to
seventy five or a minimum of
sixty thousand dollars in urban
areas and there is a strong
instead of because the credit is
based on a percentage of the
wage paid to pay even more of
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars and just for contacts
our average per capital income
in new mexico's thirty two
thousand a year there's also a
safeguard in this bill requiring
employees to have been paid that
ways for at least forty four
weeks so no one can gain the
system so this is about bringing
more good high paying jobs in
the mexic.
Thank you anybody else in favor
of this bill
anybody on zoom no matter
any opposition.
Okay
how about the committee any
questions from the committee
representative martinez.
You say that was such a
just too quick questions can you
tell me what a class each county
is.
Madame share and representative
give me one second.
Can you represent a few time
over page that's on I sight last
night too and it will be lost
but the first time it's
referenced.
So I don't know where the so.
So
thirteen on page eleven.
So
of reading it to it
madame chairman representative I
think that that is a typo I
believe that that is supposed to
say class a county because it is
referring to the sixty thousand
dollars population of sixty
thousand or more which would be
the definition of a class a
county.
Representative I will get that
representative I will get that
fixed so it let's so if you'd
yeah make sure to clarify that
because I see that we if you
look at the on the dfa website
which patrick of course you were
to go to
it and there's a classe and
there is a class each
which is it is an old.
So you might just want to get
clarification on our can
absolutely I can absolutely do
that for you madam chair I it's
the first time i've ever heard
of a class each county.
Thank you representative thank
you for the catch
then you made him travel
representative my second
question is on page nine
or striking the requirement that
the.
Be done silent in new mexico.
The.
Madame chair and representative
we're striking that because it's
already defined in the income
tax act in the worth olding tax
active we rather use that as a
reference so we were striking it
here and just reference in it to
that act.
So they had to meet residency
for that purpose.
Representative dunkin
manager as always if you're not
the first one for sky.
Representative.
So now
it's too early to really am a
weekend for madam chair I
promise we're going to get you
the phone that expelled
tremendously helpful
thank you madame chair thank you
representative okay so I heard
you mentioned in your opening
there were changing from one
eighty hundred and eighty days
two hundred and twenty days I
see on top of the line or sorry
top of page three lines went
through three where were
striking that one hundred and
eighty days but I couldn't
phoned where we're replacing it
with the one twenty if you could
locate that for me and then also
where
just why you think that sixty
days difference how you think
that'll help
madam chair and representative
the reason why striking it
is because it's already in the
tax administrative act so those
that change me to two thousand
twenty three to or credits and
refunds need to be reviewed.
Just a bit sold just to be
underlined with it okay great
thank you I work at it was
really all ahead because I saw
strike but I didn't seem to
replace language so thank you
for that madame chair if I could
interject record we got an
answer for representative
martinez's class each county
thank you so there is one class
each county in new mexico and it
is lost alamos and so this
piece of language is just to
also capture that it applies to
los almost.
Thank you madame chart to what
is the qualification.
The.
One sec i'm looking to my class
each county I mean if you want
if you want to get that
information to me after i'm just
highly I can absolutely do that
I didn't even know we had a
class each county to be a
completely honest madam chair
and representative so I would
actually like to know the answer
that as well
thank you madame chair
representative.
Any other questions from the
committee.
The.
Do we have a motion from the
committee
sure
we've got a motion to pass the
we have got two seconds
representative martinez for a
second already.
Representative and you know
representative dunkin yes
representative herdanders yes
representative lender yes
representative little yes
representative lunchtime
representative martinez yes
representative mason
representative matthews.
Madame waster
yes i'd like to my vote madam
chair yes and I don't want to
explain why
the chair final tell it for the
due past motion is ten votes yes
zero votes now okay so you have
a department but let before you
leave we like to represent
matthews to explain about
your manager and thank you
presenters I just wondered
I really was a question that I
forgot to ask is this a tax
credit going to result in
legislators being paid either at
a high rate.
Madame share and representative
matthews not my knowledge.
Thank you.
Think you've been shared thank
you apologize obviously we're
all running around right now I
do have further questions on the
bills but not so much is
aligning the timeline it makes
sense I more quick questions
about how this is are you an
operation and that stuff but I
know you already explain that I
did want to stand the way so
excited how for the
conversations I appreciate that
manager and we should talk more
about it.
Already if we can so we have a
do pass and.
Going to be next bill.
HB one seventeen
good morning and share members
of the committee I think this is
the first time i've ever been in
front of commerce or perhaps
because I didn't have enough
coffee I just don't remember
well welcome to commerce thank
you
can so hb one eleven and when it
eliminates the dirty exemption
for manufacturing for those four
laboratories established by
congress or for research
facilities are owned by the
state of new mexico
that's it madam sure I stand for
questions for any already
that was faster than I think we
were ready for because network I
don't I haven't even gotten to
the pages give us destinator
one seventeen.
For no coffee you're moving a
little fast already so do we
have anybody here in support of
your bill
do we have anybody opposed to
real.
Okay do we have anybody on zoom
already representative will go
the committee representative
dunkin
thank you manager.
Represent
can you tell me what this bill
is about specifically
it is in my my question then my
second part of that question is
will it get us in a in a fight
with the feds.
I'll answer your first question
for its madame chair
representative of junkin so
the lannel is now required to
produce platonium pets right so
they're they'll be manufacturing
up right now as it stands the
state of new mexico offers an
exemption on grt for
manufacturers.
So with the requirement from the
feds to start manufacturing
platonium pits i'm that
increases the landlord budget
buy something like up to
something like one point six
billion dollars the state of new
mexico because of the exemption
that currently exists will not
be able to capture any of the
grt
that that one point six billion
dollar brings so less almost the
county and the state will lose
out on potentially up to twenty
two million dollars
over the course of the
manufacturer of those pits from
what I understand and I and is
he is here he is not an expert
witness for this bill but he can
explain some some of the
challenges that that this
exemption can post to the state
alamos will have.
Less income from the grt with
the manufacturer of this the grt
exemption was for a
manufacturing was really
intended madame chair
represented dunkin to up to
bring in manufacturers to the
state to provide at some
incentive to build facilities
here this is a federal
contractor right and I mean to
my knowledge and perhaps someone
in this room is a
in particular court could
explain that you know.
That really the exemption is not
for an unattended for a federal
contractors it's intended for
for businesses that that are
coming in and manufacturing
goods and service.
So I don't know this answer to
your second question if it'll
trouble with the feds but I do
think that you know we should be
we should be requiring the
payment of that grt you know two
are state coffers and to los
along the city county which was
going to rely in which is
relying on that budget.
And that influx of money.
Think manager and so let's
follow up on that so.
You know what we're not going to
do it in the mexi.
Wherever.
Income and taxes from those.
Do you do you have any idea.
Then i'm shared like to
introduce not my witness but
someone who can provide some
insight
is but but let me start first
you know I think that the
manufacturing of platonium pits
is pretty unique to new mexico
and I don't know if that's what
you were going to say but it's
not something that can be
they've been ramping up for this
it's not something that can be
shipped it over to one of the
other national labs that have
certain kinds of expertise
you know I don't know in
california's all kinds of things
renewables but i'm I think the
platonium production is is
pretty specific to new mexico
but please
thank you madame chairman
representative dunkin there's
only two places in the country
manufacturing can occur here and
in I believe south carolina this
is the only place it's ever
occurred before south carolina
is still trying to get up to
speeding and get to that point
so as representative or it has
mentioned this is something of a
captive audience and to your
prior question about getting in
trouble with federal government
this does not run a fell of any
commerce cause or supremacy
issues because the
the exemption to the deduction
is applicable to not just
federal contractors in this
situation it's also applicable
to state and the non
discrimination is what prevents
us from getting at any sort of
conflict
thank you madame
as we all know
they
might
excuse me they might pay this
but they may take other jobs
from there that and put him into
other states and other cities as
well.
I don't not a retaliation but
just the.
Thank you.
Thank you madame chair.
A representative and i'm sorry.
This is is tourists from lfc
he's not my my witness or he's
just at expert on some of these
issues but is I don't want to
make it cannot
support or deny
he can't advocate on behalf of
this bill.
I'm i'm wondering if.
Um.
If this would apply.
If we get away from if we in
this exemption if it would apply
to any activities at a caring at
other national.
Madam chair and representative
only if they're engaged in the
business of manufacturing so
this is a new
development for this lab in
particular that they will be
soon began to engage in the
business manufacturing so this
is unlikely to apply to any
other labs.
Representative is he is there's
no manufacturing done for
example it seems.
Madame chairman representative
so the the difficulty or or
maybe the distinction is our
labs have typically engaged in
research and even when they've
been producing goods it's been
under research under the you
know direction of research and
so this is the first time that
they've been directed to
manufacturer not for the
purposes of research but for the
purpose of producing a good for
use that makes this applicable
managed here representative is
he is.
Are there.
Are there other activities
occurring in the state that take
advantage of this.
Is there any question.
Equal protection or fair
treatment if we treat
one manufacturer different than
other manufacturers for.
Met madame chair representative
matthews and I think there are
companies that are taking
advantage of this manufacturing
exemption and and of those
companies as up until this point
are federal national labs or
state owned research facilities
so I I understand what you're
getting at but I do think that
the federal labs are in the
state own research facilities
are are different you know in
that there are funded by our
taxpayer dollars already
I know perhaps is a you can
should more light and and madame
charge just to the second part
part of your question is it
discriminatory because we would
treat state labs equal to
federal lives all government
labs would be treated the same
that is what it allows us to not
violate any sort of
discriminatory provisions
thank you and that's all the
questions I have
thank you representative
representative mason
thank you madame chair
representative.
Is.
The.
This is the only.
Lab in the state that this will
affect their thought anything so
they are we are kind of single
one particular.
Industry there's not a state
labor this is the only energy
that this will affect is that
correct madam chair
representative mission is fart
as far as I know yes.
There.
I didn't see how i'm here
supporters who can do who was
the.
Ordered this bill brought
forward city of loss
this necessity county of los
alamos will lose
grt money well they will not get
additional trt money with the
way the log currently stands and
have
have prepared
ordinances which were actually
voted down to increase their
taxes their grt in los almost
city and county to make up for
what is going to be a loss of
grate revenue you know that the
feds.
Base essentially you know
wouldn't say force that's not
the right way they they
they contracted with the labs to
increase their you know that the
manufacturing to start the
manufacturing which increases
that budget by a considerable
bon of money and so of almost as
it's creating its budget saw
that this exemption was existing
and they they will not get that
money to you to support the
operations of the city and
county so that's really that's
what happe.
Actually.
It's not that they're going to
lose
their dark go.
And madam chair representative
mason
that they will actually lose grt
in twenty twenty eight and this
is in your fire in in twenty
twenty eight there's a projected
last of me that nine point three
percent of of grt so that will
affect their budget and then it
it's a little bit less than that
in twenty twenty nine and then
it kind of evens out a little
bit in starts increasing but
that is based on
what
what is you is it based on
manager and as some you know
there's also an expectation that
the budget will shift in that
direction and so some of the
taxable base that did exist will
become nine taxable because of
this deduction and that's how we
expect and the county expects
that they could begin to lose
revenue.
Thank you thank you very much
it's all I have
thank you representative
representative hernandez
I could make this microphone
work okay so I just I want to
clarify one thing so this is
essentially going to
get rid of taxpayer for this
selected group of of businesses
right that's what we're trying
to do i'm certain that madam
chair represent her as he knew
me not very very hard it was so
muffled i'm so sorry just text
it to me
that might be i'm still in the
microphone those ones are
different than these ones but
The guarantee tax permitting.
For these selected businesses as
that rate where they get
taxes stacked on top of each
other throughout the
manufacturing period
representative of hernandez I
don't think I I would consider
this a type permitting bill but
perhaps you can set them some
might on the madam channel that
on this
they're currently exists a
manufacturing deduction and that
is anti pyramiding so the
manufacturing deduction as it
exists is anti pyramiding this
takes the labs out of the being
able to qualify for the anti
pyramiding provision.
Perhaps you're right let me just
make sure that
a second this is very in my
brain it didn't work
sorry matter chair so this will
take them out of that exemption
and then essentially adds
permitting onto them is that i'm
trying to understand that the p
the pieces
so
madam chair that I know
permitting is a bad word in this
building but I mean I don't know
how long to describe it so
they're essentially adding more
taxes on to them
madam chairman represent
hernandez their currently paying
these taxes and they will begin
to stop paying these taxes
because of this deduction that
exists because it will be you
all attempted to provide into
pyramiding protections for
private businesses and
the intent is to you know that
was an unintended consequence of
this manufacturing deduction and
so too prevent that from
happening is the purpose I
believe of this bill and
it the almost in particular is a
little different when having the
anti pyramiding conversation
because they're not at a typical
private business with a typical
private supply chain that has
multiple layers of pyramiding
they pretty much just have the
contract and of course they
could they have subcontractors
but as they manufacture this
it's it's a much flattered
pyramid if you will so that
conversation is a little
difficult to have in this
particular case understood thank
you so much thinking manager.
Thank you.
To check
death taking
already
and do we have any any other
questions from the committee.
Do we have emotion from the
committee.
We would do pass
we have a due pass
before we go to that
representative
thank you
committee I just am compelled to
disclose that I have a conflict
of interest regarding this bill
i'm a full time employee at the
low sales national apps and I
ask you knows consent to the
committee that I because.
Thank you for the disclosure
there'll be no discussion or
debate on this request is there
any opposition to using the vice
chair from this vote
do we have a second
and the motion okay so you are
excuse me that a second on the
motion.
Patrick to take the vote.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin no and i'd
like to explain my
motion for my
representative hernandez.
Representative lender yes
representative little yes
representative lunchtime
representative martinez no
representative mason.
Yes we are doing.
Representative matthews.
Madam chair
yes
manager the final telephone that
do pass motion is five votes yes
four votes now.
Thank you very much
and somebody wanted to we've got
to represent into explain as
votes of you'll just wait
thank you manager I just think
this creates a little in in that
inequity in our tax code so it's
a reason for my thank you
representative of you have a
department.
Already thank you
our next bill is HB nine
representative dixon.
Okay.
Yeah.
The.
Does everybody have the hand out
and representative we received a
a moment to amendments
madam chair you should have a
committee substitute okay all
right so are we gonna start with
that okay so do we have the
committee.
The.
Yeah.
Okay representative if you'd
read the
the number
thank you madame chair the
committee substitute is point
two two seven nine three four
point two k that the document
that everybody has before them
okay would somebody like to move
there
the separate discussion
mentioned i'd like to move the
committee separate house bill
nine for discussion okay you
know position.
So.
Please begin thank you madame
chair thank you members of the
committee this morning I am here
to present the committee
substitute for house bill nine
husband nine and the substitute
would create the climate energy
and water division within the
new mexico economic development
department
house bell nine presents of
forward thinking approach to
managing new mexico's climate
energy and water resources in a
manner that promotes economic
development environmental
sustainability and social equity
the legislation focuses on
innovation collaboration and
streamlined processes and it is
a necessary and timely
intervention to meet the state's
climate and economic development
goals the bill also introduces
the decarbonization technology
program to foster the
recruitment and development of
climate energy and water
technology companies promote
research and technology transfer
and recommend policy changes to
support do you carbonization
efforts
additionally this bill
establishes the climate energy
and water project fund to
finance eligible clean energy
projects and re.
The climate energy water
division will offer cross
functional expertise and climate
water energy and economic
development it's gonna enhance
coordination with various stay
colders including educational
institutions industry work force
organization organizations and
indian nations tribes and
preblos it's gonna develop tools
to support pilot and
demonstration projects will
provide project permitting
navigators for climate energy
and water projects and it's
going to recruit companies to
new mexico to grow jobs and
build a robust circular economy
in addition it will collaborate
with and connect academia
private industry and our
national labs for competitive
grand opportunities and finally.
It will have the ability to
jointly employ staff with other
key agencies as well as contract
with specialized experts in the
fields of decarbonization energy
and water technology and madame
chair I would like to introduce
my expert witness who is sydney
lennon with the new mexico
environment department I may
have another expert witness
arrive as well and should that
happen I will introduce them but
at this point in time I think we
would stand for questions.
Thank you representative
so do we have anybody in the
room in favor of this bill.
Cable start here in the back.
Yeah.
No
support and mexico to be a
certain.
From here or research
developing.
Yeah.
Well like some potential of
overlap with every existing
statutory responsibilities
you're confident they can be
addressed awful coordination
with this water employee sharing
any night.
Yeah.
Needing our seat
and creating and they quality of
office.
Other department.
At the same time.
Enable the stage of support more
new mexico start ups expediate
advancement.
Yeah.
Thank you manager and members of
the committee good morning my
name is michael barrio.
Yeah.
We're here to strong.
This legislation.
Water
fostering economic growth.
We believe that he be nice
commitment to innovation and.
Promoting job creation stimula.
The introduction of the de.
The commercial.
It's been nice electric approach
to environmental strategy.
A lines per.
And we believe that these
elements of the bill working
mexico is transition to energy
economy but also offer a model
for other states to follow when
i.
Thank you anybody else in favor
any opposition.
The.
Robert upper darker.
Good morning man checking
hearing
this robber up with our came the
registered lobbyists for the he
can hear patching nation we had
the opportunity to speak with
representative dickson weaken
for vast on this bill as many of
you guys know he could he has an
old gas tribe but we are also
they are actually
about a year to happen have to
go the embarked on a solar
project that currently has about
one hundred make lots of solar
twenty one battery storage there
also look at the next speeds
which will be on my twenty
twenty five we're a disadvantage
forty make lots of solar end
fifty might watch for a bad
storage and they are looking at
the diverse fine further in the
in the future in different
aspects and the leadership
believes that this is a great
opportunity to work with the
state and leadership on
expanding the diversification on
tribal communities the arms are
weird support of hospital name
thank you
thank you mister aberdaki
anybody else on zoom
okay
any opposition to the bill
start up here.
Yeah.
Something like.
Yeah.
The urgency of.
These protections but rather
than their job would be to help
innovators now the gate the
permitting process century
protection.
We want to see
your review basic.
Or.
Yeah.
Water brazilian anti carpet.
We'd like to see.
Thank you a position.
Thank you madame chairman
because of the committee my name
is silence campaigner with the
center for viological diver.
Yeah.
It's really concerning
to create a new climate.
This should.
Air water.
Many of the bills terms like
and climate.
This leaves open the door for
tax.
Oil and gas industries.
These are all.
Instead of investing millions of
public dollars and all solutions
like hydrog.
Past legislation.
Thank you any other
person I wanted to speak in
opposition.
The.
Yeah.
Destiny.
Then afternoon charlie goes my
sister out and it still members
of the committee my name is
estimate i'm representative for
earth can you mexico development
organization on the self service
and a fee will like to express
our concerns about the lack of
clarity oversight in community
involvement around this bill are
you the families are deeply
involved in climate justice work
and yet we feel that this bill
was developed to support
industry that is looking to
continue to exploit an extra
actual new mexico.
Our first concern involves
around the bills absence of well
defined recognizer the guard
rails the terms renewables and
climate technologies remain
undefined creating room for
ambiguity and potential misuse
of funds for technology such as
hydrogen carbon capture in
storage.
We also question the necessity
of creating the climate energy a
water division of the state
already has a climate division
at the new mexico environment
the vision it is crucial to
avoid redundancies in allocating
funds to new divisions when
departments.
Meant to advance our climate and
environmental loss are already
severely underfunded.
There is a risk of fast tracking
projects that adequate
environmental oversight which
will furly harm our communities
the same communities that are
already been disproportionately
hard by a current energy system.
We're love questioning which
community groups were consulted
during this drafting and would
help the debate will include
exploration of that.
We also urge more inclusive in
transparent approach to the
decision many importance
ensuring that diverse voices are
heard and considered such as the
south side of santa be and we're
all made of communities.
We need real visionary
leadership on climate change and
we need you to choose to allow
with our use our families and
our communities not with the
industry please make the rent
choice and table this bill until
it has proper input from the
community and has the proper
guard reals necessary to protect
our health the environment and
move us towards real climate
action thank you.
And that is.
Good morning my name is and in
the globalist and I am the
policy campaign manager you can
either for climate crisis action
I am here representing thousands
of members of the portion across
the state we've been asking for
five years now.
Really more like pleading for
some real climate action to save
our future we have not seen any
movement that addresses the
urgency and skill which we need
to transition away from our
dependents on parcelfeels and
towards every general
relationship between our economy
are energy used in the health of
our communities environment now
finally there is action several
bills rollout this week that
take bold action on climate but
in several investment and
renobles and protecting our
water and cleaning up our land
and restoring our health we see
a series of bills aimed at
streamlining investment from our
public sector to private
industry including the facility
of industry that is hugely
invested and technologies like
hydrogen like carbon capture
like produce water reuse and we
are concerned that without guard
wheels this bill will help the
asilitate the taxpayers
subsidization of improving and
dangerous technology that
extends our dependents on parcel
fields and moves as further away
from the critical climate action
that is urgently needed we have
asked the sponsor to add those
guy rules where it stands there
are no guard rails definitions
or oversight for the proposal of
this new division there needs to
be tangible in a canable
measures explicitly defined
given the assumption that this
division plans to establish it
the covering technology program
that will more like the likely
impact front line over burden
communities are communities
should have been deeply involved
in the development of this bill
we were not by no means of this
bill center economic social or
health benefits for marginalized
communities the bill lacks to
define how in which technologies
and projects will be streamlined
how it will work with other
departments or inside
jurisdictions and a bit
interface as a eight ocd or
anything.
Finally why is there a need to
establish a new division if
there are other departments with
define rules just diction and
authority that lack the proper
funding in capacity this leaves
too much room to allow for the
misuse of better off plans for
false solutions like hydrogen
carbon capture produce water and
nuclear energy we ask that you
change this bill to ensure that
it helps.
It hopes not harms or feature.
Thank you.
The.
Julia bernal.
We are a public additional
scratcher to organization nor
you think it engaged in climate
justice policy and action for
the past southern years and our
staff importer present various
public community members across
mexico and i'm also a dual
graduate degree candidate a
unamid water resources and
community and regional planning.
We oppose hb nine because of the
concern of how this division is
house within the economic
development department and there
does seem to be a connection to
the strategic water plan which
is or sorry strategic water
supply which is something we
also post
we believe that this division
with streamline permitting and
pilot approval processes and
that fear
we worry that would also cut out
community protesting processes
especially for water rights
holders we find a problematic to
create a decarbonization
technology program and project
phone using public funds to the
best in the sector because it
puts the risk in burden on tax
parents and allows the state to
bail out that what when gas
industry and use court call
removal technologies like ccs
and carbon energy production
which is not clean have the
preventive decreasing missions.
We ask how can we be assured
that this division what also fun
projects for water resiliency
projects water infrastructure
repairs are not being and
groundwater data collection the
definitions in the spiller
unclear and I find it really
unfortunate that after all the
years of water groups advocating
for appropriations for water
resiliency projects are to staff
up the water agencies in new
mexico that this bill is
blending climate energy and
water issues into one division
in the economic development
department it seems like it's
leveraging the public's worry
about the bump the state's
future water security to find a
quote on call climate technology
projects we hope to see
different legislation that truly
prioritises water for before
economic interest thank you.
Tom solomon.
Thank you madame chair
palm solomon with the climate
focus organization three fifteen
mexico i'd like to associate
myself with a lot of the
previous comments
about this bill I think it has
potential I think with some
additional reworking it could be
a good bill but it has not ready
yet
I am very specifically concerned
about the lack of definition of
the term decarbonization it
could be that term could be in
perfect to include a lot of the.
Canceps related to
the use of faster methane to
produce either journal and less
full life they come analysis of
the emissions of such use is
employed you know we could be
admitting a lot more upstream
than at the point of view there
is work that needs to be done in
this bill to
amend it rework it to make it
And for those in a lot of other
reasons they don't three fifty
new mexico appointed this
particular bill at this time
thank you.
Ali hundred.
Good morning committee my name
is ali andrea lions I am the
coalition coordinator for a
group called new mexico no false
solutions we're actually a
coalition of different climate
and environmental justice
focused groups I don't want to
take a too much time I just want
to re iterate you know some of
our cult coalitions concerns
with the term climate technology
as many of you have probably
heard a lot of these can
associate with false solutions
such as the car and capture
hydrogen remember with green
hydrogen we need extremely clean
water and more than anything we
need the water for our
communities we are very
concerned about the streamlined
process that takes away from the
petitioning process of water
on the books I myself come from
in a secure community we want to
keep the water in our community
and for our future we're really
concerned with the fact that
this division would be created
within economic developments
because at the end of the day we
also want to see the state
benefit from renewable projects
from clean true clean energy but
the current definitions in this
bill as written do not reflect
that so please vote no on each
behind thank you
athena.
Yes chair committee members my
name is at the increase to do
i'm an environmental and energy
engineer I look for solutions to
the problems we humans have
brought upon ourselves
especially toxic air pollution
clean water in the current
climate crisis a retired navy
commander I raised my hand to
support a constitution and i'm a
christian all tell me to protect
lives and people need clean air
clean water and clean food in
order to live and thrive and did
you know that faster fuel
emissions account for ninety
percent of air pollution that
produced water in we can I was
going through school for our
environmental engineering was
considered talks and hazardous
waste not something that we
could recycle that
decarbonization versus parcel
fuel emission reduction which is
what we need to do is like
telling decarbonization is like
telling somebody who's got stage
one lancaster that hey you can
continue to smoke your signal
ads as long as he use a filter
instead of telling them he needs
to have it and that
I don't know if it's been taken
out but when I first looked at
the bill carbon currency aires
is just another phrase for
keeping the oil and gas industry
and operation we cannot do it we
are spiraling down in our
planetary systems do not vote
for this bill until we need a
good guard rails making sure
that we go for it i'm also
business owner and I want to
tell you i've been trying to get
a charging infrastructure
company started and operating
here we've had to go outside the
state i've got a thermal energy
storage company that I could
found it here and we've we're
essentially having to go outside
the state and so this is this is
not.
This is similar to the thing I
listed clean call or clean
natural gas or clean
at this point thank you.
Melissa troutne.
Good morning madame chair
representative happy saturday
my name is military trauman i'm
the climate and energy advocate
at wild earth guardians
i'm gonna share perspective i'm
going to dial in to the water
side of this case I am i'm a man
i'm a member of the new mexico
produced water research
consortium which is the
organization that was charged
with establishing the science to
show that the treatment of taxic
hazardous oil and gas waste is
safe for users outside of the
oil field and i'm.
I'm very concerned about this
bill particularly that it could
fast track the type of
technology that's being proposed
for wastewater treatment in
particular just hasn't been
proven safe yet
specifically appears to
win four states that the
division will provide for the
streamlining of permitting i'm
including for water projects and
then further down on page two
starting at mine twenty one it
states the divisional
established guidelines and rules
for programs and grants for
technology including highlight
and demonstration projects so I
just wanted to share that add
the new mexico produce what a
research consortium
we already have rules for
produced water treatment
technology pillar projects
we've been overseeing those
projects for a few years
and still after several years of
research by a lot of really
smart people at universities oil
and gas industry engineers
scientists that usca
new mexico ocd and an media the
data to support the safety of
these projects that commercial
scale still does not exist we
have not been able to show that
it's safe at commercial scale
and so
my concern again is the lack.
Is really the lack of any
language about this division
will rely on sound peer reviewed
research for four investing
state resources and new
technologies because while
innovation is not only required
but desired and we have to let
science lead and creating a new
deficient under the economic
department
you know about such critical
issues it also deserves a really
robust stakeholder consultation
process which as I understand
has not happened so I would like
for now though this bill has a
lot of potential I would like it
about no for now until we can
give this much more thought and
consideration through an
inclusive and diverse stay
quarter process that refines and
clarify as definitions the
divisions duties and how it's an
authority will intersect with
our environmental permitting
agencies thank you.
Sharon argument bright
yes thank you madame chairwoman
kye custom members of the
committee house bill nine
proposes legislation to see
control of new mexico's energy
and more resources without
accountability it were grant
authority to quote do anything
necessary to exercise the
divisions power and quote how
will bids go out to new mexico
residents prior to the process
of engaging national entities
instead of creating programs to
support decarbon is it should
why not cut to the chase and you
use the processes already proven
to work decarbonization
technology so I really readily
available its lowering carbon
emissions now we need to cut
carbon emissions immediately as
much as possible as soon as
possible starting with realistic
and measurable goals to become
carbon neutral negative by
twenty fifty there are missing
definitions in the bill or
already mentioned
decaramerization what is
technology transfer what is
meant by commercialization I
install geo thermal heat water
recycling I use my water twice I
have solar panels for ten years
my current p and m bill is zero.
And it has been zero for ten
years all except for two months
when it was seven dollars we can
do this please vote no on hb
nine i'm in nurse for forty five
years retired air force thank
you committee members and chair
giagos
crystal curly.
The.
Yes
they access the carly initiative
I am the executive director of a
nonprofit calls in digit and
safely and we mostly sort of
making county
here and new mexico a.
Am very concerned about this
bill because we.
Deserve the proper processing
for each of this is what the
division trying to deal is there
we don't need that marginalising
of these divisions when they
need the proper oversight and
transparency for any type of
permitting and I feel like with
these new projects that are
being proposed that we need
the necessary processes for
to ensure that our climate and
our energy and our water is
taking care of in a way that is
designed streamline any type of
services and needs the proper
processes for for each of these
issues that we're trying to
resolve here and you mexico I
feel like
the urgency to get these
issues resolved is.
Conflicting are is is getting in
the way of as making sure that
we're doing the right thing
you know there's ever need but
we should ensure that we're
doing it in the right way um so
I would suggest that
their spill not be.
Proposed anymore
it's just it's just a very awful
that this is my bill that there
is it's just awful that's even
being proposed
we see that in the future these
types of industry them hydrogen
and other fossil fuels other
fault solutions that you utilize
extractive industries isn't.
There are twisting a lot of
these types of of words and.
And now giving us the truth of
what this industry is trying to
do and what this type of
divisions change to proposed I
feel like we do need
additional support and resources
to come back these
issues are climbing in energy
and water but this isn't that
the route that
is.
Is ensuring community included
and tribal input it really just.
Benefits industry and and so
this is where it becomes a
problem so think you for your
time yet.
I don't I don't believe we have
anybody else on zoom
we do.
Unless my zoom guy.
Mister simpson
thank you members of the
committee ask for simpson
representing river and
individuals to state chapter in
the mexico but also belongs to
the national chapter individual
this is a industry bill that
promotes.
Carbon development without sound
scientific oversight in health
and safety precautions based on
what everybody is already said
who's opposed to this bill to
keep it simple please do not
support this bill I ask you to
take thank you.
Los.
Jordina's institute.
The.
Yes thank you my
Thoman sense and basic
recommendations such as
stakeholder input in engagement
early in meaningful engagement
the use of sound silence which
we know the e p a and other
federal agencies are really
hurriedly trying to update their
science and their evidence and
and findings because they know
that they are so updated and so
to nat see those recommendations
from the white house advisory
council on issues on matters of
water energy and economic
development is one concerning
but too it also doesn't make
this ambil is viable because the
billions and billions of dollars
a federal investments to help
communities like ours here in
new mexico transition or an
equitable and just transition
they need those kinds of what
we've heard before from previous
commenters as guard rails
evidence based practices to
qualify for those federal monies
and so it's for us it also have
been his institute we are not
seeing the best practice in this
bill we are seeing a lot of read
between the lines and wide open
space for potential neglector
abuse and so we are asking for
this to be tabled in for there
to be real rigorous discussion
dialogue to be and and and
further evidence on how the
state manages this and it's
clear it's a critical issue it's
clear that there's a lot of stay
colders who are watching this
and are interested in this
moving forward in a reasonable
way but this is not it this is
kind of having all the cake and
getting it to and it's just it's
not grounded in the best
recommendations that we have on
whether it's your locally from
our communities or for from
robust federal advisory
committees like those currently
serving in the way thank you so
much.
Thank you
already let's go to the
committee representative of
martinis
thinking madame chair.
Representative of dixon.
I I always made it clear that
the state needs to
look at these issues in a
balanced
I am totally a pose to the old
nothing.
Approached her energy
so i'm i'm very interested in
this in this bill but I do have
some questions
first question could you explain
to me what a
project permitting navigator.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative sure so when a an
entity is interested in coming
to this state or an entity or
the existing state i'm a lot of
times there are multiple
agencies that you have to work
with if you are setting up a new
business if you are
constructing a facility and so a
project navigator is someone who
is embedded within this
department works with a company
or an organization and
facilitates interactions with
other agencies this is not a
regulatory nor permitting
position it is simply
facilitation
thank medical representative III
love that idea
and I think it's applicable to
so many other agents.
Every day no mexic.
Issues in
requirements of state agencies
across the board so I I love
that idea
my next question on on page two
line.
Identify sight ready and brown
filled locations for a climate
energy and water projects could
you tell me what a brown fuel.
Through the chair representative
martinez am so a brown field
project is one that was formally
considered in need of
environmental remediation and
not fit for used for a variety
things
because of past pollution on
that site in this case these are
largely arm brown field sites
that have been cleaned up
through a combination of epa
funding in most cases in some
cases it can be state funding as
well there I spend significant
interest from the federal
government and thinking about
how those brown field sites that
maybe wouldn't necessarily put a
housing complex because if it's
it's historical use but would be
a great site for example for a
Or our other technologies that
generate renewable electricity
one program from the US
department of energy
clean up to clean energy is is
putting billions of dollars
into a number of states
including looking at the whip
facility as a potential site for
clean energy leasing
think a matter of chair
representative
my next question on
page relying twenty tw.
The division made.
A doctorals for decarbonization.
Lists a few things.
Why may you directing the s.
And if you're not going to
direct the division to do that
why even list these things.
The.
Thank you madame chair and
representative
it's definitely a uhm
I think pricing may it provides
for more flexibility
the.
Particularly the division may
make enter into an enforced
contracts
agreements and other instruments
necessary that should be left to
the discretion of the division
itself as it determines when
those things are necessary i'm
so I don't feel that it would be
beneficial for us to
overprescribe
the activities that the division
should do.
Thank you
madame chair representative
going on the page for line for
i'm just curious why this
division was created and not in
them.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you representative for that
great question i'd like to
start answering that question
and then I would like to pass it
to my expert witness who is with
the environment department to
elaborate and part of the reason
that we are specifying that this
division can enter into
agreements to share employees is
because this division fills a
unique gap that exists within
the state the gap is a focus on
economic development for climate
energy and water projects
because of the unique nature of
this division we need people in
the in the division who have
cross functional expertise you
need to know what's going on and
climate you need to know what's
going on in energy you need to
know what's going on in water
and we can't necessarily
guarantee that every single
employee is going to have all of
that knowledge and that's why
allowing these agencies to share
employees means that we are
going to be more effective in
all of the agencies and i'd like
through sydney to also elaborate
if that's okay
through the chair represent the
from our perspective we are
pride predominantly a regulatory
agency obviously sustainable
economic development is a huge
part of of what we do and we
continue to look to build your
expertise but we are always
going to be first in foremost an
agencies that that is dedicated
to protecting public health in
the environment and so our
employees are are scientists are
regulatory lawyers we have
learned a lot about economic
development from the folks that
ed were so good at this but but
fundamentally are climate change
bureau is really focused on
other topics like royal making
and transportation
decarbonusation we have a number
of federal grants that were
working on in so if there were
kind more that a delineation
where we could support the
efforts of edd.
I think it would make us all
more effective in attracting
these big companies good paying
jobs to this state
thank you madame chair
representative said in sydney as
a former agency.
One of the problems always had
state government and what he
ever talked to each other so the
world these programs and
duplication of efforts and
fights for territory
which to me just never made
sense and at one point I had
somebody in my agency was
job was to find out what other
people were doing and try to g.
I applied this this effort
the more discussion we can have
between agencies I think the the
better state government will
serve the people's boss to serve
my last question.
On page six
one twenty o.
The.
You talk about.
Going back to it to line ten
climate energy and water because
you should develop grant
criteria.
Curious about number six whether
the project or technology.
Could you connect
clear that out for me thank you
madame thank you representative
yes this the reason that
we want to be able to consider
whether or not a technology or a
project or a company has
received other funding is
because as we're looking at how
to use
state money it's important that
we consider is the technology
that we're looking at viable and
how do we determine if it's
viable is it something that
other investors have put money
in is it a project that the deoi
has stepped up and supported so
looking at those other factors
are important and also has this
home has the project received
state funding from another
source are we you know would we
be better spending our money
elsewhere
thank you representative manager
thank you madam chair and
represent hope dixon.
I will like the concept I like
the idea of the title kind of
scarce me to be honest with you.
I think it.
I think you might want to think
why the title because that first
glance.
Defenses were not.
But as I said in my opening I
think if this state will
come
stop looking at one side of the
other all or nothing you're
you're on my side or you're
against me
investing in this many of these
energy possibilities is only
going to move the state forward
so I appreciate the the bill I
appreciate appreciate the
concept and i'm gonna listen to
the rest of the debate.
We make a very informed.
Thank you madame chair
representative
thank you representative let's
go to representative dunkin
thank you madame chair.
Representative I don't know how
I feel about this bill yet.
Can you explain on page for
line eight section of paragraph
four there do anything
necessarily care out that
divisions purposes and exercise
the divisions powers can you
explain that to me
i'm sorry madam chair
representative dunkin could you
remind point me to the lines
again page for
line eight
um.
Madam chair and representative
i'd like to introduce one of our
other expert witnesses i'm
acting secretary for the new
mexico economic development
department mark robert.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative dunkin
thank you for the question
the purpose for the purpose of
this language is to allow the
division the ability to.
Astablished policies and
procedures as this division
developed
as we saw
five years ago we created the
outdoor recreation division
within the economic development
it's been a huge success but
there was some growing pains
that came with it in standing up
a new division this language is
simply to give us that
flexibility to stand up those
policies and procedures are
within the division
thank manager and I think that
answer.
It
in looking at this and and I two
wondered why it was in this
committee
as we continue to try to kill
the goose delays the gold neg
for our state
can you I would have I would
have loved to see how we're
gonna tax some of this renewals
we're not taxing it and as we
don't tax it I don't know where
these taxes are going to come
from as we continued to kill the
the goose
how many why didn't we did you
think about putting a tax rate
in there for these or but even a
thought
thank you madame chair thank you
representative dunkin I think
that's a an interesting question
i'm I would say though that
that's more the perview of the
taxation committee and the
reason that we did not include
that or didn't actually
consider adding it as a part of
this is because this is about
growing jobs and bringing
companies to new mexico and
supporting new mexico companies
and so raising revenue through
job creation
and in those mechanisms I don't
know if perhaps a secretary
roper would like to add to that
matter members of the committee
of representative dunkin
along those same lines
that's why
it is here is because we are not
a regulatory energy either we
are not attacks in energy where
not a regulatory energy and
those things are best left where
they belong at taxation and
revenue department at the
environment department at energy
and mirrors and natural
resources where the regulation
exists and the oversight exists
what we're trying to do here is
generate economy diversified the
economy in the state of new
mexico and in doing so not
picking up winners and losers at
But we come back to the same
thing over and over again and I
don't know that this gives us
any clarity as to how we're
going to move forward and deal
attacks anything that's in this
bill
thank you madame chair thank you
representative christ receipts
tax employment taxes all of the
jobs and
programs and services that are
brought to this state through
the economic development
department
and then think manager i'm going
say I think that's very small
compared to the golden gooses is
giving us right now and that's
my concern that were we're going
away from that and we're not
going to be taxing and not have
the funding for a.
Thank you madame chair that's
all
thank you representative
representative mason.
Thank you madame chair thank you
represent.
Representative I guess i'm the
little different the rest of my
first.
Is this I don't like the deal.
It's a little too.
I guess the first flag that I
didn't like is why are we making
this a cabinet position
department that has to do with
energy water
you know in it
though who's host on a b on this
all big by the government
those old pics that cabinet we
know who they successful
secretary for work when they
that's we all know that that
thank you madame chair think you
representative dunkins so this
would be a division within the
new mexico economic development
department so it would be under
the secretary of economic
development
but I understand that but the I
guess my deal is why do we need
this other department when we
have an energy department we
have a water department
and we have an economic
development report you know that
them as far as jobs and things I
just have an adversion to.
Adding more departments with
that the administration was more
called you'll ten may I think
we're spending ten million
dollars one of the other already
tabled and at some point
you know we have to the money
right now but.
At some I think we need to stop
the one money at the long sy
watch thicks you know and that's
the main what we're doing in
some of these the moment on
another thing that I have a
little
is definitions within this bill
you know
what the
what are the guidelines for this
committee in relation to the
caravanization climate
energy what do you say
that they're not going to have
regulatory control but.
I don't see where that.
Give keeps all that stuff where
it belongs now in the energy
water
and department that now regulate
it permitted
you'll in this bill it says
we're going to be permitting
projects.
I'd like to day in their
department where they have the
and you're going to share
personal assault and in there
but where the energy department
is might applied people that are
energy.
Experts water department is in
the state engineer you know.
That has always been the ones
that take care of our progress
in water.
Doubt that they question.
Madam chair representative
I can take a first pass at that
so I work for the new mexico
environment department so we
permit things like drinking
water system solid we systems
are
we do air quality and we would
continue to keep all of that in
house we have a staff of
hundreds of scientists you
really are primarily focused on
reviewing permit applications
making sure that we're
protecting the state while
providing certainty to the
private sector about what they
can and cannot do so I don't
think there is any intention
here of changing matter taking
scientists a way to be in
another department rather my
senses that this would create
things like the permitting
navigator system someone to help
you understand who you need to
go to an hour as projects move
through
one of I joined their state
government about ten months
going one of the first things
that I worked on with secretary
roper was bringing maxion a
large solar footable take
manufacturer to the state the
first are on short solar
photograph take manufacturers
sixteen hundred jobs two billion
dollars and this was one of the
things that I heard that they
requested big companies like
this want these sorts of things
and and separating them out
making them distinct from our
regulatory rule creates up more
clarity and what everyone's jobs
are and I think more confidence
in the work that we're able to
do um and i'll I I know there's
a lot of competition between
states for these big projects
these big job creating projects
right now maybe it can let
secretary ropers speak to that
differentiation i'm but happy to
talk more about the regulatory
roles people wanted me to just
dig on in there i'm guessing
nobody does on a saturday
morning though.
Madame chair members of the
committee and representative
mason.
What what we're trying to do
here is to facilitate
technology.
I've been doing economic
development in the station of
mexico
for thirty years i've been with
the department for thirteen
years and in that entire time
i've always heard about how we
don't do a good enough job of
transitioning technology that's
born in sender lane and afar ill
into private sector economy in
the stated in mexico
this is the past it's trying to
keep those technologies here as
well as move those technologies
here that come from outside of
our borders and create the
economic opportunities for new
mexico this is not about
changing our regulatory passion
towards claim drinking water or
clean air or or those things
that are handled through the
environment through energy and
minerals and natural resources
this is about taking that
technology
getting it here or keeping this
year keeping those well paying
jobs in to mexico and creating
that next step technology that
is going to be part of the
global climate solution here in
the mexico
they reps that they thank you
madame here in and i'm
our economic development
department you know I love it I
mean i'm not wanting to get rid
of it I just think
aren't we already doing these
things supposedly in the
economic development department
if not then we should be
suddenly
without making a no department a
no department with all the
overhead to go along with it
madam chair representatives of
the committee
you're you're absolutely correct
representative may send it in
that we should be
like I don't want to a lot of
time a little history less than
there used to be an entire
division of science and
technology within the new mexico
economic development department
there is no longer.
It was completely the found and
the new mexico economic
development department until
eight years ago which time we
got one staff person to serve in
the science and technology
department
now you will
you have already bought it on
the house bill too that is
trying to add some additional
positions in the science or
technology but this will give us
an and an opportunity to focus
on energy specifically energy
water and decarbonization as we
it's coming.
And I don't disagree with your
your assessment's representative
don't turn about the golden
goose we're going to take their
money and figure out how to
decarbonize that is it's a
statement of act
but it's coming and we need to
be the leader we continue to
move forward where a leader and
energy right now where the
number
two oil producing state in the
country
and were always in the top ten
natural gas kind of depending on
the month we are in energy state
right now and we need to
continue to be an energy state
whatever that next energy is any
as we need to figure out how to
tax it up but this is a step in
helping us from an economic
development job creation
standpoint of keeping those jobs
in new mexico and not in our
neighbor to the east I won't
mention their name
thank you
thank you madame chair
you know you went back to
decarbonization and that
i'm not
I should have rolled it down
legal exon bubble that's already
done a lot of the
deep carbonization so I guess my
take on all of this stuff is is
private enduring usually can be
that more economically better.
Without a stick in our finger
in their eye all the time trying
to regulate things that we don't
know how to technology we don't
know what the technology in a
year from
its movement so fast thanks
so.
It's a bit anyway it the I guess
the mind that you know what last
thing
works that i'm going to one that
lacks everything
you know you say we're doing
this list I like things spelled
out that this is what I will do
this is what you will do I don't
like it we this is what we are
doing
with this not instead you that
can change with the next person
that sets in your chair and her
chair and match
me at the especially when it's a
cabinet position that each time
we know we get into governor
they'll be a new head through
this department
and the we don't know what
direction they will like to take
but I guess
the one last question.
What
you know is that the carbon
design climate energy and water
projects
the lay that includes.
Everything we do according to
everybody.
Effects our climate my car's
effect your dog of my so word is
the regulation and in this
without some sort of stops for
what is climate control what is
energy what is
I like a little more specifics
in in a build tell me what the
next person set in our chairs
will do not what we're going to
do
thank you madame chair thank you
representative i'm a couple of
points on that
so
decarponization
I want to reiterate once again
that this is not a regulatory
agency so
this division would work with a
variety of companies you
mentioned exin mobile exon
actually is working on some
really innovative technology to
extract lithum from produced
water and other sources of water
right now they're not doing that
new mexico they're doing it in a
different state they should be
doing that
and this division should be
helping to make sure that that
happens.
Like representative thank you
madame chair
will go well move on to the
next.
In the capital building I
recognize that the twenty three
bubbles nastened and tribes in
new mexico the represent states
within a state and and I think
we all have to understand and
recognize and respect that the
sovereign authority that each of
them has to direct their own
economic development there on
governments etc etc and so I I
was interested when I heard of
the lobbyists from the higher
ear patching nation talk about
there's support for this bill
and I know that I represent
hickory a patch in nation and
know that for
decades they they've been a
producer of extracting oil and
gas from their respect of
reservation and I know that the
use that money to fund their
government right and and most
recently I think about two years
ago
they begun their transition to
to renewables and they have a
large solar field there right
south closer to highway five
fifty and representative can you
talk to me a little bit more
about about that in terms of of
how you see.
Your bill facility those kind of
transitions
thank you madame chair think you
representative yes
uhm so hickory a patching issue
is just one example of how the
state can better coordinate with
our
tribes and and the sovereign
nations on energy water and
climate partnerships so
specifically for their career as
you mentioned they are expanding
into more renewable uh resources
as well to supplement
the revenue that they receive
from traditional parcel fields
so my understanding is that
they're looking at building two
hundred and forty meg out of
solar and seventy megawates of
battery by twenty twenty five
and in addition to that they are
also looking at other ways to
diverse high and support their
energy needs the role of the
state in this can be to provide
introductions to new technology
that would work well with the
the programs that they have
where they want to go
serve as a resource
so really and this division can
be a connector of facilitator a
supporter and help
you know
with off takers if it's so
another example i'm if we look
into house for instance at some
of the projects going on with
kit carson and using the water
from the question mines
and producing green hydrogen
working to ensure that there are
off takers of that green
hydrogen so there is a lot
that I think the state and this
division can provide
another example that that I
specifically want to highlight I
think my expert might have some
other thoughts but
in the in the handouts that I
provided.
The.
Um there is an example of an
opportunity that we missed in
this state and
you know particularly for
representative of dunkin and
representative lenstrum there is
a program through DO u called
communities local energy action
program and this is a doe
program to support some of our
communities that are shipped in
away from fuss of yours and
maybe disadvantaged communities
but you know what we need to
make sure that the state is
aware of these opportunities and
that the communities involved
like the naval honest
sandwich community college for
corners economic development
agency that they are all aware
of this possibility and somebody
is making sure that we are
applying for those funds not
missing out on those funds we're
talking about hundreds of
millions of dollars in federal
funding and billions tens of
billions and hundreds of
billions of dollars in
investment in these
technologies.
Madame chair representative i'd
also just want to add that that
decarbonization is takes a
community I know some of the
solar energy that's generated on
the agree of patient usually
goes to the city of albuquerque
we need our neighbors and our
neighbors need us when when we
make these investments it really
does left all boats but often it
takes a regional approach and
we've seen a lot of that come
out of the requirements of the
federal government for these bad
government grants so right now
we're looking at a climate
pollution reduction grant with
they think more than five
billion dollars that will go out
to projects and we are reaching
out so that we are creating a
regional approach to how we do
decarbonization and that
includes
art tribal neighbors that
includes our neighbors are
different states that includes
our neighbors to the south all
of us need to work together to
think about how we decarbonize
each and every sector and I
think the ams strategic vision
that this department will create
will allow us to do that a lot
more effectively when some of us
get a little bit silent.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters so you're saying
then that
if if the if house bill nine is
successful and this in this
division is created then it's
definitely going to be a
resource for travel nations to
continue there they're their
transition from whatever the
weather they have is if they are
extracting and then we they're
moving to renewables that's
fantastic or if they want to
enter into some type of a
renewal type of endeavour of
which is at their sovereign
authority to do so they can
they.
At one less while a question
that i'm sure and representative
this past summer in the
legislative financial we went on
a field trip to elpasse to visit
their brackets
facility that is taken water and
and and create net to be
drinkable
with this division also help to
support those types of
initiatives in our state
madame chair representatively
date yet it is water projects
are included in this and and I
think absolutely brackish water
designers the shin I would say
that we're kind of any is is
certainly a priority and I think
we've seen that for every
economic development project
that it is proposed to the state
water is always the rate
limiting factor so it's this
allows the state to think about
things holistically like how
does a bracket water decide help
support clean energy
manufacturing
thank you madame thank you
representative sponsors.
Representative of matthews
thank you chair thank you
representative and presenters
my first question I think is
pretty easy on page two
wine two in line three.
The technology enterprise
division and the trade and
mexican affairs division
are deleted.
Is that related to your proposal
or.
Edit madame chair members of the
committee representative matters
that this is clean up language
these these two divisions
have been administratively
removed through lfc
for several years they hadn't
been taken out of the statute so
while we were in there great in
the new division is just clean
up language
thank you.
We're no longer going to have a
trade and mexican affairs
division i'm just curious about
that
madam chair members of the
committee represented matthews
we haven't had
trade and mexican affairs
division and economic
development.
For twelve fifteen years that it
has not existed in the entire
time i've been with the
department now that doesn't mean
we don't do international trade
but we don't have a defined
division
ma'am chair
thank you.
I think
well I know that at least a
present that I am the only
member of the water agriculture
and water committee that's also
on the.
And I spend as a member of the
agriculture and water committee
or a resources committee
obviously I spent a great deal
of time
listening to bills relating to
water and so forth and one of
the things and I express them
concerned to the sponsor about
this before was that it seemed
to me that this bill should also
have been referred to that
committee because we
are constantly looking at all
kinds of impacts of water not
only on our ecology and so forth
but on our economy and funding
literally millions of dollars
projects to keep water flowing
in o.
III think it's I don't know what
other committee you went.
I think it would have been a
good discussion there
and having said that manager
representative
the water field is a crowded
field in our state and it is
robust but it is essentially
government by underfunded
entities and these include the
state engineer at the interstate
stream committed mexico finance
authority which works with many
of the commun.
And so my question is has there
been any involvement I don't see
anything in the materials that
indicates that there's been any
involvement or any conversation
with the state engineer
interstates from commission or
any of these other into
that water is their business in
terms of your bill.
Thank you
a little closer yeah better yeah
yeah madam chair representative
matthews at at so I work at the
new mexico environment
department we are primarily from
in the water world concerned
with water quality not water
quantity and but we have spent a
wide time with
with the sponsor of this bill
thinking about how our pieces
fit together I know there is
also an fire from the office of
the state engineer I have not
reviewed it perhaps as
thoroughly as I should have
coming into this hearing.
The.
Great but I could
make man chair
I saw a
fire from straight state land
office but I didn't see one at
least in the materials.
Madame chair representative
matthews members of the
committee I don't recall seeing
the state in general i'm not
saying there's not one there I
don't we call seen it
but but to your point I I would
like to to say you're absolutely
correct it's a crowded field and
one of the things that the
mexico has done very well since
nineteen twelve
is handled water were not in the
bad spots that our neighbors to
the west star and they are an
utter terrible position in water
they because they haven't
handled their water well who
came in to stay to it at the
same time as we did so
thankfully we've we've done a
good job there we need to
continue to be diligent we live
in a desert.
Each thing that we do on the
economy development department
side
creates new economy race new
water users so we need to have a
plan which the state engineer in
the governor just unbuild the
fifty year plan we also have the
asked that is the being led by a
secretary kenny of the
environment department to look
at brackish water and develop it
in a way that it can be used for
industrial purposes to keep our
fresh drinking water for the
humans and I think that that
those are all initiatives the
reason water is included here
it's because the things that we
are doing do create water
demands and we need to
understand what the technologies
are we need to help get those
technologies created and utilize
the great those jobs here in new
mexico but we do not mean to get
into the business of a
judiciating water figure not
that that's not our job what we
need to do is make sure that
when we bring these companies
then there were working with
those people and that works find
those technologies to make to
make our water last is
as long as weakens the end of
the future that is why we
included water in this is that
we need to be aware of that that
we don't need to jump at that
credit.
Madam chair i'm apologies
representative matthews I miss
spoke must have been thinking of
another bill I did **** thought
I did not see the office of the
state engineer FIR either so i'm
I must been confusing it with
another bill I apologize thank
you and the manshare presenters
I think the two view the office
of the state engineer the office
of the.
And these other water historical
water bodies but that's that
would be quite right
as simply adjudicating water
rights would be a mistake we
deal constantly with the
questions of drought didn't drop
react.
And
and I guess what I see missing
madame chair in the bill is
anything that's sort of let me
back up let me start that
thought separately
I I share with the sponsored
bill the frustration with house
silod new mexico processes laws
and other kinds of things in
bunch of different areas are and
how we run often do this thing
and we don't think about any of
the other thing.
I think a lot of waste and a lot
of services and.
Results that
aren't very good that could be
so much better if we died across
these boundary lines
and well I really like about
this idea is it's an innovative
way to.
To get us out of his
and involve different agencies
and different kinds of process
and I think that's terrific the
part that that concerns me
i'm sorry to have such a
restrict voice
what concerns me is that somehow
in doing that we left out the
silo of these
there's no integration or any
kind of connection that I see
with
the the key waterpla.
It was simply a reason.
A very helpful thing i'm thank
you madame chair think you
representative matthews and that
is one of the reasons why
i'm actually at the
recommendation of the syracuse
we added the office of the state
engineer as a potential
shared employee agreement.
Is that in the
committee so madam chair
representative matthews yes it's
in the committee sub on page
four lines.
Representative I think.
I'm not sure that's quite enough
but I really.
The one other thing I wanted to
mention is
presenters is that.
The other piece of water.
And the state engineer does get
into this but the other piece of
water that
is so critical in our state is.
Always inv.
We're going to get sued again or
are we going to sue some b.
The.
And the
thing I would say that is that I
I who hardly agree that water
and the availability water is
keep.
Nobody's going to come here but.
The.
It will annoy pan being on the
great lakes.
I think one other thing is sort
of concerns me and i'll just
share this with you is the.
How to use money.
Somehow we can use our water to
genera.
Income.
Is
we have to do it in a r.
A representative little.
Thank you madame it's working
well thank you
uh quite a few of my questions
have been addressed or a few
that i'd like to ask madame to
representative thank you so much
for bringing this bill forward I
am interested in it as well
can you tell me about what the
information th.
Er a big concert of mine has
been the issue of water I was
worried about at what point
would water issues be considered
in the.
Navigation of.
Entities looking to get
commented in mexico or looking
to attract businesses to new
mexico and one of the questions
that I had actually refers is
referenced on page two in
relation to this
line eighteen.
Um item number three.
To provide
the sentence to provide
recommendations to the
government the legislature for
the streamlining of permitte.
I have a better idea of that
but my concern is that
could they.
Madam chair is there an
opportunity to provide
assurances that we are not
weakening environmental and
health protections.
Thank you madame chair
representative little there was
streamlining permitting may
sound that way we have a
statutory and regulatory
requirements when we do
permitting some of them come
from the state some of them come
from the federal government and
there is no contemplation within
this bill or within the new max
going by the environment
department of weakening those in
any way.
Thank you very much for your
response and think you made him.
On page three
the strategic one in a may have
misses item nine
the development of a two years
to teach it plan representative
they're not catching your voice
on the on this are in the online
if you
close sure thank you madame
chair and representative and
page three
item nine
it references had the
development of a two year
strategic plan which will then
be submitted to the department
I just want to make clear would
you clarify for me which
department and what other
are there plans to send these to
other entities as part of this
process.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative little I think
that i'll allow.
The secretary roper to sort of
talk about how it works within
the economic development
department
but I would advocate that
requiring a two year strategic
plan is one way the legislature
can ensure that our agencies are
looking for continuous
improvement and moving forward
and so for me
I think incorporating that is
very important
you know the department
referenced in here is the
economic development department
and I don't know
if
mister roper would like to add
to that
matter members of the committee
represent of little
one of the things that this
administration has done that it
wasn't under previous economic
development administration as we
developed a twenty year economic
development plan
it'd previously be done five
years at a time we we actually
took and went through the
process of talking to partners
agencies across the state and
developed a twenty year plan.
As part of that twenty year plan
it's a living breathing working
document.
Not a plan that sits on the
shelf.
Until it's ready to do the next
one until we annually go through
that plan and say what if we
accomplished what are next goals
within this plan and what's new
that's not that wasn't
previously in that plan this
would fit exactly within that
review with the new division
understanding that it's going to
take some time to get the
division stood up at the people
employees so having a two year
window instead of a one fiscal
year of window
it's really going to be about an
eighteen month window to where
they actively participate in the
annual review and then can
Thank you so
another point of clarification
for me please is to
would the
inner street stream commission
would those entities such as
such as
those partners as the agencies
involved madame chair would
those departments are the
currently receiving these
reports are for example that
fifty year plan because as you
described
that's it and it's wonderful
it's very ambitious that lays it
out but and I heard you say I
understand you to say that that
is flexible I mean it built in
some flexibility so as the
agency's madame chair such as
and those departments such as
the interstate stream commission
and other critical entities
I have a better
forecast of our water situations
in the mexico that plan is also
being adjusted as that am I
correct in that assumption
madame chair members of the
committee represented little yes
you are gr.
The
check will quickly I think most
of my other questions.
Answered one of it.
Yes I do have a cushion they
were concerns raised earlier
about the outreach particularly
madam chair in reference to who
was contacted
the period of time that reach
was conducted to receive input
it can you describe the what was
done in the area of outreach
please.
Thank you madame chair and think
you representative little.
Um.
In terms of outreach
what I would say is that.
I began working with the various
departments over the summer even
and have been engaged in those
conversations as well as with
some stay colders since the
summer however since this is a
sixty day thirty day session and
until the beginning of the
session I was not sure if this
bill would receive a message.
I would say that stay called her
engagement has not been wide
spread but fundamentally this is
an economic development bill and
so I have been coordinating with
economic economic development
focused entities for quite some
time.
In madame chair members of any
representative little I I will
add.
That the economy development
department is the first
department in the state of blame
mexico they have dedicated staff
to
the coolest account in a mistake
government jet I
it's justice equity diversity
and inclusion we were the very
first department to have
dedicated staff and we now have
three members that exclusively
work toward those goals starting
with us.
And then working beyond an
another area's other energies to
underserve communities
understood peoples to making
sure we're getting our message
to home so we already have the
people in place the helpers
continue to do the outrage
necessary to help this division
make sure we include the right
people.
Thank you and follow up question
venture could you describe who
is or who are the people what is
the makeup of that of judy
madame chair members of the
committee the head of the jet I
program is shony harvey.
She started out here in the
legislature
working a session she moved
through our department started I
was administrative assistant to
the secretary and now sit to top
the department she has an
individual
working directly underneath
through the reader
works directly uninclusively of
underserved groups and now
making limitucia is a brand new
member of the department that
has great background in in
energy and technology and so
she's working specifically in
those areas to help you to p.
Thank you thank you madame chair
this last question
thank you representative
representative lunch.
I think
wanted to make a few comments
and then I did have some very
specific questions about this
bill I guess my my first
impression particularly coming
from the sponsored madam chair
is to see a request of fifteen
million dollars for this new
division that yeah when we saw
the
budget they came out of lfc and
hfc it cuts
the traditional programming of
the environment I mean the
economic development department
so my question is is why is it
that we are cutting some of
those traditional programs such
as leader.
And jt some of those stallward
programs that yet we can find
funding for this.
I I i'm i'm trouble by that and
i'd like to ask is this in the
budget.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative yes the money is
in the budget and during the lfc
recommendation process I did
work with the economic
development department to
increase staffing to add more
staff for various sectors within
the office of science and
technology well just seems to me
that when we have those long
time successful programs that
run in that department that
there should have been funded
before we start launching off
into some of these other things
however I do
feel that this is a badly needed
kind of function but I did want
to ask you i'm looking at page
three of your substitute.
What i'm looking out line twenty
three
the division may may adopt rules
for decarbonization technology
my question is as who becomes
the referee.
When there is an impasse
particularly between eight
energy minerals and natural
resources the environment
department state land office is
c and state engineer as that
work.
Madam chair members of the very
representative lench and that's
it it's a great question I don't
know that I that the expertise
it is the question madam chair
because what ends up happening
it is it's the issue it's the
crux of the issue here because
you've got.
Sees you got conflicting
kinds of directives from reach
one of the agencies and to just
simply say that this division
that is tucked down to one of
those departments would be able
to come up with
rules for decarbonization
without heavy way and by the
environment apartment by the
natural resources department and
all these others water I think I
think that's a stretch
particularly if that function
isn't specifically given to the
department by the governor's
office with a complete
restructure I would be.
I think that opens a lot of
problems and
you know I hope it's something
that can be that can happen but
i've seen it in my own career
for years and years madam chair
that when you have these
conflicting policies you have
conflicting agency initiatives
unless there's somebody at the
top that says we're going to
completely change this and not
make it just a division inside
her department which I believe
the department that is woefully
underfunded wealthy understand
and hanging on in some cases by
their fingernails with certain
traditional programs I don't
know how this happens in a who
is the final referee with these
things at the end of the day
it's not that it's not a good
idea I believe that it needs to
happen because madam chair we do
have lots of silong but I think
that's a reach to be able to say
that and try to put it into
legislation i'm surprised the
other agencies haven't been
jumping up and down and and
going you know the circle for
that the other question I had
it's not a question it's more
along this energy transition act
issue that's in the lfc energy
transition act
is kind of the foundational
consideration when we look at
legislation like this because it
was the kick off legislation it
starts all this decarbonization
stuff and i'm just what i'm just
wondering madam chair and
representative.
How is this been measured and is
it where it needs to be.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative how could you
clarify how it's what being
measured well there is supposed
to be
excused me increased in the
renewable energy requirement for
all utilities and rural electric
cooperatives to forty percent a
twenty twenty five and fifty
percent by twenty thirty when we
start looking at those things
that were pretty into law or we
even get close to that madam
chair.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative
I cannot speak to the where we
are with regard to the energy
transition act but what I can
say is that you know by
facilitating the development of
all of the technology that we're
talking about we will be getting
closer to those goals this
division wouldn't be the one
measuring
where we are with the eta
requirements that that's done in
a different part of state
government
and to respond to the earlier
question about adopting rules
for the decarbonization
technology program and that
specifically regarding the
program within the division but
you know we also noted that or
can not that
others can petition the eighty
or other entities
regarding rules but.
Thank you representative
wednesday anyone can petition
that yib or the water quality
control commission my read of
this is added specific for our
technology carbonization
technology per.
Development that is focused on
technology transfer and
acceleration as opposed to
decarbonization
policies or programs that the
new mexico environment
department may pursue so we did
not read this as a concern
okay then madame chair ladies if
I bring to you a blue hydrogen
project in mckinley county and
it's approved by this group for
decarbonization purposes what
happens.
Any through the chair
representative lens from any
project would also need to go
through all of the regulatory
processes that exist within the
state so you'd likely need an
air permit you could need a
water per a discharge permit all
of those pieces would still be
in place rather this department
in this agency would be focused
on attracting those businesses
and creating clarity for them as
to what a regulatory process is
they would need to pers.
That's looking at using natural
gas
or electricity generation
through hydrogen
we've seen what those barriers
it down we've seen what that
problem has been even if the
economic development department
said g this is a great idea and
it's going to create a lot of
jobs and bring back a lot of
jobs that we lost.
With the retirement of a call
fired power plant.
It gets back to the basic
question what happens when the
bus saw of all these other
agencies decide we don't think
this is a good idea because it
doesn't meet or.
So i've asking you would
something like the the
conversion of the escalated
power plant to a hydrogen plant
be eligible as a project
representative
thank you madame chair thank you
representative I think over the
past two years we've seen
the economic development
department eminer and the
environment department all
actively working to create a
hydrogen hub in the state and so
I would think that would answer
the question no it doesn't
matter i'm asking you if
escalating would be eligible
under that kind of a program
madame chair representative if
those are within the rules it is
a decarbonization effort yes.
Is that the state took a lot of
effort in time to try to get
into the hydro.
Environment department.
We didn't get that designation
but one of the key projects and
there is asking to.
It was one of the number one
initiatives and well as well as
a ton of projects in sound line
county that was the crux of that
application however we have such
a big
concern in this legislature
against hydrogen
and we see that is one of those
fuels that we think would help
with decarbonization i'd be
concerned
the other thing in my final
comment out of chair about all
of this is that
I think this is badly needed
something like this a
coordinating function like this
and certainly energy is a big
piece for economic development
I I feel very strongly that the
work here instead of setting up
a new division should just
simply go under the science and
tech division that already
exists in the department and
have them do this work I just
think they could do a great job
with it they're already
established it's not necessarily
growing government it's actually
giving a definition of what
science and technology could do
already in that department i'm
not sure exactly what the
difference is I don't completely
understand that I think they're
kind of the same purpose but I
just think it'd be a light
planer if it just simply was the
money and the and the focus was
put into an existing division
inside the department
thank you madame terra for
listening
thank you representative
representative
and yeah nor knew.
Ten at a ten madame chair thank
you very much
I just have a couple questions
about project selection just for
my etification so page two and
one
fourteen and fifteen service
project permitting the
navigators for climate energy
and roder projects so does that
mean that you would be selecting
which projects move forward or
just kind of shopper
previously approved projects
through the permitting process
that is a lot of illiteration
man that was hard to get out
thank you madame chair thank you
representative so if you're
referring to pay just two lines
fourteen and fifteen service
project permitting navigators
that is for entities that are
moving into the state that
need assistance navigating the
cumbersome bureaucracy of many
agencies that are involved in
permitting different projects so
it is not permitting it is not
regulatory it is a facilitation
role okay thinking of that that
clears that up light so then my
question is how are we what is
the criteria I guess for
selecting projects and
just kind of making sure that
the projects that we do choose
to bring into the state and do
choose to facilitate and move
forward have some sort of
legitimate science basis for
success if that makes sense
manager representative.
Met medium chair members of the
committee i'm gonna try
representative on ya no new.
Okay.
That there's a really good
question and and this is going
to follow the same process that
we correctly go through for
for example a leader or a gtip.
We first determined whether or
not they fit the criteria that's
been established by the
department as.
As the criteria el.
Once we cleared that hurdle and
and then then we start working
with them on unboth the
legitimacy and the financial
stability of the company to see
in a where where they are in
that point and if they are and
we anticipate working with a
letter early stage companies
here until that one will start
working with them and
identifying the resources that
we have with the b through our
department throughout bdc
through mfa and other areas to
help guide them to help maybe
get to those financial reach
likely that's going to be their
first need over an above our
resources but their first need
is going to be established.
So there's going to be an
identification of eligibility
and then we'll going to continue
to work with them to help them
get to.
The.
Thank you very much for chair
and thank you expert for that
answer is there any room
in that you know multi step
process to like require some
sort of peer review evidence for
the project in question madam
chair members of the committee I
I think absolutely
what one of the things we do we
currently have two grant
programs that we work and once
called the small business start
up granted specifically under
the site under the technologies
side of it and those are grants
up to twenty five thousand
dollars and then we also have a
small business innovation
research grant match so if they
have a suburb as we call it
federal grant and we can provide
some state wrap money we use the
technology research council
which has experts across the
board including from our labs
and from
educational institutions
higher education
we have there their review of
all of those programs so we
would implement some sort of
pure review within the science
and education industry to
evaluate these projects.
The.
Thank you alright thank you very
much madame chair and
representative ex.
I I actually have some some
questions
so I appreciate and and like the
concept
but I do have some questions and
I was hoping when we had this
the amendment and then the
second moment and then the
suburb that things would have
being at least the definitions
were been.
Would have been added to the
bill to clarify what is and what
is not in the preview of the
proposed climate energy and
water division and I still don't
feel that that is very clear.
Which you want to respond to
that at all.
Madam chair would you mind
refreezing
okay
okay the definitions for
decarbonization technology
for claim it for energy for
water projects.
Thank you madame chair I
appreciate it okay I understand
now
my my sense from the drafting of
the bill and bearing in mind I
am not a lawyer but by creating
a program that is technology
neutral we future proof this
division if we are too
restrictive and prescriptive and
how we define what a
decarbonization technology is
what happens if the next
research that comes out of san
diego or landlord ends are
understanding of of what this
could be and so my sense is
because this is not regulatory
in nature rather it is that
economic development in nature
we want to create
a a big tent where we're
inviting lots of different
technologies and to be reviewed
by
process for a value eating
technology readiness for a value
eating a project ability to meet
our sustainability goals
so the so that is my sense of of
why it was phrased in that way
came.
I guess because the definitions.
Are so.
Murky to me I i'm having some
trouble there but i'll move on
could you talk to me about what
the safeguards.
With that we could ensure that
the money is being well spent.
Thank you madame chair so a
couple of points for the with
regard to the fund
so on page six
sections
you know subsections b and c
we are number one requiring that
the division and development
grant application process that
number one protects intellectual
property number two insurers
transparency but then in terms
of the grant criteria we are
including the viability of the
technology whether the
technology was developed in the
state whether it can be deployed
in the state whether the project
demonstrates a long term
connection two new mexico and
whether the project will benefit
the states environment public
health economy and workers and
so I would say that those are
some guiding principles
secretary might have other
thoughts.
Madam chair members of the
committee additionally as with
as with any of our typical grant
programs and they have to fall
with under the rules of
procurement.
So they have to be competitive
and nature they have to be
public in nature we can't just
randomly determine that
that somebody can get this gr.
So we're buy by rule of state
government we will have to
follow.
Yeah.
I guess i'm still hung up I I
just believe that there needs to
be clear definitions for the
types of projects that can be
approved and what the criteria
is
and so.
I I just don't see that clearly
in this bill.
The.
Madame chair members of the
committee and III think or are
expert from environment it tried
to address that I don't know
that I can change what she said
what we're trying to do is make
sure that we have flexibility in
here to not eliminate a
technology that may very well be
the one that we need to do.
So that is the reasoning.
In your assessment of the
desperate definition but that is
what we we didn't want to
restrict something that was
really going to be good by
putting it in statute that
that's why we're allowing that
to happen.
You know I guess with this type
of bill and with the concept I
would have thought that there
would have been everybody would
have been behind it as i'm a
little concerned that there's so
many people opposed to that can
you talk to me a little bit as
to why they're it was there
enough consultation and I know
you can't get everybody on board
but there seems to be a lot of
opposition and concern thank you
madame chair I can absolutely
address that I think what it is
it's a fundamental
disagreement on how to address
climate change
in all of the international
reports issued by the
international parents climate
coalition any any major
governmentally supported
modeling of how we can address
climate change it is well
understood that we are not going
to solve climate change by
simply relying on windows solar
we have to decarbonize and that
means we have to look at direct
air capture we have to look at
carbon capture sequestration we
have to look at hydrogen
fundamentally.
That is.
That is the disagreement if you
believe that we can solve
climate change by shutting down
the global economy tomorrow
having nobody.
Travel having nobody buy cars
because remember all of the car
products are made with oil and
gas are winterbornes are made
with oil and gas are
the batteries are extracted from
where earth minerals if you
believe that we can solve
climate change by shutting down
the economy crossed the world
and just relying on windows
solar than you're going to
disagree with this bill this
bill believes that there is
technology available and that
there is technology that has not
yet been developed and that new
mexico should be at the forth
front of that and if we limit
ourselves premium surely
we are not going to do ourselves
any favor I believe that that is
why there is fundamental
disagreement on this bell.
Thank you I appreciate your your
feedback thank you okay anybody
else have
promotion
please however do not pass on
house bill nine but it do pass
on house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for hospital.
Patrick to take the role
you get a second.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Representative and you know
yes
representative dunkin i'm a no
for now.
Representative hernandez
representative lender
what does it mean for now
yes
representative little
yes representative lunchtime
representative martinez.
Representative mason though
representative matthews.
Yes and i'd like to explain my
book
madam by share yes madam chair.
Yes
and I also explain.
And i'm sure the final tally is
eight books yes three votes now
representative matthews to
explain about dance madam chair
thank you presenters.
For now
I
was kind of torn by this because
I think I I just like the fact
we are not properly funding
leader which is been a pruven
program for us and turns
economic development and then I
express my concerns about water
and all of that kind of thing
but
I finally decided to.
You're last statement was was
persuasive I was at your high
hydrogen.
Anti work to call it
conference yet the high hydrogen
conference and I I just met the
point in terms of dealing with
warming and economic development
and all of these things thinking
that you know
not everybody's going to drive
and electric car there isn't one
simple s.
And this offers some real
hossibilities of alternatives
that could really make a
difference.
And.
Hope that it offers some real
roads forward that would really
app actually work and help us in
the future.
Thank you and.
You know I am hung up on on the
definitions i'm i'm don't feel
it's it it's very clear
as somebody who counts you
cannot come on my vote on the
floor until some of those things
are addressed I think we can do
better than what what you've
done and I know that it's been a
working document as I appreciate
that
I too feel like we need to to
start looking at it diversity
diversification and looking
towards the future and that's
where i'm i'm struggling because
I was a hard no when I started
but I eight I hope you can fix
it thank you
thank you madame chair.
All right
so our next committee meeting
will be on monday I know things
are being added to the
to the agenda
it it that is a living breathing
document as well
so please be watching for it as
I mentioned at the beginning of
today's meeting we are no longer
under the twenty four hour
role of amendments we are going
to be moving fast and so please
be watching what time were
meeting watch for amendments and
be ready to be ready to work
fast I guess is what I would say
so our next mean will be
