Afternoon madam chair members of
the committee.
What we said let's go ahead and
take their all.
Representative an enormous
present.
Representative Duncan your.
Representative Hernandez here
Representative one day if
Representative little here
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez here
Representative Mason there.
Representative Matthews is that
moisture here Madam chair here
sure you have a quorum what
you're talking good afternoon
everybody today we're going to
start with house bill two fifty
three
as a representative Garcia asked
to be her first and he said you
and so there is.
Representative.
More two justices.
Thank.
Already have Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
afternoon
we're here to present house bill
two fifty three it's relating to
gaming changes in operation
operating hours for nonprofit
organization gaming operator
licensee changing the net take
percentage for a nonprofit
gaming operator license madam
chairman and members of the
committee
This bill has to do with with
the the nonprofit to stated and
it affects all our veterans
They're having a hard time.
Cash flow in their their their
place of a business they can
hardly keep up their buildings
and pay their gas bills and and
I have the gaming.
Commissioner here with me and
and their back in this bill to
support.
These nonprofits so they can
keep exist in the state of New
Mexico
with that madam chair out I'd
like my.
Hi expert witnesses to introduce
themselves if you may not say
may and we'll go from there
thank you madam chair members
means that terribly chairman for
the report.
Madam chairman representatives
of cities and then the audit
compliance director pretty
gaming control one thank you and
we have to over here to.
Madam chair by Mary as one of.
Let's get you closer to the Mike
so we can so that I can hear
and.
We've got two lines as well as
the chair of the Human.
Madam chair I read you would
me could be a few brief comments
on the on this bill on the
special education these
nonprofit third meeting the of
BMW's of the American Legion
post and so forth and most of
these most of the funding is
received from the the gaming
machines go to US dollar ships
community activities and you
know it's point allow kids in
and and all districts checking
in the state and it's very
important because right now is
it is.
What they're receiving in and
contributions from the machine
as well for our patients you're
going back into the.
Gaming department and you know
these kids are here to we sure
that this has to be done so the
the we've Division American
usable for the survivors right
now they're at the brink of not
even returning there working on
the deficit think that manager.
And madam chair and members of
the committee we missed one more
expert witness he's kind of
quiet sit in the corner open
that nobody ask your question I
think.
Thank you to the right place.
And I'm showing State Council
for the New Mexico gaming
control board.
Even today all right thank you
madam chair with that will stand
for questions some of the anti
displaying.
Hi bill Jennings the American
Legion Department New Mexico.
Vice commander emotional
president of the V. F. and P.
which is the veteran paternal
nonprofit organizations and
Mexico.
Thank you for being here today
Sir.
I'm not missing anybody madam
chair and members of the
committee that will stand for
questions.
Do we have anybody today in
favor of this bill please slide
show in.
Anybody opposed.
Any videos.
Okay let's go straight to the
committee any questions or
comments from the committee.
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair of denture what
what we're trying to do with
this bill I know you all have.
M. K. roller Veterans
dissipating in these kind of.
orders and what have you
actually can.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm I'm not a veteran
and I never have claimed to be
but I just want to set that
record straight and the madam
chair and and I'll let our
expert State answer that
question.
I thank you madam chair
representative it covers two
primary changes one currently
the the nonprofit the veterans
clubs are allowed to operate
twelve continuous hours between
noon and midnight so the first
change would be allow them to
change it from noon to midnight
to any twelve consecutive hours
to maybe ten AM to ten PM to
better fit their membership by
you know because you know not
everyone's the.
I have a lot of a.
Out liars out there in the
second one would be to adjust
the charity percentage stated
from sixty percent down to
twenty percent and this would
allow them to pay their
operating expenses their
payrolls the electricity bills
everything associated with the
game room because currently the
way it's written a sixty percent
goes to charity and up to forty
percent would go to the
dictating machine at leases so
this you know guarantees a
percent so they can actually
stay open and pay their bills.
Go over the.
The Madam chair representative
the nieces right now are in
rural fifteen point one point
ten point thirty two the one and
it says no more than forty
percent no they do negotiate
there's two distributors in the
state right now and the not all
most of our little below forty
percent but not much and that.
Depending on the distribute a
somewhat different deals with
the licensees Djerejian Fund.
Easy to use of force should back
into the love or appropriations
Madam chair representative is
that's correct.
Yes correct thank.
Thank you Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair
it.
You guys remember last right you
just a minute I am just curious
what allow will gaming expenses
would cover.
What would that entail.
Madam chair representative so I
have the definition my role
right now and it it covers
if they would bein non cash
prizes for like promotion
security surveillance systems
accounting fees licensing fees
utilities
Device repair if they have to do
anything like that salaries and
employment taxes gaming supplies
and repairs and maintenance to
to the game I'm sure that's
that's great to hear total slew
of things that's correct I was
looking for that's great thank
you so much after.
Representative Martinez.
You madam chair thank you
representatives I appreciate you
bringing this forward want to
make a comment real quick.
For the veterans organizations
you talked about some of the
percentage going back for
salaries.
One of the great things about
the American Legion the beefed
up years of federal
organizations as they are all
full into your.
You may have the board tenders
makes a small salary but the
majority of the people there are
there as a service back to.
There.
Small communities.
The other thing is these
volunteer programs.
The American Legion has the the
American programs for the work
with kids in schools they do
these just a programs they
really.
Roll that back into the
community.
They take care of.
You know back when we were at
the height of the wars in Iraq
and in Afghanistan they would
take care of the families.
Of these specially the National
Guard members of we're getting
deployed to make sure their
bills were paid then we'll make
sure those kids know that there
was going to be somebody there
important social.
The ability to keep those doors
open is what's important.
Being able to cut the amount of
money that they're having to put
out so they could roll back into
those are built organizations
what's important
so madam chair.
Representative.
I don't know Representative
Zamora the amounts of this book
Representative Garcia I believe
you may have some numbers of how
many of those organizations have
had to close because of this.
Madam chair of the read about
the needs of your.
More and not.
Your have moved closed
Right now you got about
five more have a move close
into the into the mind you know
these operations that you said.
Help a lot of kids you know like
I said the two scholarships
The organization's annual and
the need to be above the This
American Legion potion and.
All these to the to the pin and
and existed for a long time you
know when I came out of Vietnam
they kind of took me a little
bit to help me help those
struggling a lot and you know
there's a lot of errors are
coming out that really struck me
you know we have over a hundred
forty thousand visitors the
state of New Mexico.
And you know a lot of families
as we struggled throughout the
these organizations are really
helpful to families and maybe
the kids like but and and
emphasizing kids that madam
chair and you know which is our
most important thing to me our
veterans are more important
meeting but the kids are coming
up they need that budget and
help of the of the Jews and
poles a really good do is hope
that anti question.
Madam chair representative thank
you very much
I agree with you it was
heartbreaking get the New Mexico
state region post closing or
there was a delay because of and
what was happening a lot of
times those encouraging them to
share buildings
so they could you know.
Run their programs on different
days.
The other thing Madam chair
representative that these
veterans organizations do is
they pay up to the state the the
state level.
And that state level that
employees service officer that
has an office at the regional
office of Albuquerque.
And they help.
Martin about Services push
those.
Disability claims through the VA
so that's another reason that
this is very very important so
you have my full support my my
thanks for bring this forward
madam chair if I may
you know a lot of Representative
Matthews said a lot of these
pollution regions have a.
They're not they're not
certified in the state of the is
sold but that people they're
helping veterans.
Get the benefits of I would
budget one more thing that the
money that the the people that
use the machines are.
You have to be a member of the
deed of gift W. or or the legion
proposed to participate in these
governing the activities them or
the other family members are
there but not anybody up to she
can not program these places
thank you thank you.
Madam madam chair I made the to.
Representative Martinez is a
Madam is I know in Clovis that
the knights of Columbus older
building.
And they're conducting the
business under read the rules of
reddit Errol in trying to have
the building goes into their
fundraisers and stuff so I wish
we could have done this years
ago so they wouldn't have to
have left lost their building
and and keep operating in doing
the good that they do throughout
the state thank you madam chair
thank you.
Representative Serrato.
Questions thank you madam chair
thank you sponsor for the bills
I'm I'm just curious how this
due to the.
These nonprofits no longer
utilize like like bingo and
others and how those interact
with the gaming machine.
You madam chair and elect our
mixer Steve to madam chair
representative is there they're
not to apply for both licenses
are dependent licenses.
You go they can either operate
being go with full capture
additional pull tab dispenser
which is a lot easier for a lot
of the clubs you don't have to
have a full staff so you save a
bit on a lot of you know extra
work in the building you need to
have a threshold of so many
people show up every week where
the dispensers is this is
automatic so there now to do
fundraising on both of those and
they both are geared to find
charity for the committee thank
you madam chair.
At Representative Mason.
thank.
Always.
Right the of the.
The.
All of.
Bob.
All of.
We have those.
And madam chair representative
it does.
So.
As.
for.
Sure.
In the.
Related news.
The top the.
It does this in a year years
have a service charge and so
very very appreciative we did
receive a charge is that what
city yes ma'am.
Hello with this chart is and
that basically that's just
please madam chair let's make
sure Steve explained thank you
madam chair representative it's
a three sections in the top one
is the way the the act as
currently written with the sixty
percent so going from left to
right I have different
categories of them monthly in
that net revenue and that
revenue in the gaming business
is crying in minus point now on
the gaming machines so if you
put twenty dollars in machine
and cash out up you play I the
net revenue would be five
dollars that machine so we base
the tax on that revenue and it
stays the same is ten percent of
the state that's not being
questioned or change so
everything is based on the
calculations on that revenue
after tax which is a little
confusing so the topic sample we
have sixty percent and the as
it's currently written and if
the distributor payment lease is
up to forty percent that lease
or net balance of zero the
second chart would be just shows
you if the
the changes in this we'll go
through and you go to twenty
percent that the chair will got
contribution will go to one
eighty and the they get to keep
three sixty the same as with the
gaming machine a distributors
Kate so they'll have that money
per a thousand to pay
there level game expenses and
keep the post vote and they have
a wide discretion of what they
can do with their money once
they get across
and then on the back there's a
dissolute now issues of what
they're currently doing with
charity obverses what this pop
change in the bill would have
and has a net effect of nine
dollars per thousand but that
goes right back to the the the
the organizations it could be a
VFW American Legion moose Elks
the eagles those are five
primary right now we did have
some others with the gaming
machines but they're not in
operation right now the
sometimes open closed but a.
It helps them and it sets that
revenue in in statute and
affordable amount so they can
remain open no matter what.
Thank you
Representative I.
You know I.
I see that you're concerned
about having facilities closing
down could you do you attribute
that to just economy white where
you see there.
Madam chair and and
representatives I imagine it's a
combination of things usually is
when you have a problem
one of my job jobs at the dairy
was troubleshooting problems and
and usually if you open up your
eyes there's two or three
factors I imagine some of it was
a.
The formula that they were
provide by.
And then inflation and and just
maybe less participation that
the building goes and all that
that thank you you know it's
hard insurance cost of their
buildings maintaining their
building costs and.
Parking lots you just just
everything combined madam chair
I appreciate that and
I will say so I grandfather was
a a Purple Heart recipient and
so I have a very.
Special has for veterans and
but I also know that the local
VFW for him was a place for
where he was able to get support
and people that had been in the
war with him and I think that it
would allow him to I think
Representative I see is that
this you know you to allow him
to get help us and help that he
needed because you know he
experience of the very dramatic
and so I don't I would hate for
these to disappear and so I
appreciate you bringing this
bill and with that
Representative person.
Madam chair up to the question.
Of what's going on with these
clubs it opened comment came in
they're awful for about two
years just about roughly.
And these people in that are not
the only building you're
probably renting them so that
keep on putting money into
putting money into a problem
because the we can find.
To the committee can benefit and
that was a big factor
on what's happening now in this
bill could not not coming a
better time to you know get them
back up to where you should be I
mean all in all the committee
members here I appreciate a yes
vote on it because you know all
on behalf of myself a hundred
forty thousand veterans to New
Mexico the unities clubs you
know I really appreciate is hope
thank you thank you thank you
for your service to both of you
thank you for being here today
with that turn it to the desire
of the committee.
So if you do passes.
Do we have a second.
If you would take place.
Representative and you.
Yes.
Representative Duncan yes
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews yes.
Adam vice chair yes madam chair
yes Madam final tally is eleven
votes yes zero votes now bill
thank you madam chair members of
the committee good afternoon.
All right As fees fifty five.
Discuss committees yes.
That's what.
Thank you.
Thank.
This is not the fifty fifth time
current this is.
I.
All right Representative are you
ready thank you madam chair and
you should have a committee set
up and it's two two four eight
nine four point one.
And madam chair at the committee
it asks gone page one line
twenty concerted efforts in page
one one one twenty one
coordinated plan the to provide
and that is to find at the
bottom of page three starting on
line eighteen.
There were other questions out
of this century or
conspiratorial and those are
current state statutes thirty
dash one dash thirteen is a
session right at thirty dash
twenty dash two is conspiracy.
And with that madam chair.
The second.
Madam chair with that all state
for questions.
At.
Businesses that we.
Yeah.
Comments.
Committee chair and member of
the office.
The.
Okay.
Chair of the house of
Representative Mason Madam chair
representative.
looks like you did pretty much
what they need to be here but
districts are.
Representative.
The
Just to clarify that the read
this special what what what is
your definition of organized
crime related to this
legislation.
Well we'd have to read the first
part organized crime consists of
one of more of the following
acts committed as part of a
concerted effort by a person or
a coordinated plan with one or
more co conspirators to deprive
a retailer of merchandise on two
or more occasions for deprive
multiple retailers located in
the state of merchandise over a
span of one calendar year and
that's January one to December
thirty first at the this making
everything clear madam chair
representative
Well this bill.
In reality the terror.
This type of the rising of this
type of crime you know we all
feared on the news but with all
the time it is definitely a
rising crime.
Is this got an update that the
think about out of it.
Madam chair and representative
Mason yes and what I follow is I
follow the Larson the statute of
as to the penalty of crime so
we'll add up the incidence of
the property stolen and then
that would go over to whatever
level of penalty it is and may
be prosecuted at that level.
Thank you Representative
One last.
Thank you madam chair.
For that
My my take on the deal in the.
No I'm not my view of this type
of crime it's actually a tax on
our consumers.
The retail crime is every.
But if it's at a retail store
said was some places more than
others but the businesses have
to calculate the cost and the
cost of goods so for this loss
the higher the value for each
product.
And hopefully this thanks what
was that all thanks to slide
that across.
The.
Thank you madam chair you
Representative families and.
Thank you very much
Representative Rehm eyes you are
either certainly persevering.
you and I have been working on
this crime for some period of
time
my bill H. B. thirty four I'm
sorry two three four will is in
Judiciary this afternoon.
And data I'm hoping very much
we're going to have a due pass
it will be supported by the
attorney general's office
a state police that and the City
of Albuquerque and members
brothers your bill has have to
get.
Senator awards for creativity
has been becoming more more like
my bill every time you present
it.
but my concern is for two bills
floating around on the same
topic.
In trying to deal with the
serious crime.
That.
All that happens with the second
one is that it confuses the
situation and it makes it far
more difficult to pass the bill
that has been put together with
the aid of the attorney
general's office state police
and other law enforcement
officers and so I have offered
you several times at the
opportunity to be a co sponsor
on H. B. two thirty four
and it is very very difficult to
get current bills to the house
of representatives.
I'm just concerned that we are.
I'm not sure why you're
continuing to
What a bill that's been
basically and knock off of
another Representative spell but
I think in the circumstances of
this appropriate to table this
So forward with with the other
ones about the confusion that
this may cost.
That's that we have
Representative Lundstrom thank
you.
House and the new members I have
been named chairman.
Late on that I have.
And.
What is here members
who are on their own.
In that year when those results
are.
This year and have those four
all the chair **** and that
makes you feel alive Madam chair
representative ring thank you
the issues that were raised
madam chair and Representative
Lundstrom yes I did those were
the two definitions that wanted
I now have a defined in here.
As Madam chair of the committee
a little bit of a long way as.
Last.
It what it was supposed to.
An hour and that would be able
to run.
So I I would like to ask your
line there's a raise on for
another provided the same.
Madam chair and Representative
Lundstrom I've been working on
this for about two and a half
years last year I introduced a
bill very similar to this
no one's health signed on it I
continued working over the
summer and then this year
there's two bills that appear
and if you look at this one this
is house bill fifty five the
other bill is two hundred and
thirty four.
This was introduced I ask of the
other representative to work
with me and the other
representative has declined I
thank both bills need to get to
the house Judiciary as we all
know judiciary is quite thorough
I fully anticipate my bill and
her bill will be vetted hard up
there.
But I'd like to get it up to
that committee because we've got
to address this problem.
That is correct.
Those of us that are involved.
Story.
Is that the two that I know
because these right those are
are.
A long long time not very many.
The time is here.
You think about this point until
the end of the session and.
Don't have to go through our
five nine million plus another
sign that whether or not we need
to schedule the interview this
point I mean I've never seen the
super helpful stuff on the
Senate side.
Your but I guess I'm a little
disappointed in.
Sanchez.
Thank you madam as the other.
I will say is the best hearing
is part of conversations that
the chairman I have had we had
we also that the sponsors were
able to come to
our this single bill however
that was not the case I'm having
this little for us what is the
committee.
As
fast as I can.
I'm sorry.
Do not change I do pass.
The problem.
Representative an enormous Act.
Representative back in.
Yes.
What.
Mexico to get a two thousand new
best depend on the premise of
the State.
Is a yes or was it a pass yes.
Years.
Representative Fernandes yes.
Representative Lente nope.
Representative little no.
Representative Lundstrom.
Senator one X..
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Matthews have.
Representative and in order.
No.
Madam vice chair yes.
Sure the a final tally is six
folks yes thanks for both.
You have a few thousands of the
representative of thank you
madam chair I just spoke to them
I've always follows rules.
Share myself for many years I
ask somebody to go to us and
they did it I think the
committee has a responsibility
now to pass legislation.
we can't get in the middle of
these towers thank you.
Thank you Representative have to
pass on your.
Thank you madam chair.
You'll.
The
lower class thank you.
Right.
So like.
It doesn't.
Yes.
madam chair
This is House commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for H. B. eighty
three.
This and I would move that that
we here the committee.
Of the it was for discussion for
discussion sorry.
We we are now.
Thank you.
This committee substitute is a
product of several weeks of
negotiations and this bill
originally started
I am on a bill that I filed
Just be eighty three the half of
the dieters Association Act
introduced Afghanistan who is
the executive director of the
dietary Association Anna
conductors.
And it was kind of a just that
of kind of a little deal with
some changes on when we do is we
do not to do this but the fact
the fee for the doctors and so
forth
and then in the process of
having conversations with the
With with the superintendent of
regulation licensing and.
Whatever.
AS superintended Senator he
opened I'm sure you all know
very well of it has evolved into
a process by which at this bill
actually moved to put dietary
board of over to with a lot of
provisions to be part of.
board to be subject to the to
the supervision
and direction of the as.
Medical Board.
And get is kind of a I'm gonna
let Representative
superintendent and Dr Simon
explained how we got there and
what the purpose is and what the
key point to.
Thank you madam chair then thank
you committee members for
hearing us today chair Lundstrom
may recall that this was
actually part of the sunset
review process during the summer
in which podiatry is one of the
boards that is for sunset review
this year and the recommendation
there was quite a few
recommendations in regards to
the this the boards that went
before the LFC and one of those
recommendations was to move the
podiatry board over to the
medical board and so I worked
and and and and then the and
then it the recommendation was
that the regulation licensing
department take the lead in
working with the medical board
the podiatry board in the bay
dietary association to come to
an agreement so that a bill
could be presented so that's how
the bill started as a as a
supported a recommendation I
don't know if it was an actual
vote it is a supported
recommendation on behalf of the
LFC.
and
Yeah I'm not sure which one of
you should at least costs mainly
about the.
Sure okay okay perfect sorry
sorry madam chair I thought I
was just explaining how we got
here.
so so let me just kind of go
through the sections are not the
public vote at in a broad suite
because it really is a fairly
simple fail I know it's a long
one and and I typically say the
long ones are very simple bills
but I truly mean it this time
so.
Sections one through four
basically all that does is amend
the medical practice act and
what it does is it makes
reference to podia Ettrick
physicians and it make
Representative makes reference
to the podiatry Act so that puts
the Medical Board a responsible
for the implementation of that
in the medical in the podiatry
Act and and I want to clarify
where that term podia Ettrick
position came from in the
podiatry Act there is a section
that says podiatrist bar
physicians and surgeons so it
already skulls than physicians
and surgeons the national term
for a podiatrist is podia
Ettrick position and so with the
the dietary Association past to
have happened is that we change
their term for podiatrist
ability Ettrick position the
medical board was not in support
of them being called the
physician under the definition
of position they wanted to keep
that M. D. M. D. owes and so we
are adding another definition
podia Ettrick position under the
Diatraea so basically sections
one three four just do those two
things they call put input podia
Ettrick positions and they put
in reference to the medical but
to the podiatry Act section five
is actually where we begin
amending the podiatry Act and we
again change podiatrists to pony
up for position it does define
association and that is a
conflict that's been pointed out
to me today so I'm happy to
answer any questions of that but
I do believe that we're gonna
have to take out that
definition itself defined
throughout the rest of the
dietary Act and so it's not
necessary I'm it also defines
the board as the New Mexico
Medical Board instead of the
podiatry board I will just say
one of the reasons of the LFC is
recommendation was to combine
them is that there's only a
hundred and forty.
Seven podiatrists in New Mexico
no that's a low number obviously
the podiatry Association and
many of us would like to see
increaseper right now there's
only a hundred and forty seven
and that makes it very difficult
for even their licensing fees to
fund the cost of staffing to
find a board for them to do all
the responsibilities.
section six changes the term
against from podiatrist to
proteolytic physician that's all
it does section seven and eight
sets up the pit I podia Ettrick
advisory committee and the board
to the medical boards and the
advisory committee's
responsibilities the advisory
committee would advise the
medical board regarding the
recruitment and retention of
podia Ettrick physicians in New
Mexico the advisory board would
include the executive director
executive director of the podia
Ettrick medical association as
an ex officio member and then
two other podia Ettrick
physicians appointed by the
medical board right now all the
podiatry board is appointed by
the governor this would give the
medical board the responsibility
for appointees.
Of the Medical Board would
appoint those two members from a
list of three qualified podia
Ettrick positions that is
provided by the New Mexico podia
Ettrick medical association.
It also clarify something that
came to my attention what we
were doing this that right now
the foot and ankle radiology
radiation technologist is listed
in the podiatry Act but there's
no there's no requirement for
what kind of licensure they get
or what kind of of functions
they can find so this clarifies
that it does add a fingerprint
background as required and I
know that is going to be some
questions about that so I'm
happy to answer those when we
get into the questions section
a podiatrist at this moment do
not have to do a fingerprint
background check which is
something that all other medical
professions in large have to do
in order to get licensed section
nine through eleven changes the
terms of pope but I trys to
podia Ettrick position
authorizes the biennial renewal
of the license which is what the
original bill did and increases
the fees up to to six hundred
dollars versus three hundred
because it's now a biennial
renewal instead of the annual
renewal.
it also in section then moving
on to section twelve it removes
the requirement there is a
requirement currently in the.
The dietary Act that the
licensees have to prove that
they've got a tax number well if
they're not a business they're
not going to have a tax number
and so we're removing that
really on unusual requirement
for physical for a for a
professional occupational
licensee.
Sections thirteen through
fourteen just change the term
podiatrist to podia Ettrick
position section fifteen we just
remove a lot of unnecessary
language there's a whole section
there and it's almost like a
page and a half that says this
is unprofessional conduct in
paragraph Hey and then paragraph
he says but all of this stuff is
exempt from unprofessional
conduct in isn't that's kind of
a backwards way to say what
isn't unprofessional conduct and
all of the stuff it's listed in
that is really terms and ideas
that should be presented in
rural by the board
sixteen and seventeen just
change the term to proteolytic
position of section eighteen is
the temporary provision that
most all of the podiatry boards
funds fees of the staff if
there's any staffing which there
isn't it moves everything that
is owned by the podiatry board
over to the medical board.
Section nine repeals the sunset
provision and that is already a
provision that is being repealed
in house bill two oh one which
is being carried by
Representative Perry.
That region
Presentation.
you madam chair I just will.
State as the most recent past
well no I can't say that as a
recent past year of the but I
agree board
Many years we have clearly
identified some of the.
Staffing issues that have
happened and.
And to the United boards are
there to protect the public.
And we are certainly in
agreement that this move will
provide.
Better let's say staffing to
ensure that the public is safe
and has a timely mechanism for
review of complaints.
Which is the the times a little
challenging.
I also can say that the actual
staffing of or not staffing what
the.
membership of the podiatry board
has been a bit of a challenge
with the fact that.
We've not often he had the
nominations through the
governor's office to get
actually board members so that
maintaining a quorum for our
meetings has proved to be
challenging.
So as we are
Putting forth we have worked.
Well in terms of moving this
with
good discussion and hopefulness
that as we get resettled let's
say under the medical board that
it's going to certainly.
Provide better service and
quality or safety to our.
Asian population.
Madam chair members of the
committee the executive
directors just in a nice way
saying that they think they'll
get better service with the
medical board and I've been very
clear that I agree with them
Medical Board has nineteen staff
that are dedicated specifically
to medical issues we have
staffing but we cover everything
from body art to massage therapy
to dental to the dietary and a
hundred and forty seven
licensees does not give us the
ability to have that kind of
full time staff specifically
dedicated to the dietary so as
hard as it is for her to say
better service I'm happy to as
the to the superintendent for
regulation and licensing suicide
I have admitted that I believe
they can get better service of
the medical part.
That we stand for questions.
Show of hands who am here years.
Against the.
Those online and those in favor
of those online please raise
your hand of this bill in the
house you want to speak with the
lower the rate.
She
is also on the wrist watch.
A lot of work together and solve
this issue this service crew and
opportunity that the office this
is a.
Anyone else because they were.
How about
Mr anyone opposed to speaking
that as we are.
Thank you.
Our illustrious Representative
yes ma'am Madam chair
representative.
first.
Top what is it
I'd like to ask of our hands.
This.
Our address food for less.
Members of the.
To.
Madam chair representative the
only thing that I guess seven
through may for.
Hello.
Realize.
What are the six by Neville
RT seven right a lot of really.
Of this in the years of offices
that I was right but I have.
There's no way I could sit here
and read this bill.
That.
And I did that comment on that
part of the reason this bill is
so long is because they had to
in the Medical Board statute
they had to go in and insert
nine three on page two in the
number of sections and the only
change in much of this bill is
the insertion of the word
dietary Pataki would be entering
already answered and I'm sorry
the acting Surgeon in and
because of the way we draft
bills you even if it's a work
one word change you have to put
the whole section in so in need
of it is much much smaller and
most of it is simply forty at
forty after the surgeon being
put in eighteen ninety
provisions that are already part
of Medical Board statute.
The representative madam chair
and I feel that's pretty good
about the you know it's still a
little discerning may madam
chair that had no chance to
really.
The bill of legislation from the
August.
But it's still a lot to swallow
for million in the thirty
minutes that were we're here and
while we're talking we really
have the top rated first place
but the but you know that's that
I'm sure it's probably pretty
good the it is a little.
Well hard on my digestive.
Madam chair
Most of my question
Representative my questions that
I had were.
Finally referring to the over
the last I thought we were
basically extending.
Funds that.
Of the old one in the twenty
twenties that and.
And giving the medical board R.
that is right but.
But actually I guess I madam
chair that's all I have to say.
Thank you madam chair of.
For.
I.
Actresses.
Hi policy.
Yeah.
Really years LFC K.
With one of these works.
Is that I.
So it is a recommendation
provided.
And the committee does both.
A lot of work.
In the state of
you.
So I'll be more.
I just feel like we just need to
be able to correct.
And as you mentioned.
Thank you next.
Thank you chair
so.
In reading that indicating that
you know that one point on page
thirty one thank you thank you.
It talks about.
Are to be that way.
Very
David again.
Have
thank you.
That's on that Representative.
in here at age thirty one.
July twenty one twenty two
eight.
Could you tell me what moral
issues.
you madam chair sure you.
It is a at madam chair that is
kind of a all of the staff
right.
I.
And just a moment this is
something we.
And chair
My suggestion would be that that
is a phrase that is in the
current use.
And that
the best thing they have been
trying to regulation licensing
and trying to get it out of
statutes and it somehow slipped
in on page thirty one as much as
Representative Mason indicated
it's hard it's easy to make a
mistake it is that right and so
we would ask of the provision of
the committee to remove.
That range from one twenty two
page thirty one.
Chair in the state we we we
appreciate doing this because
actually we've been trying to do
that for quite awhile and also
the only way that you could get
struck from statute is you know
yes this process so we all.
And madam chair probably the
better correction would be to
just leaked all of section B.
beginning on line twenty two
through the end of time for.
And and remember accordingly.
So.
So yes yes and beautification to
that I'm being told that we
cannot and I'm a little more
senior members it we can act
amended committee substitute.
Issues that come back changes.
We're interested in New Mexico.
Madam we can come back and read
the entire bill to that to.
But I would hope that so I went
to go to.
In that case thanks for the
committee to continue to to have
a discussion and we can get out
because I know that the vice
chair is also identified some
some.
Probable problems and so
we want to make sure that that
gets have claim so let's
That was mine.
As we noted.
Moral turpitude port.
On that will give.
I'm really sorry to everyone.
Okay we would forget everything.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair
representative I talked about
this and and the and because I
just want to know a little bit
about it
And one of the things we talked
about was the subject of
difficult it is to get all work
together even do anything the
closest thing I can come up with
is that chairman of a sewer
board one time and.
It's difficult to get people to
run or even to the state of or
of any type and so that's one of
things I said was this a great
sounds like a great idea good
spirit
the what question I have was
when was the last time this act
was looked at amended or
anything as any you know.
With the sunset is every madam
chair at years you like to
respond.
Yes your I believe it's five
years ago okay response that.
Thank you madam chair same
question.
I I did a couple the but it was
actually Representative at the
noted here is here experience
Hero you mentioned earlier that
that just to ciation language
was not trying to pull it up at
the apartment was not up to date
and I'm curious if we are going
to go ahead and it looks like
bring this back potentially
Friday it looks like we have
some ability to very beginning
on Friday to be able to do that
I would hope that we also here
is page nineteen at that the
first definition lines six
through eight you were noting
that it appears in a different
way later would you get if we
could get that however you
chairman of the.
And there page nineteen what
lines are six through eight.
So that's the definition and
it's FOR Association but then
later on association is set or
something else tightly so I
don't want to strike it or what
have you been to fix that thank
you and then also you mentioned
that there is another section
that you thought may also need
to maybe I just miss for that
we.
Madam chair of Representative I
understand that there may be
some questions about doing the
background check and I'm
prepared to answer those based
upon you well a in the criminal
offenders employment act and how
that relates to this it helps
clarify if you're if you would
like.
On the.
but otherwise I think if if it's
alright we'll with the committee
will go to roll this until
Friday will have your first and
then we are in heard public
testimony on this the committee
so we can move forward.
Thank you and thank you.
Thank you.
I I.
Charges.
Okay.
Representative.
Vice chairs rather we are the
two fifty five.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee this is my experts got
family and who is the registered
lobbyist with the national
association.
The national association of
professional employer employee
organizations sars within
minutes are there a lot of
acronyms but we will find them
as we go so how's labor veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill at two
fifty five was developed after
multiple conversations with the
office of the superintendent
she and we agree that we need to
get adjusted both statute in the
rules that were in place for
these organizations so these are
employee leasing companies also
known as professional employer
organizations out what these are
is should small companies need
assistance with H. R. or other
services like that they're able
to lease out these employees to
provoke provoke perform this
professional services
however right now as it stands
they cannot aggregate all their
employees and when they're
getting health care support and
so what this does is essentially
a men's this that they're able
to get that support it also
ensures that there underneath
the insurance code as opposed to
regulations what we're that
would not be as effective the
state so we were able to do this
so that if its the it's with the
federal standards that the O. S.
I was concerned about but also
fit so that PO's or or yes these
are able to operate effectively
if you want to add anything to
that madam chair I think that
was a outstanding explanation
but I do we would like to give a
shout out whoever to the
superintendent's office they
were they work with us for a
couple of weeks to really
perfect this bill one and to get
the substitute the last
committee and and so kudos to
kudos to them for working so
hard and and working very hard
to make sure that small business
in New Mexico can continue to to
to have the services and and and
this is really up the status quo
Bill this would use whatever
leaves thank you we we do see it
as a.
Even application of the law and
helping that way with that we
stand for questions thank you.
Is there anybody in support of
this bill.
Ready posted on.
Anybody hasn't yes sure.
Emily March.
My name is Emily marsh director
state government affairs for the
national association of
professional employer
organizations
we support this legend
legislation it would in summary
clarified employee leasing
companies licensed in the state
of New Mexico can continue to
sponsor and all for billing sure
large street welfare benefit
plans to the worksite employees
which will bring New Mexico in
line with the vast majority of
other states that recognize the
PO's can sponsor benefit plans
for their worksite employees and
I wanted to also give a shout
out to the LSI we appreciate the
opportunity to work with the OSI
on this bill and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee for the opportunity to
comment.
Thank you.
Outcomes we.
Share committee members Malcolm
Slee outside counsel for the
national association of
professional employer
organizations and I'd like to
thank you as well for the
opportunity to speak in support
of this bill
I'll just echo Mister Scanlan
miss marsh's comments and also
note that
PO's are currently subject to
licensing and regulation in New
Mexico under the New Mexico
employee leasing Act that law
provides the PO's are able to
provide any benefits required by
law by employers to employees
and as an employer in accordance
with longstanding practice in
New Mexico many PO's currently
are sponsoring fully insured
large group health insurance
plans and providing a
comprehensive health coverage
there worksite employees and as
Mister Scanlan said this this
bill will just ratify their
ability to to do so and and
ensure that they can continue to
sponsor such plans.
That's all sure thank you I will
go to the committee
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and
reprieve Serrato I I really like
this bill it took me a little
bit to wrap my head around we
were in house labor.
Once I understood what you were
trying to accomplish I really
appreciate what this does for
small business it really allows
them to kind of.
Be part of a bigger organization
will keeping their identity so I
really appreciate this and I
fully support thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative thank you I was
one if you're expert would be
able to give me a percentage
Of how many small companies take
advantage of of this.
Representative Madam chair
representative Duncan
you know right that's a very
good question do I have the
answer but I'll get it for you
okay
Madam the reason I ask is you
know you can have two employees
and you can still get in on this
and and that's why I think this
is a great deal because
we're the state of New Mexicos
is build up of small businesses
with two employees.
So thank you madam chair that's
of course and thank you.
The committee any questions.
I have a couple questions.
So Representative and I am.
I am the executive director for
a nonprofit would not be able to
utilize the services yes they
they utilize a PO or you'll see
for their for the professional
services and yes and so we would
just I'd never.
I never knew that this type of
organization and so
so you have to hire the
organizations are like reading
your payroll run your insurance
and did you hire just for one
service or does it have to be
incorporated into everything I
thank you madam chair thank you
could committee it really can be
depends on the provider so it
can be for an individual service
or for a full slate.
I think that's all I got what's
the desire of the committee
would do pass.
Take the rope.
Representative an enormous yes
Representative Duncan yes.
Senator Fernandes.
Representative yes.
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Matthews.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes madam chair Paul
tell Houston both yes zero votes
now okay
thank you.
All right Representative
Hernandez the REC.
Okay this bill at the and then.
Teachers in the principal's
office.
I feel.
Purpose.
So Representative Hernandez my
understanding is with that
Representative online as well
to help with the presentations
Representative do are here so
thank.
Yes they can thank you madam
chair okay thank you.
So.
Madam chair representative today
whenever you're ready.
Thank you madam chair
representative I appreciate your
committees flexibility in
allowing me to participate over
is doing today just also want to
recognize and thank you madam
chair for also being unnamed co
sponsor on house bill three
seventy four in just a second
I'll turn it over to
Representative Hernandez but
just wanted to say that for my
part this is a common sense
piece of legislation that
changes the income cap on the
use of needed dollars for is
infrastructure development from
sixty thousand to two hundred
thousand again this would be or
this would be applicable for
government owned lands that are
not a team to hire bees to be
very direct and clear we think
this is in line with the
original intentions of some of
these leader dollars which is
making sure that municipalities
and governments outside of
Albuquerque have kind of their
have the kind of resources they
need to do well to to make
economic development happened
and to make sure we have the
address industrial development
parks that our communities
warrants and deserve and are
ready to make part of our
workforce development and
economic development landscapes
so yes this is raising that cap
to include three new cities Los
crucis Rio Rancho and Santa Fe
but that would mean that
basically all of the state
outside of Albuquerque would now
become eligible for these
dollars we're ready to talk
about why that matters and I
will turn it to my co sponsor
representative for non this to
share how Rio Rancho came up
with this idea and then to
discuss an amendment we've
brought before you madam chair
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative that is first
things first let me clarify that
this is for a population limit
increase not an income limit
increase
so the question is why is it
critical to help out the you
know the second third and fourth
largest cities in the state
these three cities have driven
the New Mexico population came
in last census accounted for
about eighty five percent of
that growth
they played a critical role in
retaining and attracting human
capital and workforce in into
New Mexico they offer attainable
and diverse housing options are
key economic engines for the
state their local economic
growth is economic
diversification for the state of
Los crucis has a four thousand
air taker industrial park owned
by the city and the city of Rio
Rancho has forty five acres and
city center that dovetails with
stem related job creation also
owned by the city and with that
I would like to.
are present an amendment it
should be in your books is what
I was told now.
the to to I numbers two two five
four nine four dot one.
The one.
We'll explain why in a second.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay so this this amendment
would take the two hundred
thousand limit and raise it up
to three hundred thousand so
that the entire U so that it
would cover the entirety of
billing and accounting as well.
And that is all this ammendment
us.
So
we have a.
Representative extracts out the
word to and putting three in two
places H. two.
If any of those in.
Expert.
Chairman of the committee Larry
around registered lobbyist for
the city of Los crucis in the
city of Rio Rancho Madam chair
representative Martinez the two
hundred thousand brought in
three communities of Santa Fe
Los crucis in Rio Rancho but we
didn't realize you can also
utilize this for publicly owned
infrastructure within an
unincorporated county that's at
least ten miles away from and
you can just ability by raising
it just a two hundred thousand
that excluded Dona Ana County to
be able to use this as a tool
and so I know so that I know
there economic development
corporation the data the agency
you value can I was on the
cessation asked if they could
change that so then Dona Ana
County would also be eligible
for these funds and then it's
and is limited infrastructure
for publicly owned property.
Madam chair is there any other.
On.
Area that would be able to give
them just this raising up to
three hundred thousand.
Madam chair representative
Martinez I do not believe so
because I think the only one
left is Albuquerque Bernalillo
county which is well above six
hundred thousand.
Thank you madam chair we do have
opposition.
Yeah Representative Lundstrom
what's the population madam
chair.
Madam chair.
Lundstrom.
Without the city was crucis.
Madam chair representative
luncheon my understanding based
upon request and it's a it's a
it's close it's about.
It was about two hundred and
forty thousand or so is what my
recollection is if you take out
Los crucis.
This is just over a hundred
thousand in population so it
would but the definitions for
the entire county in the bill.
Here in us you were talking.
Yeah yeah I can't use of half.
Doesn't mean that they're not.
Working late all the time.
At the county can go in as of
now what is our population.
Madam chair representative
mentioned that would be around a
hundred and forty thousand.
We're talking about count this
as forty two thousand.
Madam chair and representative
was yes.
Just a minute yes ma'am.
Hi.
Yes I am very tired.
Maintenance maintenance from
the.
At.
It
was.
Representative Lundstrom the the
total population of the Indian
account as of the twenty twenty
one sets this is two hundred
twenty one thousand.
The population of Los crucis is
one hundred twelve thousand
pages as you are twenty one in
Los.
I do believe so yes.
No
chair representative was from
because that would that would
capture Dona Ana County and make
sure that for the future in the
expenses.
Now.
They're under the two hundred.
Representative.
This morning.
County was it a.
You want to.
Out of the coverage.
I I just want to have about
four.
Good.
Yes Madam chair representative
luncheon the way the way the
original re wasn't in it maybe
we maybe reading it wrong is
that the entire that to trigger
in the eligible you have to take
the population in the entire
county and madam chair
representative once wanting to
hear from you is maybe it's not
the entire county state the
county that the population
outside of the municipality yeah
what I'm saying that I'm sure is
one is a governmental.
From our.
Are there industrial partners
you don't expanding their own by
the city ma'am.
For the day and I Madam chair
representative and I do not I'm
not aware of any that are owned
by the city and the county
together.
when chair one million dollars
in assets on.
This body on what they all based
on their population.
And madam chair.
Hi I guess my feeling is going
to do that once you all earlier.
And it just doesn't make sense
to me that we would have
Albuquerque.
And there is yeah.
The the whole state was to.
I mean that's fine just ask you
one.
Madam chair representative
Representative Lundstrom.
One of the considerations
although that and had come up in
discussion although we have not
heard from the rural New county
where the movie is bleaker the
counties as to what they wanted
to do that but madam chair
representative luncheon to
concern always is if you bring
in Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county and they're eligible then
some of the smaller committees
may not be able to avail
themselves of the benefit
they'll get a lot of the money
chair of the ordinances with.
And that are I mean I would be
the.
Right that is that just at.
It was not in your area.
It's forty percent.
At the time.
Yes I mean that's destroying
western madam chair I I I just
line.
What to do that when they're
separate entities a winter
separately all in the.
Government.
And I know that that was.
Representative Martinez on the
amendment.
Madam chair representative maybe
Representative Lundstrom without
your.
Why was what was Albuquerque
Bernalillo county left other
than out of this program in the
first place.
That was
under the riches and
Administration.
As a closing.
I think what it was used for
primarily is out stimulate
growth outside of the
metropolitan area and.
Doesn't make sense of the sense
that they should be eliminated
and more I mean I think the.
The whole state should be on.
Instead of picking and choosing.
As a manager meeting using
tricky programs work with if you
ask for a million dollars you
have to have a million dollars
was not easy to use program is.
It would make more sense to me
that everybody is in everyone
should be on.
Shares of one.
Twenty one and is based on the
number economic days jobs
created and while many of those
jobs we have to be hiding and.
Generally.
U. K. type jobs we are not
eligible.
Eligible for the find yeah well
why would they call need to.
I want you well I appreciate it
and I read and.
There's a lot of factors that go
into it.
Madam chair representative okay
so.
That's able to do this but.
I have a question what would you
would you be amenable to us
changing this bill to
incorporate Bernalillo county as
well because.
Everything that you have just
said you're right why are they
excluded at this point if
they're bringing in jobs we
should have that open to them
regardless if not and the
protection of the forty percent.
For rural regardless.
Is that counties like a lot of
yours are going to be able to
access that as well.
Chair when you think about the
growth on the west side of the
gate.
That is fine as a lot of good
jobs being created there and
then south Koreans and losses
there's a lot of new jobs are
being created there I would
agree in the this cause is
under.
Hello County losses and whatever
that was you okay that would be
the one that's the reason.
that I would not think it's a
good idea anymore for us not to
early on because of everything
that's happening of.
I just messages.
I would.
Madam chair representative that
was never the intent it was that
the two communities that ask for
Rio Rancho Los crucis and
there's already population and
statute and so that's the change
that makes sense but that that's
absolutely policy decision that
I think you take out any
population reference in the
statute chair representative you
want to yes probably the easiest
way to do it.
It.
That in madam chair I think when
did when you did that it would
say something like in a
municipality or unincorporated
area the county not located
within ten miles there's a
there's a way you can do it and
when we have that discussion we
never had anything from
Albuquerque or Bernalillo county
or the league for four
association counties other than
asking the question of do we
want to include.
Sure I just I guess that maybe
we just of them ending
operations.
One.
Just.
That is my.
Where they want.
Trying to fly.
So madam chair can we have some.
We roll this bill and bring back
a committee so whenever you are
available next with
Representative luncheons changes
thank you I appreciate that our
with her changes incorporated.
Yes but I think that there's
still comments at the end of
possible.
Questions from the committee so
okay.
We do that Senator.
Representative.
At and you
order.
Thank you madam chair
Representative just because of
the kind of come up this way is
actually a question
Representative Lundstrom and
because you mentioned that the
that.
Carts out forty percent of their
funds for rural communities and
I was just curious because I
honestly do not know how we did
defined several in that and.
You know what they do and I
think to take the easy way out
by saying you're not on college
and I've been here you're not
Los crucis Albuquerque or Santa
Fe then you were all so they.
They try to do that we also
have.
Michelin's and.
Related
if you cover related
disadvantaged communities.
high levels of poverty.
You get more points for job to
generally that sounds.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative so there's no
specific numbers involves just
like not large the but you may
also still qualify if you're in
a large city occurred from the
disadvantaged areas that
economic age or
experience
major downturn they've lost a
big industry has faced that that
something like that you would be
eligible for later sure you've
got a company that needs to
be taken away.
But I I I just feel like.
Thank you very much for those
answers I want on the record
that I participated in seventy
time Merion thank you.
Madam chair can interject
something real quick.
For the freshmen that are here I
would highly recommend taking
Representative Lundstrom
economic development course if
you're going to operate again I
learned so much about leader and
J. tip academic development in
those board is and it really
helped me with the job that we
do here so I would highly highly
recommend taking that.
Yes.
The town that I.
City of July.
How long would you survive this
is really very.
Interested in really getting
deeper into some of the stuff.
Madam chair as I would highly
recommend it other times.
If anything else on the
committee.
I would just like to have one
thank Representative Lundstrom I
think that we are fortunate to
have those ones Representative
Lundstrom and Representative and
at chairman landed on this
committee I think they're put
out here to keep me on the
straight and narrow anyway which
is the wisdom and experience
again you know I said this
before it is committees it's in
its infancy and that we're
learning together and so I
appreciate the flexibility to be
able to have teachable moments
for this committee especially
with
Representative have members
would you like to confer with
your
with that representative today.
To the public because she is on
by phone she was drops by zoom
so
Representative content do you
have any comments.
She that comes with.
She's not on the.
Let's give her testament in case
she does want to weigh in.
We have last year so
Representative it is I'm I I am
not able to contact
Representative can get it she we
lost job is and I also since we
are coming back anyway if you
would get together I know that
I'm also sponsor on this.
and I think the recommendations
that were made I have seen very
appropriate and would like to
move forward with us and okay
all right thank you at all that
I at this point thank you all
right.
Once again we have worked at
