Mr chair and myself are when we
go to the members that are
currently in rural so they can
say hi Representative hi good
Martinez we want to say hi where
you're from a little bit about
thirty seconds of your economic
wait what is the economy
interest you in this committee
interest welcome of
Representative by Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman this month
in a state representative for
district eleven which is
downtown Albuquerque in parts of
the north valley I've been
legislature now for six years
I'm also the chairman of the
house taxation and revenue
committee and I come to to the
World Economic Development from
a social justice perspective I
believe that you know along with
education health economy an
economy that works for everyone
can be the great equalizer so
I'm very excited about the work
that we're going to do your
committee Mr chair and the work
that we're gonna do.
With this legislature in the in
the next couple of sessions
thank you very much.
Thank you of the Martinez and if
and if you have to go understand
are we also have
Let's jump down to
Yes your Wonda seconded join us
let's jump down to our seats
your seat the home of the famous
hot springs Representative Dow
welcome.
Chair representative at the Dow
I have granted Dogo and Sierra
County two of my three counties
are among the poorest in the
state I've spent a lot of time
in nonprofit work investing in
making sure that children are
healthy and entered school ready
to reach their highest
individual potential and many of
the barriers for the more
achieving that related poverty
it's one of the reasons why I
ran I learned you know there is
there that we rank low we need
copies of tax reform we need to
have business friendly tax
policy and so policy around
economic development and growth
that helps us move from
surviving to thriving is my
number one reason for running
because I think it impacts so
many of our barriers to success
and it impacts so many of the
diseases of poverty.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative will come up of
the beautiful well rounded alley
to Valencia County
Representative Baldonado.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
good afternoon everybody
my name's Alonzo Baldonado a
state representative district
eight which is a almost half of
once the county the west half
every time I go to Starbucks I
see Rebecca Dow they're stopping
in spending money in my
beautiful community Mr chairman
I run a small business here in
Valencia County and that's how
we feed the family and so my
interest in this committee
definitely is to see New Mexico
continue to make some gains in
the the world of economic
development I think we have a
made some good progress in last
year's awfully we can dig out of
this comment economic shutdown
and hopefully we can convince
our governor to start allowing
some stuff to get back open
we're really struggling a lot of
a our local folks are are
hurting I'm sure that's the same
for all of you so that's my my
goal this year and and welcome
to the new members of excited to
get to know you maybe in person
someday would be nice but but
willow will settle for this for
now thank you Mr chairman thank
you representative we have two
members who are of voting
members of rules rules is a
standard committee but doesn't
doesn't necessarily need a
particular time so they're going
over time over and rules we want
to welcome better number first
this Wonda Johnson can you say
hi and.
For you what's your what's your
thoughts on this thank you Mr
chairman and a good afternoon
colleagues from Gallup and I'm
representatives Doreen Wonda
Johnson and I represent house
district I which is that in
northwest New Mexico San Juan
and making the counties I
represent a large land base and
Navajo Nation ease Gallup and
I'm glad to be joining the
committee again I'll be serving
my fourth term and thank you for
hosting this meeting Mr chair
thank you thank you now we're so
thrilled this year we have a not
a member new member of the
legislature by any means but a
new member of this committee I'm
here for going on the county the
majority whip is with us
Representative bangles welcome
thank you for R. twenty eight.
Thank you and I'm so honored to
actually be on this committee I
have wanted to be on this
committee for a while so I'm
really excited I think the
members on this committee I see
that they work well together and
I I really love that about this
committee so I I'm excited
you know my family is comes from
business we've we've had you
know retail stores I run a
nonprofit I work really closely
with my business community and
so just saw this as a way
to to really broaden my base of
who are you I can reach out and
help and distillers more about
this committee and and work
within that area I think
especially right now with the
time of COVID it's going to be
really important to get of
businesses back to work safely
when we can and so I look
forward to to being part of that
so thank you.
Thank you so much and welcome
and we will R. comes in my neck
of the woods beautiful but I
less Sandoval County the senior
member of the house minority
caucus up Representative
Powdrell Culbert say hi to the.
I have a folks are listening.
Welcome back to you
representative what we have all
one new member of the committee
Jim Jim Trujillo who retired was
a stalwart member of this
committee for our.
For almost two decades and it's
kind of kind of neat that the
that the.
Representative that's a
neighborhood is also on this
committee we're just so pleased
to have our it took me years and
and that president okay was
years to get on this committee
with this represents kids and
was highly highly sought after
so we're happy you chose this
committee Representative set up
or would you of the satellites
and tells us but a few moments
also what about yourself welcome
to the legislature and outcomes
sure thank you Mr chairman my
name is representative Linda
Serrato and as the chair
mentioned I took over the seat
once Representative I Jim
Trujillo resigned last year and
so our district is on the south
side of Santa Fe all the way
into the county and really in
the burgeoning the area of the
airport road where a lot of new
businesses from the looks of a
lot of different backgrounds are
are scared growing and a lot of
our you know wonderful business
leaders living within my
district so it's a fantastic
place Representative really a
lot of growth a lot of movement
here I studied at the
intersection of of in economics
and policy when I was much
younger in college and I
continue to look at those things
when I went to Capitol Hill and
a few other places as well so
I'm really eager to you know
really look at that again that
intersection of how we can
promote economic development
that's an efficient and
effective and really still
support our working families so
that you know any crises that
happens either nationally or for
for them for small businesses
and our families and we're
really able to ensure they have
enough saved and enough to to
survive these moments and still
thrive beyond the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
so very much and we are going to
drive over to the vice chair of.
But don't cover call Miller told
I couldn't pick up of so we'll
try to get her fully functional
and izurvive Jarrell my vice
chair were voting and rules on a
jump over rules and and vice
chair of you could introduce
yourself and and and and out of
our staff introduce themselves
and are there particular rules
on the committee.
Thank you Mr chair I am
Representative Natalie Figueroa
returning into the commerce
committee I represent house
district thirty in the middle
northeast heights of Albuquerque
and my background is in
education I am a thirty one year
veteran educator of high school
students so I am particularly
interested in the intersection
of workforce development and
have built economic development
making sure we have the jobs in
New Mexico for the graduates of
New Mexico.
And we have the appropriate
support necessary and policy
structures in place so that New
Mexico's small businesses can
thrive.
That's my goal on the committee
and.
Let's go to staff and have you
folks introduce yourself your
role on the committee
Alisyn you're at the top left my
screen so Allison Jones you're
up.
Yes I'm thank you.
My name's Allison Jones and I
and the committee floater so if
you see me on more than one
committee that's why I just go
around help where I'm needed I'm
really excited to be here this
is my first legislative session
and I'm really excited to get
started and see how everything
works thank you.
Thank you Allison all right
George would you please
introduce yourself and your role
on the committee.
Thank you chair George Allison
introduce yourself George is now
introducing himself and his role
on the committee.
Mr chair George is needed.
George could you place yourself
I did I did I'm sorry I didn't
catch it I'm sitting for more
the soles and not on the
committee I'm just taking notes
in the.
You can see my face I guess I'm
actually on the house local
government and land grants and
cultural affairs committee but
rarely is it doing stage work
she's fighting right case with
the PRC today as we speak so.
She's getting her background for
the committee.
Thank you
George Mr chair I hand it back
to you marvelous and we're gonna
be working with Representative
to the public comment on her the
mute button above we can have
maybe wait assist her with that
but my name is on one last us on
the chair of house commerce.
And I've been not chair this is
the second provided.
Session no legislature which
I've been chair and that just
really needs to do that I
Representative dot district
sixteen the Westminster of
Albuquerque on the west side of
Albuquerque is gonna have the
most significant growth in the
entire state just west of my
district so we're really excited
about that we are with the Board
Albuquerque going economically
as well as the state we have
tremendous comparative
advantages to our neighboring
states we have on on the
parallel
natural beauties and and more
the store or places we just have
to add that on to the more
subhuman capital to get our
economy going back as quickly as
plans that level you can once
once everybody is vaccinating
comment we have tremendous staff
we're gonna be on work on Monday
Wednesday Friday afternoon
committee meeting at one thirty
the zooms are going to get
exhausting so work with you
maybe one thirty to four thirty
so much work we can do a three
hour period and we're just gonna
take it meeting by need.
will probably have one or two
bills on Monday our and then
maybe we are some a deeper dive
into some some more
Not as controversial but just of
the forty page bills on
Wednesday and Friday I'll be
coordinated with the with
spectacle worked out since the
the ranking member of the
committee and the analysts our
analysts are you know once the
speaker of signs of Bill to our
Canadian Alice go into full
of that they for analysis on the
various state agencies are
various interest groups which
was to submit analysis of a
particular veil and they come up
with a committee analysis for
all of us and then the majority
and minority adult analysis for
their respective members so we
have dried out as much
information as possible thank
this committee however is
hearing from the public.
More hearing from the public
here are being hospitals
unintended consequences that you
know the bill maybe fantastic
idea and try to solve a
compelling problem but it may
have an unintended consequence
that.
Negative towards towards
economic growth in business so
we got to be aware of that also
have to make some tough choices
our top choices we have to
expand markets yep the lower
barriers to entry are so small
businesses can start up in
bars and Representative to
create and foster competition
which are which may be this may
help provide resistance from
both spoke to start we haven't
had a lot of competition but
know the competition but again
the hospitality food service
restaurant tourism sector
injured payment secretary I'm
definitely deplores the bill
back on on the
Representative Powdrell Culbert
you are.
And you are muted this time.
All right.
It's my understanding that
Representative Powdrell Culbert
does not have a microphone or
camera so I'm working on that.
All righty thank you and just
So just so you know this but
represents the Kerala stubborn
Senator county area business
woman of the State pillar of the
community C. R. her and I have
units used to be on the parole
board and was not boy eight B.
R..
Your one the barn was of the
posterior and actual so will be
heard on Monday
but thanks for joining us J. I
know you can hear us and get the
public comment more about here
and then also will also visit
with Representative public part
of one this model is a leading
voice in the minority solutions
need deep in the rules committee
or are coming up with rules to
make the legislation bring open
as possible but we want to be
fair to all our all our.
And then our okay.
And so we are all by the and
again now all of the major the
major Alice's are we're going to
tell you as a technological
wizard whether you are not.
Is
your.
Some double speak.
One of
yourself when I was gone.
I'm sorry what was that.
You already introduce yourself
when I was gone.
I I have not Sir.
Introduce yourself what do you
do for this committee and ensure
at over eight are possible.
Okay thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is increased in LA thank you ask
up I'm gonna quit pretending to
try so this is my third year
back here with with this
committee I'm very glad to be
here I've got a wide variety of
government experience both in
state government and federal
government back in the day I
work for congresswoman heather
Wilson also worked for the
regulation and licensing
department here in New Mexico
and I've also worked for the
children youth and families
department so I'm very honored
to be here I love this committee
and not very honored to be here
working with you with you folks
thank you for.
And we're gonna bring in James
L. because I'm the technological
genius finally got the work.
Hi everyone and welcome to the
committee I'm James drug Culver
have been on the committee since
two thousand and three my very
first session and so it's a
great Canadian is a Canadian
that we don't do a whole lot of
fighting on and I look forward
to us working together this year
to it's a major pieces of
legislation out my major concern
is the fact that we do not the
we absolutely do not hurt our
small business community so
we're gonna really have to pay
attention to what legislation
comes through in order to avoid
that and so welcome everybody
has not ever been on the
committee.
And for those who been on there
what you know.
Thank you Monique.
Thank you so much and we will
definitely get to some
struggling and fighting but
right now it's all about reading
and writing is it was our
session thus far we missed
everybody in this building we
miss the folks
at.
Well Representative folks
obviously they can watch on
webcast is being recorded in our
I five years on webcast but we
also opportunities and attendees
are in the zone they're not on
this page you can see them are
we have their name as a no in a
separate
box and so now we ask of those
attendees that was to say hi I
wish to address the committee
please do well one is we we are
we want to hear from the folks
who historically are in this
committee most every day
Representative businesses and
industries throughout the state
so yeah you can our our
committee
R. W. secretary was all about
as.
And then so myself and by
stripping it all will have the
ability to let folks and and and
on new people and new people
unfortunately can't see your
face will get your your voice
and your voice will also be
archived in on the record so
Dominic's all I know has a a
meeting to go to our students
name up when we go to Mr so far
and then go down the line I'll
turn it over to them to the
audience and and missile that is
the manager thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for a long
to speak up dominance over
registered lobbyist with the
independent community bankers
association American heart
association
and you others can you hear me.
Okay good so just wanted to our
I've been part of the process
for over thirty about thirty
years since I was nine years old
since point out legislators but
I just wanted to say hello to
everyone I will reside in Santa
Fe for the entire section if you
have any questions if you have
any information that we can
provide you more than willing to
to do it I'll give myself reduce
our our information my
information contact information
for all committee members but
thank you and we appreciate your
service.
The.
On site thank you Dominic always
good to see you and and just
because work we have a high
learning curve in this committee
I actually we haven't finished
introducing staff so we'll go
back to the audience in a moment
but the if we can have a divine
facing higher and tells about
yourself to one to the a new
major analyst to this committee.
I'm using link so this is just
this
and vontade don't believe is
joined us yet but he will also
be working with us this year
this will be my third year well.
Servings Committee I'm small
business owner in Albuquerque
and supported
worked in nonprofits and
supporting small business for
many years it's great to be here
with you and your name.
Yes my name is.
Not to want to a lot thank you
Janelle soldier noted that US
and the Monday what's under the
major Allison will
want to say on Monday and last
but certainly not needs their
anchors Committee.
And then the skill set brings a
legislature
Of the.
My.
Are my admin assistant and the
committee secretary I will
choose adolescents also by
yourself Giselle.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Giselle Alvarez and this is my
third year on this committee and
I just love my work and the
people that I work with I'm here
to assist in any way I can this
is a new learning experience for
me with this and the virtual
meetings but I promise to get
better every day and just you
got any criticism at all
constructs let me know and I'll
be more than happy to work along
thank you guys.
Thank you just so thank you for
picking up taking a break from
from your wonderful retirement
to work with this the next sixty
days and I will go back to
members of the audience does
I'll just go at your leisure on
muting folks.
Mark Fleischer.
Representative deceleration
lobby you to Gallup Kelly in the
school district's figuring
communications affordable solar
van scare in McKinley paper
company in the in a mask the
flood control authority a couple
of questions on process I have
my hand raised can you also in
my hands right when I do that.
If I put it down like I am now
it's now down yes okay in the
chat button doesn't seem to work
are you not going to allow us to
have chat from the audience.
Now we we can see who's
attending.
Is not available anywhere on the
screen.
You mean attending in the
audience yes.
You get to see was attended in
the past we're in the committee
room we get to see who's in the
audience we don't get to see
that from zoom now right so on
participants like this is my the
reality right on participants I
press the little the little up
Errol
on participants and I get a list
of the panelists which are the
committee members and committee
of the staff and then I got
another list of attendees you
don't you don't get that we
don't either one.
Is chat which is and and and and
and and table we get the raise
in.
All right so we'll take a look
at that
definitely want to know who's
who's in the room and the
virtual shoulder to shoulder or
or not position to your position
but will check that out and then
maybe what's a good thing
markets I can announce.
You know how many folks are here
things of that nature
But now thank you for that will
will all look into that he made
the thing but I just want to
bring it to your attention that
we don't get you that.
It could be nice what.
Yes I did do.
The
invite link where did you go
through the NM ledges webcam I
would do the NM Legislative
webcam and I think that only
allow me to look so I went back
and added to the late in came in
that way the one that does
Representative my has to set the
I see okay I will check with I.
T. and see how we can address
that in a notice when you go to
the agenda at the very top
others of places please click
this link to join the weapon are
for public comment that's at the
very top of the page which is a
nice feature which I've not seen
before was not aware of that so
you we enjoyed also and and
participate like I am now okay.
Thank you.
Hi and see how the system worked
and I appreciated the email the
representative thank you very
much chair.
Very welcome thank you mark
welcome and your smiling faces.
It may be a good time for you
guys to practice addressing the
committee you don't wanna.
No one of want to be on your
game when you're our clients
have built up anyone else was to
say hi in a address the
committee.
Other signs up all right just
all taken away.
Mr chair she still muted but I
believe I read her lips saying
my name so everybody.
As this is Pat blocker here in
Santa Fe just across town from
the ground health side
Representative The New Mexico
retail association Walmart and
several others so were before
your committee quite a bit it's
nice to see all your returning
faces and Representative cerrado
nice to see you in person we
talked on the phone but I
haven't seen you yet and now
I've got the advantage because
you can't see me but I'm excited
for you all to be here and can't
wait to get to work and have a
good session.
Thank you.
King.
Giselle FY I I was I needed I
needed myself and I noticed I
can still a mute myself I don't
know if you want to meet people
after they speak or not my
that's what I was that.
That's what I was trying to do
right now.
I'm asking Jason Espinoza.
in okay.
You hear me yes awesome chair
members of the committee thanks
for let me try this out as well
my name's Jason Espinoza spend a
lot of time and and your
committee some of the clients
that I Representative that that
affected by a lot of legislation
that comes through your
committee is a New Mexico idea
which is the association of
economic development
organizations in the state NFIB
which is the national federation
of independent business this
only represents a small
independent businesses here in
New Mexico as well as the
associate of general contractors
the mechanical contractors
association in New Mexico in a
variety of of other clients but
just appreciate the.
Opportunity to do an
introduction and and try this
out and see how it works.
Thank you.
There can you hear me.
Yes we can okay great
I just wanted to say hello to
everyone I will be representing
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce this legislative
session again along with Terry
coal and other members of for
staff and also so a lot of us
small and large entities
including the union Pacific
railroad in Laguna development
corporation the the the tribal
business arm of the Laguna
pueblo but I mostly just wanted
to make a couple comments about
about the process like mark I
also clicked on the top click on
the top link where it says click
here to participate.
And it's you can't it's very
confusing there's no microphone
there's no speaker there's.
It's just a little awkward but
it looks like Giselle is
controlling that so is just L.
gonna be those soon quote
unquote zoom master for the
committee.
Trying to get your we are doing
good you're doing good it's just
on our end we just can't tell
what's going.
Also Mr chairman we cannot see
participants and also like I
think mark said the chain that
is dis abled are you Mr chair
are you going to allow the chat
to be enabled so that as we're
listening to the committee
members of the public can type
in comments that everyone can
see are you just going to keep
that disabled I see
representative Sarah Figueroa as
vice chair shaking shaking art
I'd like to know what there's no
way the up.
Chat we can't even
We get the panelists can chat
with one another I'm sure all of
you are familiar with zoom given
your professions the panelists
and chat with each other.
I think I can chat to you I
don't think you could chat back
but your question and JD also
out of shot
then we just send you a chat see
if you we and can yes it's from
Antonio Maestas tonight that one
back I don't believe you could
send me one back and and the
other no the attendees will not
be able to chat in the gym I
can't you're correct I cannot
resist so I guess the way we
communicate with members during
a hearing is we just have to
send text messages or emails or
is there a process while the
committee is under way that we
can send them written comments
based on what we're hearing
being discussed how do you
recommend that we interact
during a committee after it
started thank you Judy the well
after a bill is being presented
we interact the exact same way.
The rules are not different the
protocols are not different I
call on a on the bill's sponsor
to present the bill.
They can have you know one or
two or three experts which then
you know present the bill I will
then go to members of the
audience I will go to the
members of the virtual audience
and then you can address the
committee just like you normally
do.
Once the audience is done
commenting on that particular
bill as you know things go back
to the committee so of course in
the same room you can't raise
your hand and and and and
correct this or shout out or
walk walk through the well of
the committee and how this of
documents so so that's nothing
new of granted people have
relationships and can you know
call us out of the room which
we're going to be able to do I
suppose I suppose you could call
a member of you could turn off
his video and speak to but I
don't anticipate members doing
that and obviously you're free
to text and email members as you
would normally during the
committee because I know during
the committee I'll get a couple
through text throughout the day
by the way to address the
committee in a formal way is the
same you would simply address it
via your voice as opposed to
standing in the well of the
committee.
Thank you and I have one last
question so it looks like when
you are ready to go to public.
Comments.
I can raise my hand that's how
Giselle is L. A. knowledge me
this time so when you are going
to public comment I can just we
can raise our hands and just we
hope that you'll call on us
right.
Yes and and and let's so you
know it's it's it's committee
will get a little better will
get a little better
I don't cut off debate I don't
cut off public comment we don't
have those highly contentious
bills were chairs will say
thirty minutes to the side
thirty minutes to that side.
So we're unable to do that I
think we don't have like lengthy
public comment Norman in this
committee but there are folks
who want to explain themselves
no for three to five minutes or
what not so what I'll do is go.
To the proponents for the
opponents and we'll try to
filter it that way we it may
zigzag.
Of what
But also eight the proponents of
the bill let's say you have your
hand up and I see the proponents
of the bill and then just L. on
mute you.
Then you could you could.
You could give your opposition
or say Mr chair on the
opposition can I you know and I
go later it's it's all going to
be kind of game time okay hi
decisions.
Well thank you so much in detail
you can you can mute me now
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you Mr
chairman this is mark Fleischer
and I see a couple of issues one
is just keeps muted me but I
could be myself whatever I want
I don't think you want to be
able to do that I think when you
meet somebody you want to invest
they raise their hand and
Giselle recognizes.
Because I should be able to help
now and you send a text or chat
to just the panelists and I got
to see is the did you receive
this chat.
You may not with the public see
in the chat you have it says you
to panelists but yet we all got
it.
And I can hear you.
Thank you mark up my new was on
for sure that so no great points
great points that the chat I
sent to you I sent to the
panelists and you I thought it
was only sending it to you but
as JD confirmed I can see
members of the panel consent
jobs to you you can't send shots
back so we I wouldn't do that.
I wouldn't do that with regards
to the mute and unmute when
Giselle on mute you you become a
panelists you jump into the
zone.
But you're still in the room you
chase and and I believe JD are
still in the room with us about
blocks in the room JD is not so
that's just kind of interesting
so anyway we'll figure it out
we'll figure out.
Committee then let's leave it at
that what I'm gonna do right now
before we hear from is on a try
to share my screen.
Let me try to do that of.
The new share my screen and see
if if that's happening.
And this is folks who were of
attendees so these are folks who
are attendees
And I'll scroll down so we have
Jason at the top.
And I'll scroll down.
So these are folks that are
chairman I don't think we're
able to see the participant list
from your from your.
I'm here to see your mouth
moving merely show out okay.
shucks then that's that
Can you see my screen now.
We just see here desktop and
your little boy sleeping okay
fantastic that
All right so I I tried to share
the screen.
All to no avail let me try one
more time.
So I'm gonna have to learn how
to share the screen but what I
did is I share the screen like
scroll down on the attendees
fall practice that and that'll
give folks an idea of who's an
attendee obviously you don't
know who's watching on the web
well folks watching on the web
would not be able to address the
committee all right just I will
go back to the members of the
audience I have.
So I wanted to ask.
Your muted.
Yep house she has made a need I
think.
So I'm talking now if you want
to me we've seen cut me off.
She.
Yeah you mute yourself.
So what is remove your
permission to speak you jump up
jump back into the tend the
rooms you jump back in the lobby
appropriately instead of the as
a member the panelists.
Next person Mr chairman.
Chairman.
We sure.
Mr Mr chairman thank you when
you do that so I got on mute
myself too I don't know what to
do.
What.
Can you meet yourself now.
I'm sorry as I work with Ballard
consulting this we're going to
disconnect but often on I've
been with you in this committee
in the past and the for the work
with you guys but let you know
that when you did do that as
well do that me and you might
speaker as well I don't know
what to push.
But that sort of on my screen to
on mute as well.
And I did not have my hand up to
Mr chair I'm also getting
messages that when we are back
to muting people some of the
people have already spoken are
being kicked out of the session
when we need them it's removing
them as participants.
Thank you.
So all are just if you could
just a let's let's do
housekeeping after the
introductions of let's just go
back to introductions does all
of the pandemic please alone in
the in the in the room.
My notes.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee can you
hear me welcome yes welcome
thank you so much for this
opportunity it's a whole New
World for all of us and we
should all the service that you
and the staff are doing and
anything that I know any of us
can do to help.
We are here to assist in that I
will be in your community quite
a bit I represent healthcare
gaming our waste repositories
water issues and oil and gas so
you're be a pleasure to see all
of you I do echo well this is of
course but I do echo some of the
comments made by mark R. N. JD
about the accessibility also if
there was a way to.
Make some of these changes in
each committee so we have sort
of a standard process to the
house and the Senate I think
with also be greatly appreciated
as we venture into this virtual
at legislative session so thank
you all very much have a
wonderful day.
Hello good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Vanessa let
eat and I will be in your
committee on pretty frequently
this session as well I represent
eighteen anti dell technologies
Garrett Development Fizer I went
rock Development in Albuquerque
as well that's just among a
couple of the different
committees of clients that I
have Mr chair and just only do
have a question about presenting
to the committee will you be
allowing us the ability to share
on our screen if we have maps
that we'd like to refer to or
economic development numbers or
things of that sort.
That's a great question we could
talk more about this during the
housekeeping after introductions
but we would have to figure out.
The share screen which would you
guys probably know better than I
we would have to allow share
screen well what I would suggest
is that you the male members of
the committee PDF's or what not
and you can make reference to
them during your presentation so
we'll try to figure out how to
do that because certainly the
bill sponsor and the experts
will be allowed to share
documents so that the public can
see them and we could see them
but I'll try to figure out is on
on how
All members of the of the public
can share documents will change
course.
So what I've been told is that.
We just handout or you want to
submit to send them to me and I
will put them in the share drive
which is available to all the
committee members and the
analysts.
And members of the public can
make reference to that share
drive and walk us through what
you want to walk us through what
will be one way will will we'll
try it out and and you know two
weeks three weeks from now we're
gonna be pros next week is going
to be a lot of trial and error
so we appreciate everyone's
patience but welcome thank you
Mr chairman and members and just
as Marla had mentioned we're
going to be up in Santa Fe as
well my and my brother over to
and I and we're happy to go on
walks or make ourselves
available to you to provide
additional information and
certainly analyst I will send my
information and my clients so
that you have my contact
information if there's something
I may answer as well thank you
very much.
Thank you.
My.
Yourself.
Okay be here now welcome yes we
can hear thank you so much I
apologize for that all there two
year but anyway my name is Marco
Gonzales and I'm very happy to
be for the committee today and I
have several clients who are
Representative I appreciate all
the discussion on the rules is
very helpful to know the playing
field and was glad to hear about
normal procedures that's all
good and my clients that I'll be
in for the committee for our
many and I love on don't look
forward to talking to you about
the ball if you have any
questions but I represent
Albertsons and Facebook and
Invenergy a claim which
distributes a lot of the
products in our stores Molina
healthcare The New Mexico had
tech conservation initiative
pattern energy southwest
transmission test of a Verizon
and virgin galactic and really
happy to talk to anybody about
any of that and excited for the
committee and all that the work
we have to do an appreciative of
the opportunity thank you very
much Mr chairman and members of
the committee what welcome
Mister Gonzalez we appreciate
your autograph as well where you
may be more persuasive to this
committee if you have a
beautiful trout know your lap
when you are.
With your for.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you I'm.
Thank you.
Am I being heard yes you are all
awesome Mr chair members of the
committee the only reason I'm
speaking to you right now is
because of the statement you
made twenty minutes ago when you
said you better practice.
Because it's really it's just as
challenging for me my name is
art hall and you guys will know
that I work with him again the
two of us do everything together
we represent a very broad cross
section of business interests in
New Mexico that extend all the
way from the energy sector
whether it's renewable oil and
gas for utility to licensed
child care providers
We've been advocating for the
interests of our business
clients over the last twenty
years I've been doing it for
twenty six Kim's been doing it
with me for the last ten we're
very grateful to be representing
these interests in New Mexico we
look forward to communicating
with you about our concerns on
legislation whether it's pro or
con.
And this is really hard for
those of us that have been doing
it the other way all of our
lives and we're hoping that we
can.
Make contact and get the
information that our clients
have to you in a timely fashion
so that you understand the
implications of the stuff.
So that it supports the position
that we're taking whether it's
for or against and.
Obviously you I have a
tremendous amount of anxiety but
we're looking forward to working
with your committee thank you
all very very much.
Thank you Mr hall.
Matt.
Thank you very much and Mr
chairman and the committee it's
it's great to see you all in
glad that you were doing healthy
that you're all else in
everyone's trying to get by in
these interesting and confusing
times Matthew how to me and I'm
also speaking for say you're
Yamada and Carlos to settle
representing the public service
company of New Mexico.
As many of you know anything
business related it tells what
we follow and what we get
engaged in and so any one of the
three of us is a is a mainstay
in this committee and we've
always appreciated the dialogue
in the ability to present our
perspective and our concerns and
we really always appreciate you
willing to listen to our
challenges of I want to echo
what everyone else's said if
there's anything that we can do
not only to keep you sane and
safe we're willing to help out
any way we can thank you for the
time and thank you again for
what you're doing it it really
is inspirational for for you to
to really try to get something
done what needs to be done
especially in this time when so
many people are struggling so so
we all admire that so thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr India.
John Thompson.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good afternoon can you
hear me.
Wonderful are much like Mr hole
I I wanted to to give this a go
before I'm I'm testifying on a
bill wanted to see how this is
working and and I guess I really
will have to get my dry cleaning
done this year because you can't
see me so looking forward to to
working with all of you.
I see some familiar faces and I
see some new faces I wish you
all the best and I look forward
to to figuring this out working
through this together thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you.
HB.
Good afternoon Mr chair then
madam vice chair do need more
people to New Mexico oil and gas
association we represent
We are the largest association
of oil and gas interests and
Representative team over a
thousand members so we always
look forward to working with
this committee and appreciate
your staff members for their
diligence and all that they do
and each of you for your
call and consideration as we
work with you throughout session
please let me know if you have
anything.
B..
Matt.
Akhand raised again.
I think that's it put it down by
poachers.
Yes.
I thank you hi Mr chair high
madam I share just want to say
thank you for having us today
judge Thompson and I are you're
listening and really course to
at.
In the committee this year and
we really appreciate the way you
run your committee and.
It is now if you need help with
any of our vast client list.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
I'm.
So that's that's all the hands
we see also will give you guys a
I've got one more.
One of the.
I'm.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Lucy Campos
and I'm old features I am very
grateful for the opportunity to
be in this committee.
And I look forward to working
with you all all.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
Giselle thank you for sending me
that thing I think society that
I'm feeling that I I want to
make sure that we're we're
looking at you.
I noticed on the screen there's
no where for us to.
We got cut off there's no way
for us to.
My biggest anxiety on all these
calls but I've been on is when I
can look and know that I cut
myself off so that I'm not
accidentally talking.
And it's going to the world.
so far on this Committee meeting
that we've been witnessing.
me as a participant I can't tell
if I muted or not.
It sounds like what you're
saying is we're for sure always
muted.
But on the screen just I I and I
was just saying this for the
housekeeping things when I'm
looking at the screen right now
I can't tell if I muted or not.
That creates some anxiety for
me.
Out of fear that I'm watching
you guys and who knows I just.
All right.
That question on see you should
see in the lower left hand
corner there's a little
microphone button that says mute
and as long as that has a little
red X. over it then it means you
are muted okay that that I just
now saw it that button has not
been there.
It like right now that buttons
gone okay but your mouse you
might thank you I don't mean to
be having this dialogue and
public I apologize.
No thank you Mr holder it's only
way we can do it literally I
mean this is fantastic this
information great so we
appreciate you sharing that
because we have to do it in real
time so we can figure it out
anyone else who are.
This.
Can you answer me yes you can
yes Sir we can Mr chairman and
madam vice chairman Mike my name
is Hey she thought and
You know I I work for the
American heart association so.
I'm not a.
Hi power lobbyist like most of
the guys are.
Will appear in front of you but
as you know we deal with the a
lot of health issues and you
know a lot about tobacco issues
and you know so.
You know.
To be in front of you here today
and you know look forward to
working with you all and you
know like to you know provide my
information to ms Alvarez and
you know if you have any
information we can help you with
the you know especially.
What the COVID nineteen related.
issues
in what American heart
association doing to address
those issues.
And I'll be glad to talk to you
offline.
You know set up in the so
meetings.
I would also like to invite you
to some of our.
Zoom meetings and blowing you
know some of the medical experts
in COVID nineteen we were
planning to do a couple of those
to to at least.
You know educate you and inform
me about you know what it is
doing with the COVID nineteen
issues nationwide and in New
Mexico so you know but I look
forward to working with you all
and and that thank thank you for
the opportunity Mr chairman
thank you thank you Mr see the.
Thank you good to see you.
What happened
to
your hand raised again.
Yes thank you just L. and I'm
sorry to ask again but I have a
follow up question I think it's
important to piggy back on the
question that our whole just
asked.
We can't we don't see the
microphone icon and we don't see
the video icon so it is
difficult to tell when we're on
our off I all but also to sell
with respect to the video icon
do you have the ability to turn
the video function on and so the
US without it's not yet no I do
not okay thank you very much.
And I think it's us it's a thank
you Mr Bill Clinton for letting
us know I think it's our I think
it's our and the need to manage
it so and during public comment
we get you in when we get you
out
so you know we'll tell you you
know yes your turn will announce
your name and then when you're
done give your presentation I
would.
The stop the side chat and then
when the other person starts
you'll know that you're you're
out of the room but what will do
a much better job of forty
people in taking people out also
When we're when we're getting
people more gently pushing
people back into the lobby
they're getting they're getting
kicked out of the of the virtual
experience so they have to watch
it on the webcast so will also
deal with that.
Because we want you in this
virtual reality want you in this
virtual room with us but when we
kick you out of the as a
panelist back into the lobby of
some folks are getting kicked
out of the virtual room so
thanks for bringing that to our
attention.
I see no one else with their
hands up we really appreciate
you guys visiting all we had
upwards of twenty five attendees
there's twenty now when I think
the committee members vice chair
Figueroa ought we will we're
gonna if the we're gonna try to
have one bill on Monday if not
will start Wednesday but I think
we could do one or two bills
that we've seen before on Monday
and then we'll get into
More technical built in the
bigger bills any missed out
Representative out used to any
parting shots when members of
the committee.
Now we're ready stay safe thank
you Mr chairman I see Baldonado.
Your hand is up Mr chairman
Representative Baldonado thank
you Mr chairman I sent a couple
quick questions just on
procedure in terms of amendments
and substitute bills are you
gonna have any kind of time
requirement terms of when those
need to be turned into committee
before we hear them and in our
committee Mr right no great
point verify let's do a little
housekeeping before we go
with regards to that so we don't
have any hard and fast rules
with regards to amendments
This committee does amendments
on the fly obviously we want to
do too many complex amendments
but will change a word here or
were there and then is I will
type up the amendment and I'll
sign it and I'll run it by the.
By the you know the the major
member minority member in terms
of substations there will be
subject to bills on these big
issues
But those subs to bills we need
to get into the analysts to
analyze and then that way the
committee is comfortable voting
on that there's gonna be times
where we hear a bill here public
comment and not act on that bill
knowing that we're going to get
it out this this committee is
committed to a liquor license
reform this committee is
committed to to expanding
broadband this committee is
committed to opening up those
type of market so those those
big bills will probably review
them and then sleep on and then
take action on a maybe a couple
days later but it's all.
We all have to be comfortable
voting or voting on so if you
have a substitute bill out like
for example if we hear bill on
Wednesday and it has like eight
or ten amendments or eight or
ten criticisms of the bill that
they would be who the sponsor to
get a a a substitute bring it
back get it to the Giselle she
gets it for the analysts we get
the analysis and we put it back
on the calendar but.
But there is no hard and fast
rules
I can imagine I think if we were
to drop of subs to build on the
spot it would only have one or
two amendments from the previous
four combine a members that
we've already voted on and and.
You know that way it's just the
languages clearer as opposed to
some brand new policy in the
sense of bill.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
one more one more question
before I think it's the Rebecca
Dow
the
I know that there was trying to
figure it out to sales trying to
get everything situated but will
we be receiving an email link
because I I just never got one
of everybody else got a link in
the email I got an agenda so I
clicked on the the pain of the
attendees link and then you guys
brought me in but it will that
is that the plan is to have a
leaked email to the members the
day before that Mike that
Representative.
So it is my understanding that
when I sent out the agenda you
have a link right there if you
click that that's supposed to
bring you into the zoo okay
we're not able to do that Mr
chair is L. I. I had an agenda
with the link and I I did click
on it and eventually I was lead
and so that's the way we're
doing it no problem of I'll just
follow that you know
Just maybe that's just a little
hick up at the beginning but we
will work through that because
you should all be able to come
in but madam vice chair you able
to come in directly with that
leg correct.
This is L. I did not use that
link I used a different one.
U. S. center number email so
we'll just have to decide which
way you're going to send
panelists their learning and
consistently do that okay.
And another thing Mr chair is
that you mentioned that
amendments would come to me so I
could type them up it's my
understanding that I'm not
allowed to do that that all
amendments must be typed up and
LFC.
Because they have the they need
to be consistent with language
and make sure that amendment is
is done correctly.
No thank you for that no I stand
corrected we would you would
take impeccable notes as well as
I on on on the fly amendment
okay and then and then you would
be responsible for getting it
typed up you would physically
type it but you and work with
let's council yes no thanks for
that clarification.
Don't Mr chairman thank you
thank you Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm trying
to lower my hand here okay so
thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative brought others
questions brought up another
question for me so are we going
I know in the rule I don't
happening rules but I know one
of the bill one of the
amendments that was proposed
rules eliminated the twenty four
hour.
The committee bill so
theoretically.
I don't know what happened that
could we receive the bill in
less than twenty four hours
after it was.
Past a previous committee in
less than twenty four hours.
Do you believe that adequate
time for public to review and
provide input do you believe
that adequate time for us to per
to propose amendments so what
would that time frame look like
bills coming to us and how do we
that it properly and have time
for public input through that
time that it comes to us from
where it's been right now thank
you Representative Joe I would
imagine like bills there were no
bills get introduced or or we
received a message from the
Senate the speaker then assigns
bills once the speaker assigns a
bill to this committee or with a
four adopt the committee report
which then sends a bill to this
committee then the analysts go
into affect that's really you
know as long as the analysts
have received you know
information from the various
stakeholders they can do their
analysis and then were able to
proceed those last seventy two
hours we may get we may get a
bill from the Senate but we
would have to be familiar with
that bill would have to be
familiar with that policy would
have to have agreement on that
policy
No they I don't anticipate a
bill being introduced referred
to this committee on a Wednesday
or Thursday night and then US
hearing on a Friday and less
we've heard it in years past or
something like that I.
But I mean the normally it the
quick as we can turn a bill
from.
From referral to hearing is.
For about a week or so.
Okay so thank you Mr chairman
and I received an email from
someone I think this was
briefly discussed maybe even
multiple times but could we
please just go through the steps
there someone that is in that is
watching on the webcam through
the Legislature sacked how did
they become a participant how do
make comments so they're not a
panelists they're watching on
the website which is probably
how ninety nine percent of the
public is going to get how do
they get public comment thank
you so very much that is a great
point because of these
professional this are having
difficulty how do we incorporate
the average Joes one of the
beauties of this virtual session
is that.
The average Joes can benefit by
testifying from their living
rooms in their offices what not
so for those folks this new this
so there is a NM Legislative
site and on that website up in
the upper the there's a menu at
the top we press webcast and
then you watch the webcast
however if you go to committees
your committees and drop down on
the left hand side there's a
house commerce committee you
click that it gives you an
agenda and it also gives you a
link to be an attendee and that
this is these are the
vernaculars will be using an
attendee is in the virtual room
with us and can address the
committee once we allow them to
our panelists is a member of
this committee and staff which
which you'll see our faces and
hear our voices at all times
what I'm gonna ask is that
members of this committee keep
your cameras on for the majority
of the time obviously if you
have to Robert document or take
a bite to eat you know what not
but we're gonna ask committees
to keep their.
Your cameras on.
Maybe have the mutes off or or
on depending on you know.
If you can no there's not a lot
of surround sound
but yeah we want to we'll have
good instructions we got a good
instructions our social media
platforms so the folks incorrect
and ledges and get it in as an
attendee to talk on a particular
bill so we working on that and
and the disk and the the days
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and yes if
there was
a bill and we were on a time
frame generally you would say
okay we're going to limit you
know to ten people or if you're
in favor raise your hand if your
post raise your hand.
Is you're not going to you're
not gonna limit public comment
is that what you're saying
earlier even if.
For some reason there's a whole
lot of people in the chat room
or how would you take a roll
call that way.
Thanks for Armstrong.
Mr chair you are unmuted to did
you want to answer
Representative question or would
you like me to take a crack at
it no please.
Okay
use sol representative and
attendees the year saw how you
could put your hand up.
At the beginning of public
comment this year will have the
option to say okay everyone in
the attendee room who is in
favor click your little raise
your hand button okay lower your
hand now please everybody
opposed raise your hand so we
will be able to get a broad
count now the chair is going to
have to answer the question of
whether he will limit public
comment perhaps my limiting it
to two minutes or perhaps by
limiting the number of people Mr
chair I leave that to you.
No thank you madam vice chair I
We haven't got we were not in
the habit of limiting any public
comment some folks.
You know I eight minutes of.
Invitation as a member of the
public but these bills don't
have hundred people lined up
like like in C. pack judiciary
they're not highly contentious
from an emotional standpoint but
with even more so from a real
pocketbooks and fourth so we
normally don't have more than.
Ten twelve fifteen folks on a
side.
I don't anticipate cutting folks
off we will leader obviously if
there's profanity and the and
decorum is of is violated well
we're gonna let people say their
piece.
Any other housekeeping items
Any other housekeeping items we
So lastly so we want to we want
to be cognizant of acronyms.
to not use acronyms
you know we rattled off really
fast you know we got we're
talking to everybody we're
talking to to history these are
archived and and documented we
were gonna have we're gonna have
the built in front of us
sometimes the bill will be on
our screen and we have to jump
to the bill screen and and and
you know it's we're just gonna
gonna be comfortable knowing
what we're voting on we got to
be comfortable knowing what
we're talking about
we're not gonna be interrupting
what I'm gonna be doing of on
that point but but by all means
raise your hand or physically
wave.
So I can call on you and we can
clarify anything that's that's
means that we're gonna be going
to the chair.
We're gonna be having cordial
dignified conversations
everything is the same.
Except instead of folks twenty
feet away from us and sitting in
the same physical rural.
They will be in this virtual
room they will and they will
address us
via audio rather than standing
in front of us twenty feet away
so it is the very best we can
but we we have to do some big
things this legislative session
that cannot wait
And we just we just let's take
it day by day we respect to
criticism feedback we want this
to be the most transparent and
and and and two full committee
in this legislature as we're
dealing with some of the more
impactful bills coming across
our desks so we want to thank
everyone any other housekeeping
items.
That I may have missed.
Also what I would recognize is
Of that of the staff keep their
cameras off we can see their
name
if you want to get your our
attention you can
text us via our phones or you
can put your camera on and ways
we can see you what what I ask
is that members keep their
cameras on that staff keep their
cameras off
And and bring this more because
these cameras are much better
for the for the for the folks
not normally in the room as
opposed to one camera in the
corner listen to our voices you
know we the folks get to see our
facial expressions and then
And things of that nature.
Anyone else with some
housekeeping I don't know what
else you can on Monday Wednesday
but we want to thank you guys
for joining us on a Friday.
Of a fabulous weekend
Check out the the agenda as and
And we will see you all soon
thank you thank you hi everyone.
