We're.
Representative don't.
Here.
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Vice chair Figueroa I am here.
Chairman my instance.
And I'm here so we have a quorum
welcome everyone
Three days to go so we got a.
Decide on these policy questions
so welcome up your Shendo and
Representative a Garcia.
And the secretary is here with
us as well welcome secretary
John Garcia what is going to not
take it away you have the floor
a.
Gentleman Shendo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee of.
Senate Bill.
Thirty nine as amended what this
bill is add of.
The language to our current
existing
A procurement code to include
At definitions for native
American resident business
mid American resident veteran
business.
And then also they Merrick
resident contractor and it
American resident veteran
contractor to those sections
that are dealing with the
resident business and resident
veteran businesses and
contractors.
And then the it also increases
the
the cap of from our existing our
our veterans from at three
million two to six million.
And
Removes the
The the.
The language privative business
from claiming preference for
more than ten years.
So I have secretary John Garcia
GSD and also Representative
Garcia I would like for them to
maybe have a little bit the for
go to committee.
Secretary.
Thank you all Representative
from a representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman all my
concerns on this bill of Mr
chairman and committee members
is that the all a lot of
contractor rewarded out people
from out of state.
Can you hear me Sir.
Yes we can okay.
Contractor where do people want
to state all right we got this
is all for the I'm not a real
preference that we're putting in
here will give all.
It is an resident veterans a
better opportunity to be
competitive on bids are going
out the state
of.
With that they will a.
Europe Representative I mean US
secretary Garcia.
Thank you Representative
secretary I welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee Sanchez yes this
is that one of the governor's
bills it.
It's it's we call it the by New
Mexico bill it's a proposal to
basically expand the
the opportunities for local
companies to benefit from bank
of New Mexico government as a
big company big corporation with
billions of dollars and so we
want to get that the contract
out to local local suppliers for
goods and services and so.
The sponsor to talk about the
specific preferences it's for
local businesses it helps native
native businesses and native
American businesses in that
clarifies the language on
qualifying those particular
companies and then the third a
big part of the bill is for
veterans that we improve a
little bit or at least were
consistent with what we've done
in the past with the give me a
ten percent preference for up
for those veterans I think Mr
chairman members the committee
you may be questions but I'll
just let you know that the the
previous bill sunset will it was
set to sunset July first of this
year so that all preferences
would go away if we do nothing
and then as they Senator and
sponsor Shendo said the we did
improve they met there was an
amendment and Senate finance to
cap at six million dollars so
the keeping those companies
would graduate essentially from
from that to the program if if
they had six million or more in
in revenues Mr chairman of.
Representative so I'm happy to
answer any questions thank you.
Mr Chairman.
Yes this is Senator Shendo just
one thing that we I left out was
that we're also increasing the
percentage from of five to eight
percent for resident business.
Of.
So but the veteran is still it
at ten percent there was a
question is why we only went
eight percent.
We wanted to allow the veterans
to have at least a two percent
advantage over resident
businesses so we went to a
percent the veterans still get
ten percent.
Reference all right fantastic
thank you for that will not go
to members of the audience
there's a.
Wanted to folks in the.
In the attendee room go out and
raise your hands.
Beijing has if you wish to speak
in favor of the bill will give
you guys a couple of moments and
then I think everyone used to
have a will let you and then
we'll you you on our side and
then I'm yourself on your side
R. T. Garcia followed by Gary
Williams.
This is our to Garcia a small
business Services say within our
own business.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of.
I believe that this bill will
provide a.
Relatively small advantage but
an advantage to the federal
businesses.
And will provide the opportunity
for contracts and it would also
provide with local businesses
getting that contract but in
additional revenue stream of
taxes paid to the state with
that I would just suggest to
you.
Recommended to pass on the bill
Senate bill thirty nine thank
you.
Thank you Sir.
Gary Williams followed by.
JD Bullington.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I am
Gary Williams I serve as the
associate state director for
community outreach with a focus
on veteran and native American
issues A. R. P. server stands in
support for Senate bill thirty
nine we appreciate all the
efforts of the sponsors to bring
for this legislation and will do
all that we can for veterans and
native Americans within state in
New Mexico as members of a or P.
so thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee for the
opportunity to speak in support
of this legislation thank you
Sir.
Thank you JD Bullington followed
by Steve Hogan.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee this is JD Bullington
Representative a greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
and also the public going to
we support this legislation
keeping government dollars in
New Mexico and buying local
makes good economic sense for
our state it's supports job
creation here at located.
We see legislation like this is
leveling the playing field for
our in state businesses and for
native Americans and we urge you
to support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Steve Hogan followed
by.
Elena Ortiz.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I appreciate
this opportunity.
To participate in the process I
want to thank the sponsors of
the bill Senator Shendo
representative Garcia and
secretary Garcia for continuing
to push this along I'm a
veteran.
And the I'm also a procurement
professional with the New Mexico
procurement technical assistance
center I also serve on the board
of directors for the New Mexico
veterans business advocates and
on behalf of all the better
businesses that are
representative I wish to express
my support for the bill thank
you it's.
Thank you.
Malena Ortiz.
Committee members and guests at
my weight or do and I am a
registered lobbyist.
What the weather okay Wendy but
we think Santa Clara thank you
and I would like to thank the
sponsor senator Shendo and
representative Garcia for
bringing this bill forward at
the public transport house bill
thirty nine which helps
residents businesses and expand
that opportunity maybe American
representative and native
American president Veterans.
What
the
court and they also support the
percentage increase in
preference and the increase in
the past.
So for this reason stated
earlier Senator support and
packages Senate Bill Page thank
you.
Thank you very much anyone else
wish to speak in favor of the
bill please raise your hand.
And what else was to speak in
opposition.
Thank you many members of the
audience in opposition.
Members of the committee.
So I just have a couple
questions up for what a
committee thank you thank you Mr
chair for being here Senator
Shendo so I'm looking at the
definition on page two.
Native American resident veteran
business.
Isn't that definition part of.
Resident veteran business don't
native American veterans fall in
with every other veterans.
And so so my question is why why
is that definition necessary Mr
Chairman know there was some
confusion with the with the
definition for native American
business and so if you look at
the bill on page eleven it
actually goes into a little more
qualification about what what
make what qualifies a native
American and to do to be tend to
benefit from the from the.
in this procurement opportunity
and so essentially Mr chairman
it's a affidavit that signed and
what this does this process on
Levin page eleven
makes it easier for taxed
Representative then to qualify
them as a native American
business we did not have that
before okay.
Thank you thank you there Shendo
secretary I know I I I
understand that I understand the
the the need to define native
American resident business my
question is why does there need
to be a definition for native
American.
Resident veterans business.
Like if you're native American
veteran or just a non native
American veterans are just a lot
better in.
And so my question is why is
that.
Necessary.
To create a definition within
the definition of resident
veteran business as native
American resident veteran
business okay Mr chairman and
the reason that is because if
you're at local company a local
business then you get up to
eight percent if you happen to
be a native American business
but also at with as a veteran
you'll get the two percent
benefit from between eight
percent ten percent.
Thank you Sir thank you Mr
secretary on native American
veterans has the ten percent
anyway.
So I'll just leave it at that.
Or am I missing something.
Mr chair.
it's because of the tax is not
paid by native American business
I think they were exempted and
that was the reason Sir I
understand thank you thank you
for that clarification reserves
that and then also this doesn't
increase the
The preference for for veterans
the the current laws ten percent
if this bill becomes law it
remains ten percent correct.
Mr chair all righty but it does
up change the depth you know
bump the appropriation goes from
three million to six million.
To capture more veteran
business.
Lastly
I can
Yeah I know the policy.
Arguments for women owned
businesses minority owned
businesses native on business is
what what is the policy.
If you know centers and or or
anyone frankly what is the
policy for giving a ten percent
preference to veterans.
Justice that we love them.
We.
You want to okay that that would
that's existing procurement it
was ten percent and five percent
for resident business.
Right now we're moving the
resident as well as everybody
resident native American
resident veteran resident two
eight percent eight percent all
right all right thank you so
much members of Mr Chairman Mr
Chairman but on the question
that you just ask about we love
interest of just want to make a
point the you know we have Bobby
a hundred fifty thousand
veterans in the state of New
Mexico and then to me this is a
good opportunity to give these
people that we have in our state
an opportunity to bid on the job
and to advance themselves at the
end of the day Mr chairman and
committee members you know the
number while keeping the dollar
New Mexico number door helping
veterans which is really near
and dear to my heart because I
am a Vietnam veteran.
We're helping New Mexico and
we're helping the people of New
Mexico by doing this thank you
Mr fantastic thank you
Representative.
We'll go back to the members of
the committee by your Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair so I think
some of my questions were
answered partially answered but
I also have that question about
bettering versus native American
veterans it sounds like.
We're making them jump through
extra hoops not only do they
have to certify their better and
they'll have to certify that
their native American
and they would get the same ten
percent preference if they just
show that we are better so I'm
not sure why the extra step is
necessary or beneficial.
Mr Chairman representative
that's a that's a good question
in the previous bill for
procurement the it wasn't clear
for native Americans what
qualified them as a as a local
company especially based on
their taxes and so they did
that.
Arts of this bill are the added
two percent for veterans but and
bring everybody up to ten
percent but it also a lot of the
bill had to do with qualifying
what was it was to protect the
native American entities that do
compete in can't compete
by filling out the affidavit in
qualifying that they're a
majority owned company on native
lands owned or operated by a by
a lower tribe and and if you
look on page eleven where that
languages that that's the
criteria for the.
for qualifying them underneath
the program so that all this
bill did on that part was just
bring it to.
Bring it up to a standard that
native American and these could
then compete of again for tax
reasons and and other reasons.
Mr Mr chairman let me just add a
little bit if I were a veteran
of let's say I'm not from New
Mexico.
I'm from Oklahoma.
When I register my business and
operate out Albuquerque I go
through the same process as
anybody else would.
You know if I would the state
you know show that I pay taxes
in Albuquerque rand whatever you
do but if you're a company.
And he was Pueblo were my tribe
is that.
And my operation is there.
Operate on tribal land under
procurement co we're consider a
foreign entity because that's
not State Land.
And so so in order for me as a
tribal member of my operations
in a mess and I'm not paying
state taxes or rent to own land
but I'm painted to Amos.
Then they will have to show a
foreman affidavit say that yes I
am a tribal member I am
operating my operation not amis
and then that after they will
show that I'm legit New Mexico
business because under
procurement co.
Anybody on tribal land is almost
like that as a form because it's
not State Land and that's the
technicality that we're trying
to fix in this particular bill
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Mr chairman and senator I really
appreciate that because that's
exactly what I was not seeing in
this bill I'm and I was looking
at page eleven and reading and
re reading it and trying to make
sense because it looks on page
eleven in section three well
starting at the top in the in
the paragraph parentheses one
I'm looking at the floor
substitutes are not line items
to refer to but eleven print
this he's one.
It refers to an Indian nation
tribe or pueblo located in whole
or in part with in New Mexico sh
does that mean if someone is
operating on tribal lands in
Arizona state can apply for this
preference in New Mexico and if
so is that is not our intention
or is that did it just happen.
but I I think this speaks to the
Navajo Nation whose lands are
you know the contiguous within
Arizona New Mexico and Colorado
so if I have my operation in you
know Gallup New Mexico but I
also have projects you know and
I work in Arizona or or whatever
it's it's it's is to capture
that you know because if I'm an
apple in ship rock or somewhere
next to Arizona border
I'm still New Mexico resident
but I might be doing work and
that Arizona as well basically.
Yeah that you need to Navajo.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator I think that gets to my
point but I'm thinking more of
that business person on the
other side of the border the
business the resident of Arizona
no business in Utah that wants
to do this what they fall under
this preference no not as an
individual because there will be
a resident of Utah and.
Arizona.
You and.
Sees number two then it says at
least fifty one percent owned by
the Indian nation so what if
it's owned by the Navajo Nation
central operation is in Arizona
but it's owned by the Navajo
would it then fall under this
preference in that particular
case it will because it's not
owned by an individual is owned
by the nation SO that's a
distinction when I said earlier
if I'm a Navajo tribal member
and operate on a farm to ship
programmable critique I'm
treated exactly the way you
would be because you would have
to apply to the state
corporation for all the things
as an entity but when the tribe
owns that business and as a
tribal nation not like Navajo
Nation has a construction of a
company that does mainly for all
the public schools and other
things.
That would fall under this it's
owned by the Navajo Nation all
right thank you Mr chair and
thank you senator I think I've
got it down by the Navajo Nation
whether it's located where ever
Arizona you chart here it falls
under this if it's owned by an
individual on the Navajo Nation
it has to be within New Mexico
the New Mexico resident correct
okay thank you very much for
clarifying this I was trying to
make sense of exactly that Mr
chair and senator my other
questions have to do with
that sunset that is ending this
year so we need to extend why
did you choose to make it
permanent rather than extend and
do we have any data this is this
works and we get more better and
for New Mexico resident
businesses because this I would
assume it works but do we have
any data.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna have a
secretary under C. we did have a
data I don't have it in front.
More session I believe well he's
looking for a seventy two
percent of our of our purchasing
is now for resident businesses I
think that number was like one
thousand six hundred entities as
opposed to a try to remember
from my floor debate four
hundred and some that are a out
of state so seventy two percent
of the residence or resident
businesses and I'm I don't know
the dollar value per se but in
terms of apps in terms of just
the numbers we're looking at
about.
But sixteen.
Okay I'm not gonna give me
numbers John looks to me dollars
like he's got the numbers in
front of the right now so
secretary I way I do Mr chair
and representative that's a
great question we have started
tracking this impact the big
part of this new bill is the
governor wants us to show
outcomes for this to see if
we've improved so we since we
started the program we've seen
an increase up to and now
seventy seven percent of all
state contracts are and and
that's a sixteen hundred forty
contracts masa mannose I'm going
to state going to New Mexico
businesses so far so we had to
try to improve on that number
and madam chair all all the
reporting that in my annual
annual updates to the governor
and to you.
Thank you thank you very much
thank you for bringing this
support bill Mr chair those are
all my questions.
Thank you Representative set out
the.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the sponsor I move that
you pass on.
There's a motion for a do pass.
Representative Johnson second by
do passed by Representative set
up though second by
Representative Johnson C. notice
further discussion please call
the roll.
Representative Dow.
Representative heart of.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative the heart of.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Last year to grow yes.
Chairman my is.
Yes and so Senator
representative Garcia you have a
do pass on the Senate floor sub
two percent about thirty nine.
As a few members on this
committee that that will speak
to to try to get her before.
For noon Thursday thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Are you said afternoon.
All right.
The committee thank you thank
you all right thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
leader Townsend welcome of
Representative Scott is with us
as well we have a.
The proposed substitute for
House Bill two twenty give
everyone a a second to go to our
share file it is been up loaded
on to the share file.
It is there.
For us.
Let me just grab it real quick.
And do I have
Before we even start the
presentation of a.
Entertain a motion.
For discussion purposes.
Gets late in the session is all
about
discussion Mr chair.
Mr chair all right fantastic
signal objects and great so we
have moved the substitute for
discussion purposes
Thank you.
Thank you for coming up with
this proposal leader Townsend
you have the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee
Committee substrate house bill
two twenty I believe of is one
that.
We all have to address it and
the purpose of of this bill is
to.
Address the.
I guess two or three times
announce pending.
How are problems in the
Albuquerque market.
At the same time.
Tried to address.
the continuing solution for
economical and dispatchable
power in New Mexico.
What House Bill two twenty does
is that includes natural gas
utilizing combined cycle
technology into the renewable
energy portfolio and it adds a
two year run time on the San
Juan.
A power plant.
It also quite frankly.
will.
Open up the potential of things
that Escalante for natural gas
to be concerned we
Chairman they are I'd I'd like
to try and tell a little bit
about birth this bill started so
people understand.
Is due in in the beginning this
was this bill was.
Was I tried that it had a three
pronged approach it allowed the
hydrogen initiative that chair
woman Lundstrom had for.
that she's been working on hard.
And it had the.
Natural gas and then and it also
had the run time on a San Juan.
So.
After a number of meetings
including the speaker and
Senator Wirth.
and others.
It was decided that would trim
this bill down to try to address
the Albuquerque problem inside
the thousand jobs in order New
Mexico there's no.
That's that's all it is it's
this issue in Albuquerque is not
my district I just think it's a
problem that we as legislators
will be.
Maybe we should be looking out
for the whole state I believe
that this does that so Mr
chairman I appreciate the
opportunity to percent Committee
substate for House Bill to
twenty to you today.
Thank you you have any anyone
else on your team Representative
Townsend I wish to speak or any
experts.
Other stating you're shaking
their head now but that
Representative dot is here to
back me up it gets to technical
which won't be very much in on
the some back up does that
welcome representative got all
right great will go to the
audience.
We'll go to the audience the.
Let's hear from folks who.
Wish to speak in favor.
Of the committee substitute.
But in raise your hand.
And welcome let's hear from our.
Worn on sicker followed by
Peter.
Mandelstam.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members.
Can you all hear me we sure can.
Wonderful my name is worn and
sicker on the director of
economic development for the
city of Farmington New Mexico on
I wish to speak in support of
this bill as we have continued
to resoundingly state of the San
Juan generating station is
important employer here in San
Juan County
employing over nine hundred plus
a complete is a in additional
five hundred or so that are
indirect and so we definitely
want to make sure that this
plant moves forward but more so
the mat to we want to make sure
that the citizens of New Mexico
have access to reliable and
clean power and so obviously
with the added into the and
chant Energy in the carbon
capture project we're trying to
accomplish that goal and as was
stated you know the the problems
that could come down the pike
yes this plant is shut down
prematurely from a.
Power reliability perspective
and so very much want to put my
hat in the ring in support of
this bill.
Thank you Peter Mandel stem
followed by Paul guesting.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee we are Townsend I'm
Peter Mandelstam on chief
operating officer of and chant
Energy I'm testifying today in
strong support for this bill as
Warren said and I'm authorized
to say the Farmington mayor Nate
Duckett and the city manager rob
Mayes and the Farmington
Municipal utility had I get
there we all strongly support
this bill three brief points
first and foremost we support
this bill because as Warren said
it will maintain the well paying
power plant jobs in San Juan
money jobs estimated by San Juan
college as Warren said
approximately fifteen hundred
existing jobs and fifty three
million dollars in tax revenues
these jobs we saved during the
construction of the carbon
capture I. one at the San Juan
generating station during
construction engine is very
proud to say and we've said this
before it bears repeating that
there will be two million worker
hours needed just for the
construction of the carbon
capture and two million worker
hours well paying union jobs the
project labor agreement for the
one point three billion dollar
capital cost of the carbon
capture.
Of course once the project is
operational the carbon capture
will have a minimum of ninety
five percent capture where we
will store that CO two
underground in this is
guaranteed by Mitsubishi heavy
industries secondly as we all
know the pandemic has created
tremendous supply chain problems
that threaten all aspects of
electricity generation and this
bill would help to address that
it's a problem for generation
transmission and distribution on
thirdly and finally this bill
will maintain urgently needed
low cost reliable electricity
keep the lights on in northwest
New Mexico I'm a proud
Farmington resident I get some
of my electricity the San Juan
generating station through the
Farmington electric utility
system and as we've already the
newspaper is a concern about
blackouts this summer and next
summer it's important to keep
this plant on allow for the
economic development maintaining
jobs allow for the new jobs
capture the car and and put it
on the ground.
Leader Townsend Mr chairman
thank you I'm available for any
questions.
Thank you very much well
guessing followed by.
Jim Winchester.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Paul
guessing presents the Rio Grande
foundation were free market
policy research organization
based in Albuquerque working on
New Mexico public policy issues
we strongly support this
legislation because we all know
how important having affordable
and reliable electrical power is
we've seen the articles and some
of us have been talking about
this issue since way back in
twenty nineteen with the energy
transition act passed.
Rio Grande foundation so also
believes that this is a public
health and safety issue in that
the last thing we want is for
people throughout our state to
be.
In the heat of the summer
without electricity to cool them
to keep the lights on also the
idea of using natural gas moving
forward always made a lot of
sense natural gas is a clean of
form of electricity claim form
of fuel and it's something that
that is home grown right here in
New Mexico so for all those
reasons and many more we support
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Sir Jim Winchester
followed by Carlos and take.
Thank you Mr chair I and members
of the committee Jim Winchester
here with the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico we strongly support H. B.
two twenty and certainly think
the bill sponsor for bringing
forward what we see is a very
important piece of legislation
we along with others you've
heard from I feel that the
ability to have dispatchable
power to avert brown outs over
the next two years in New Mexico
is a necessary in fact
potentially life saving measure
you know you look at California
their own governor they are
signed into law legislation
recently that confirms natural
gas as a firm zero carbon
resource it is one of the
cleanest burning energy sources
in the world and it is essential
in reaching energy transition
goals the clean burning natural
gas certainly is a lifeline to
upwards of over a billion people
across the globe who wouldn't
otherwise have access to food to
shelter clothing to heat to
clean water and even life saving
health care in medicine and it
certainly can be that here in
New Mexico so please take the
first step to remedy the
situation that's facing us here
in New Mexico with potential
brown outs in both for H. B. two
twenty.
Thank you Carlos sant'agata by.
Coming up the woman.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm car less on
tech with the New Mexico
business coalition our focus is
to make New Mexico a better
place to live and work with an
abundance of jobs and it's hard
to do that when you don't have
proper and adequate electricity
we really appreciate the
leadership taking a look at the
situation it's been in the news
repeatedly for months even a
year that we are going to have
problems this summer and next
because of the current structure
what the utility companies are
going through they need some
relief and so do New Mexicans
not only is it a health risk for
seniors who need to have their
home schooled but it's a health
risk for hospitals and emergency
facilities as well if they don't
have the power then they can
have the life saving equipment
that they need so I urge you to
support this legislation and do
it quickly we have time to get
to the legislature and I hope
that you will do that on behalf
The New Mexicans that are at
risk of not having the power
that we need thank you.
Thank you very much Suntech is
there anyone else who wishes to
speak in favor of the bills.
Is there anyone else who wishes
to speak in favor of the bill
showing promise you all those
that wish to speak in opposition
please raise your hand at this
time.
All those that wish to speak in
opposition.
Please raise your hand at this
time we're gonna start with
Camilla the woman followed by
Athena.
The dollar.
Welcome.
Hi there can you hear me yes.
Hi there Mister chair members of
the committee unfortunately
my organization the Sierra Club
has not had a do or fair amount
of time to review the content of
this legislation.
my understanding is that it is
an attempt to move back certain
implementation dates of the
energy transition act that is
not necessary or X. were
acceptable and should not be
done without the broad public
consultation and participation
that took place to protect our
state from deep and drastic
climate change.
Without a copy of the bill for
public review and it we don't
think that this bill should be
being heard at this moment thank
you.
Thank you.
Hello yes thank you chair
committee members my name's that
the increased to do though I'm
retired commander of the US navy
an energy engineer and in recent
years we we have a folks you
themselves you're not okay it
might be.
Okay that's fine do the best you
can thank you.
Okay.
We can still hear you I just if
it's you it's you I just
invented Health Care interrupt
you.
All right okay no it is I'm in a
place that's a little bit.
Yes share your committee members
I am also a business woman and
I'm very scientific person and
for the past two years have been
studying and following what this
pandemic and the north west of
ours your full states and we do
need to make that decision as
quickly as possible all peer
reviews studies that have come
out recently say that we should
consider only wind water and
solar energy and these
technologies will result in the
greater simultaneous reduction
in air pollution climate change
and energy security the non wind
water and solar technologies
that are at risk here we must
stop
it is a matter of our.
Our planet is for health and
safety my grandfather was a coal
miner and died of black lung we
do not want to keep our people
in unhealthy situations and we
need to consider the future and.
Fast forward with clean energy
do not pass on bill H. two
twenty thank you.
Thank you is there anyone else
who wishes to speak in
opposition so just let folks
know the
The I became aware that there
was proposed committee
substitute for two twenty this
is by our last data meet.
you know less.
You know the bill comes or from
the Senate that's that's on
point to our committee's charge
and I placed it on the calendars
quickly as we can to get it
heard on every state the culture
this committee that we hear
every single bill
and so that's so I understand
folks are upset that this bills
being heard but I guess you
could say that about any bill at
any given time if you don't like
the bill
let me just kind of go through
it up before we go to members of
the committee for the.
For the public
Leader tons and so what I'm
looking at on on page two.
The definition of renewable
energy resource it just says
solar wind and geothermal is.
Is today is the law now you just
add and natural gas utilizing
combined cycle technology and
then on page three except for
natural gas utilizing combined
cycle technology so you just
tweak the definition.
And.
Of renewable energy resource and
then you bump the timetable
from.
January one twenty twenty three
which is very much upon us.
To January one twenty twenty
five.
So essentially it will be and
then be legal under the ETA to
utilize natural gas utilizing
combined cycle technology for
another two years given.
The.
What may be coming down the pike
is that is that a fair kind of
run down that is absolutely
correct chairman
No when I started reading the
articles facing Albuquerque.
Our largest city in the state of
New Mexico we would have
brownells and rolling blackouts
this summer I became very
concerned we have the land M.
hospital we have some great
industry there and we have a we
have the ability to fix this I.
I I believe that.
The process will continue to be
passes your committee today will
be that it even further on the
floor and Mr Chairman
You know currently today that
energy providers put us on
notice that they do not have the
capacity to provide.
Or they're they're very
skeptical that they have the
past the capacity to provide.
Adequate how are during the peak
eight times this summer.
And so Mr Chairman just as a way
that we can address that save
some jobs create some jobs in
every business and every
individual in this service area
of this provider deserves the
opportunity to have continuing
dependable dispatchable
affordable power that is
environmentally sensitive so I
have tried to address this and
You know I have no doubt that in
the future if there's more
critical ways to address this
that will we'll take it on but
for this summer and next summer
I know of no other way that we
can immediately address the
problems facing Albuquerque.
Thank you for that explanation
will go to members of the
committee Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman the I'm
I'm.
Learning a lot in the session
about the situation that we have
in different terms my question
Mr Chairman representative is
Representative Townsend can you
explain what is the typical
typical cost of merchant power.
Power is what the typical cost
is.
March and power is the power
that that utilities basically go
to when they no longer have
their own power to meet the
demand if you go back and let
at what has happened in in
recent history for example in
Texas and other areas that how
are
our cost is gone.
Way over a hundred times
sometimes almost a thousand
times what is the baseload power
utilities because when they go
out and try to by merchant power
it's what the market will bear
and you and I both know if I
wake up at midnight and it's hot
in the bedroom the first thing I
want is to turn the air
conditioner down and if you're
on a merchant power contracting
the cost of that can be very
expensive and it will put a
number of families in hardship
if we have to go to market power
capacity.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Townsend and
so PNM doesn't have the
capacity.
For really hot it during hard
times in the M. has at least
twice that I know of.
notified the public the PRC and
expended in the in the local
papers where they are warning
all of us including us in the
legislature that they do not
have they don't believe that
they have the capacity to meet
peak load demands this summer
and there would be paid
potential rolling blackouts and
brownouts across the region
thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative but the stand on
plants does have the capacity to
meet the Albuquerque issues of
a power loss goal.
Well.
That this bill expands the wrong
time for the San Juan plant by
two years so if that plant was
to continue to run the problem
in Albuquerque of the short term
would not would not be a problem
because they would have the
ability to address the issue
okay.
So what makes combined cycle why
is that so much more efficient
the difference in this bill and
what's been proposed before is
that you're making an exception
for natural gas if it's combined
cycle so why is that more
efficient as a cleaner like
explain to me what that is it it
is the most efficient.
Utilization of natural gas in
creating electricity you take
not only the fuel side of the
but the she could turn to
different carbons one being
turned by the steam generated by
the heat of the of the use of
the gas and the gas itself is
during the first chairman so it
raises the efficiency of
utilizing natural gas from
thirty to sixty percent.
And that's and that's the the
cost effective alternative to
dispatchable power.
Yes ma'am it is the only
capacity we have to avoid.
Run outs blackouts.
the immediate the immediate fix
of course is to utilize the
power that we have one that we
had to stand on long term I know
of no other stores that will
that will deliver economic Paul
our basketball power to the
consumers of New Mexico of so it
is the best alternative we have
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative when you said
economical if we don't do this
what are what are you looking at
at energy prices well we can't
avoid a blackout and think I'm
understanding and prices will
increase by one percent.
Well Representative that are is
as I said
Representative it can be a
hundred plus percent of a
hundred times that of what we're
paying today so now there were
people in and
Taxes during the last winter
that had bills that were
thousands of dollars and we just
can't let that happen in New
Mexico well Mr Chairman
representative I there is a
chilly producer in the valley in
the hatch valley who called I
was in the my office mate is
Louise to rass in there his
constituent and they said that
their their utility bill now
they're natural gas bill had
gone up from what it's a large
company went from sixty thousand
to like a hundred and thirty
thousand I think it was it was
it was eight excuse increase
now.
And so is but that's not
merchants now we will be much
more expensive than that
What has the effect what has
affected really happened in the
last year maybe year and a half
as you have seen a price rise in
natural gas prices which.
Has been a part of the issue
with electricity prices but.
This bill will help prevent that
from occurring and will
stabilized okay I'm thank you Mr
chairman I thank you I
appreciate that thank you
Representative.
Thank you.
Other members of the committee.
The past.
We have a motion for a do pass.
Mr chair Senator devotion to
table.
There is a substitute motion to
table that the bill passed
motion wasn't.
Correct.
Procedural motion but we we get
the gist there is a motion to
table there is no more debate
that's a non debatable motion.
please call the roll on the
tabling motion.
Representative Dow.
No to table.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Gaydos.
Representative Hernandez.
No to table.
Representative okay.
Yes to table.
Representative Johnson.
Yes the table.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato.
Yes the table.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
I share your.
Chairman miss.
Yes so the
So the bill has been tabled I
think that you know it's on the
table there's multiple bills
dealing with this issue in the
Senate house we'll see what
happens the next forty eight
seventy two hours.
with regards to any larger
discussions are compromises but
create you later for being that
the idea forward
In documenting it you bet Mr
chairman thank you for the
opportunity to bring forward
absolutely will one quick up one
memorial that Representative set
up that was gonna present of.
And I apologize for the stress
that house bill nine was put on
the calendar over the weekend
that was that was removed by the
sponsor gosh seems like months
ago about two three weeks ago
but anyway we have a quick of
memorial that is about to
present House memorial forty six
I believe forty five house
memorial forty five
Representative set up thank you
Mr chairman the Memorial
Hospital forty five to simply
strengthens our relationship
with Taiwan from twenty nineteen
to twenty twenty we've seen our
exports with Taiwan increase
significantly and this would
just be in support of
controlling continuing that
effort.
And with that I'll stand for
questions Mr Chairman.
Thank you anyone in the audience
was to speak.
on this Memorial vote for
against or neutral.
Members of the committee
Representative Fajardo.
For
the past.
We have a motion for a do pass a
second by Representative Dow see
no discussion.
Please call the roll.
Well.
Representative Dow yes.
Yes Representative Fajardo yes.
Representative thank you yes.
Present this.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yeah yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato yes.
here Representative Martinez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
vice chair Figueroa.
Who are.
Yes and so that's a do pass on
house memorial forty five so I
think everybody for the hard
work the the analyst in
particular Mr agents and Mr
Watson miscue terrace and
missiles tremendous doing these
at analysis in twelve hours
twenty four hours I'm getting us
ready and prepped for these
decisions so.
This will probably our last
committee hearing this thirty
day but it's a privilege to
serve as the chair of house
commerce and Preciado all the
folks in the audience and
joining us this afternoon.
Have a great afternoon everyone
we're adjourned.
Thank you.
